ESSENCE 



OF THE 



INFINITE LIFE 



SUTIV\ 



ESSENCE 
OF THE 
INFINITE LIFE 
SUTIVN 

VENERARLE MASTER, 
CHIN KUNQ 



PUR.E LAND COLLEQE PR.ESS 
TOOWOOM RA. AUSTRALIA 



© 2013 by Pure Land College Press 

Some rights reserved. No part of this book may be altered 
without written permission from the publisher. Reprinting is 
allowed for non-profit use. 

For the latest edition, contact purelandpress@gmail.com 

Translation by the Pure Land Translation Team 

Cover design by Pure Land College Press 
Cover image © Wong Sze Fei - Fotolia.com 

16 15 14 13 1 2 345 

National Library of Australia Cataloguing-in-Publication 
Data 

Author: Shi, Chin Kung. 

Title: Essence of the infinite life sutra / Chin Kung Shi. 

ISBN: 978098071 1486 (pbk.) 

Subjects: Pure Land Buddhism— Doctrines. 

Buddhism— Doctrines. 

Dewey Number: 294.3926 

Published by: 

Pure Land Learning College Association, Inc. 

57 West St., Toowoomba, Qld 4350, Australia 

T 07 4637 8765 F: 07 4637 8764 E: pllc2001@gmail.com 

www.purelandcollege.org.au 



Printed in Taiwan by He Yu Publication House 



CONTENTS 



Venerable Master Chin 


Kung AM i 




Foreword 


vii 






Preface 


ix 






Excerpt 1 


1 


Excerpt 2 1 


156 


Excerpt 2 


12 


Excerpt 22 


160 


Excerpt 3 


23 


Excerpt 23 


162 


Excerpt 4 


24 


Excerpt 24 


171 


Excerpt 5 


27 


Excerpt 25 


176 


Excerpt 6 


30 


Excerpt 26 


180 


Excerpt 7 


32 


Excerpt 27 


185 


Excerpt 8 


38 


Excerpt 28 


191 


Excerpt 9 


42 


Excerpt 29 


196 


Excerpt 10 


54 


Excerpt 30 


200 


Excerpt 1 1 


65 


Excerpt 31 


204 


Excerpt 12 


66 


Excerpt 32 


207 


Excerpt 13 


72 


Excerpt 33 


209 


Excerpt 14 


81 


Excerpt 34 


211 


Excerpt 15 


83 


Excerpt 35 


219 


Excerpt 16 


86 


Excerpt 36 


221 


Excerpt 17 


104 


Excerpt 37 


224 


Excerpt 18 


113 


Excerpt 38 


227 


Excerpt 19 


124 


Excerpt 39 


228 


Excerpt 20 


141 


Excerpt 40 


229 



Excerpt 4 1 


9^1 
ZO 1 


TT vr/lQr't-.f 49 

nxcerpt hz 


9^7 
ZO/ 


Excerpt 43 


944 


Pvnar>r.f 44 

nxcerpt hh 


9^£ 
ZOO 


Excerpt 45 


9^n 
zou 


Excerpt A 6 


269 


Excerpt 47 


275 


Excerpt 48 


279 


Excerpt 49 


284 


Excerpt 50 


289 



Excerpt 51 292 

Excerpt 52 299 

Excerpt 53 306 

Excerpt 54 308 

Excerpt 55 314 

Excerpt 56 317 

Excerpt 57 323 

Excerpt 58 326 

Excerpt 59 332 

Excerpt 60 335 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Venerable Master Chin Kung AM 

Venerable Master Chin Kung AM, born in 1927, is 
an eminent monk in the Pure Land school of Ma- 
hayana Buddhism. He has learned Buddhism for 
more than sixty years and has lectured on it for 
over fifty years. He is advisor to over 100 
Amitabha Buddhist Societies and Pure Land 
Learning Centers worldwide. In 2001, he founded 
the Pure Land Learning College Association, Inc. 
(PLLCA), Toowoomba, Australia. 

Master Chin Kung pioneered the use of the 
Internet and satellite television in propagating the 
Buddha's teachings. His recorded lectures are dis- 
tributed in books and on DVDs, CDs, and other 
media. He has sponsored the printing and distribu- 
tion of the Buddhist Canon and Buddhist sutras, 
books, and images as well as books on moral edu- 
cation. All these are freely distributed worldwide. 
To this day, the Master still teaches tirelessly on a 
daily basis. His lectures are broadcast live to audi- 
ences around the world. 

Born in Lujiang County, Anhui Province, 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



China, the Master studied Buddhism and the clas- 
sics under the guidance of Professor Fang Dong- 
mei, a great philosopher of his time; Zhangjia Liv- 
ing Buddha, a renowned monk of the Tibetan 
Buddhist tradition; and Mr. Li Bingnan, a lay prac- 
titioner and master of Buddhism and Confucian- 
ism. In 1959, Master Chin Kung became a monk at 
Linji Temple in Yuanshan, Taipei and was given 
the Dharma name Chin Kung, which means "pure 
emptiness." He has served as instructor at the 
Tripitaka Institute at Shipu Temple, professor of 
the School of Philosophy at the Chinese Culture 
University, and president of the Chinese Buddhist 
College. 

Master Chin Kung founded the Hwa Dzan 
Dharma Giving Association, the Hwa Dzan Bud- 
dhist Audio- Visual Library, and the Corporate 
Body of the Buddha Educational Foundation in 
Taiwan. 

For his achievements in building interfaith 
harmony and fostering peace, Master Chin Kung 
was awarded honorary doctorates and professor- 
ships by the University of Queensland, Griffith 

ii 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



University, and the University of Southern 
Queensland; Australia, and Syarif Hidayatullah 
State Islamic University, Indonesia. He is the 
Honorary Founding Patron of the Australian Cen- 
tre for Peace and Conflict Studies at the University 
of Queensland. 

In 2005, Master Chin Kung was appointed to 
the Member of the Order of Australia (AM) in the 
General Division by Queen Elizabeth II. He was 
recognized for service to the Buddhist community 
in Queensland, particularly through the propaga- 
tion of Buddhism and the fostering of interfaith 
activities between diverse ethnic groups, and to the 
community through support for educational and 
health institutions. 

In 2006, Master Chin Kung and the PLLCA 
were invited by UNESCO to co- organize the event 
"Celebrating the 2550 th Birth Anniversary of the 
Buddha" at UNESCO Headquarters, Paris. The 
subject of the event was "Discover the Buddhist 
Contribution to Humanity" to enable more people 
to learn from the Buddha how to reconcile conflict 
and promote social stability and world peace 

iii 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



through education. The goal was to prove that 
through the moral teachings of sages and saints, it 
is possible to teach people to be good, and it is pos- 
sible to teach people of different faiths to live to- 
gether harmoniously. 

In 2009, Master Chin Kung was appointed as 
an International Trustee of Religion,) for Peace, an 
international peace organization that is active on 
every continent. Its mission is to create multi- 
religious partnerships to confront issues such as 
stopping war, ending poverty, and protecting the 
earth. 

Since the late 1990s, Master Chin Kung has 
both initiated and participated in interfaith forums 
and summits in many countries speaking on the 
importance of education. He explains that it is im- 
perative that all religious teachers sincerely "learn 
to be a teacher and act as a role model for all" and 
encourages these teachers to practice the teachings 
of the sages and saints in their daily life, delve 
deeply into the teachings of their own religions, 
and also humbly learn from other religions. 

Currently he is lecturing on the Infinite Life 

iv 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Sutra, hoping that the daily teachings can trans- 
form the current mindset of people today and help 
foster world peace. Master Chin Kung's message of 
loving-kindness and compassion for all has been 
the central theme of his teaching. With thoughts of 
sincerity, respect, humility, and harmony, he dedi- 
cates himself to help all beings gain long-lasting 
happiness and joy. This has been his life's work. 



V 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Foreword 

In August 1993, Venerable Master Chin Kung gave 
an eight-hour lecture series titled Eddence of the 
Infinite Life Sutra at Ta Kioh Buddhist Temple in 
San Francisco, USA. The Hwa Dzan Lecture 
Notes Team transcribed the recorded lectures and 
organized them. In addition, relevant segments 
from the lectures on the Infinite Life Sutra given in 
San Jose in June 1992 were excerpted as a sup- 
plement. 

This compiled transcription was given to Vener- 
able Master Chin Kung for correction and editing. 
Originally titled Lecture Noted on the Eddence of the 
Infinite Life Sutra, it has now been translated and 
published under its original name. Freely circu- 
lated, it is humbly offered to readers for them to 
benefit from the Dharma. 

Pure Land Translation Team 
Toowoomba, Australia 
November 2013 

vii 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Preface 

For this lecture series at Ta Kioh Buddhist Temple, 
I plan to give four lectures, eight hours in total, to 
introduce the Infinite Life Sutra. The Infinite Life 
Sutra is called The Longer Sutra in the Pure Land 
school. I have given several lecture series on it in 
the United States. 

In the past few years, the Buddhist Canon has 
been printed in Taiwan and distributed worldwide. 
After more than ten reprints, the number of copies 
in circulation is very impressive. Chinese classics 
such as the Complete Library of the Four Branches 
of Literature and Selections from the Four 
Branches of Literature have also been published 
and given to libraries around the world. Therefore, 
there is no fear of their being lost to the world. 

The literary treasures are abundant, but it 
would be a shame if no one read them. How many 
people have an opportunity to read the Buddhist 
Canon from beginning to end even once in this life- 
time? And when they attempt to read it, they may 
not be able to comprehend it. 

ix 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



It occurred to me that important passages in 
the sutras can be excerpted and compiled into a 
book to facilitate reading, studying, and practicing 
in life. In this way, traditional Chinese culture and 
Mahayana Buddhism will truly be able to benefit 
all beings. 

Master Hongyi's Wanqlng JL is a collection of 
excerpts from the sutras and quotations from the 
patriarchs, 101 of them in all. I once lectured on 
the Wanqlng Ji in an easy-to-understand way and 
the audience liked it very much. Therefore, I feel 
studying the excerpts is worth trying. This time I 
have taken sixty excerpts from the Infinite Life 
Sutra. If this experiment is successful, I think that 
the Buddhist Canon can be studied in this way. 
The Taisho Buddhist Canon is one hundred vol- 
umes. If it is condensed into one volume, studying 
it will be more convenient. The voluminous classics 
like the Complete Library of the Four Branches of 
Literature and Selections from Library of the Four 
Branches of Literature can also be condensed into 
one or two volumes by excerption. This way, in the 
future, everyone will be able to read them. 

x 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerption requires identifying the essence. 
This is a must. It is like finding the right medicine 
for an illness. What symptoms are present society 
and people exhibiting? Today society is in disor- 
der. People have conflicting thoughts. They feel 
helpless and do not have any sense of security. 

When we look into the root cause, we find it is 
none other than (1) people not maintaining proper 
relationships with others, (2) the loss of morality, 
and (3) people ignoring the principles and truth of 
the law of cause and effect. These are the main 
causes of today's problems in society. This is why 
our excerpts should focus on morality and the 
principles and truth of causality. 

The sixty excerpts were chosen based on prob- 
lems in society. The focus was not on Pure Land 
practitioners. For Pure Land practitioners, instead 
of these excerpts, I would definitely choose the 
forty-eight vows and chapters 32 through 37. 
These are the chapters Pure Land practitioners 
must study and understand. 1 

1 Regrettably, we do not have an approved English transla- 
tion of the Infinite Life Sutra. — Trans. 

xi 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Reading these sixty excerpts is the same as 
reading the entire Infinite Life Sutra. It is impossible 
for a sutra to suit one's capacity from beginning to 
end. There may be parts that seem boring and that 
are not applicable for the reader. The reader may 
thus lose interest. 

The excerpts, on the other hand, are the es- 
sence. Whether one reads them or listens to lec- 
tures on them, one will be highly interested to learn 
and practice them. 

Shi Chin Kung 



Xll 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt One 

All followed and cultivated the virtues of 
Samantabhadra Bodhisattva, were replete 
with infinite vows and practices, and 
steadfastly dwelt in the virtues and merits of 
all dharmas. 

This first excerpt points out the objective of the 
Pure Land school. 

A well-accomplished practitioner added "The 
Chapter of the Vows and Practices of Samantab- 
hadra Bodhisattva" to the three Pure Land sutras 
and named them the four Pure Land sutras. He did 
so based on the above excerpt. These words tell us 
that the beings in the Western Pure Land — in the 
four lands and from the lowest to the highest of the 
nine rebirth grades — all cultivate the virtues of 
Samantabhadra. It is not surprising then that in the 
Lotus Treasury assembly, all forty-one levels of 
Dharma-body Mahasattvas follow the example of 

1 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Samantabhadra Bodhisattva — they mindfully 
chant the Buddha-name and seek rebirth in the 
Land of Ultimate Bliss. 

It is also stated in the Mahayana sutras that if a 
bodhisattva does not cultivate the practice of 
Samantabhadra, he will not be able to perfectly at- 
tain Buddhahood. "Perfect" refers to the attain- 
ment of perfect Buddhahood, which is the 
Buddhahood of the Perfect Teaching mentioned in 
the Tiantai school. 

"Vows" in "infinite vows and practices" means 
aspiration. "Practices" means implementation, to 
carry out. When we condense "infinite vows and 
practices," we have the Four Great Vows. When 
expanded, the Four Great Vows become infinite 
vows and practices. 

Samantabhadra Bodhisattva uses the Ten Great 
Vows as the key guiding principle for infinite vows 
and practices. The practice of Samantabhadra dif- 
fers from other methods, for the mind of Samant- 
abhadra Bodhisattva is truly pure and impartial: 
there is no discrimination or attachment. He treats 
everyone in the entire Dharma Realm equally. 



2 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The first of the Ten Great Vows is "to respect 
all Buddhas." "All Buddhas" encompasses all be- 
ings. The Avatanwaka Sutra and the Sutra of Perfect 
Enlightenment both say: "All beings are Buddhas in 
nature." Therefore, "to respect all Buddhas" is to 
equally respect the past Buddhas, the present 
Buddhas, and the future Buddhas (all beings) . 

It is stated in the sutras that all sentient beings 
have Buddha- nature. It is called Dharma-nature in 
non-sentient beings. Buddha-nature and Dharma- 
nature refer to the same nature. This is why the 
Avatanuaka Sutra says: "Sentient and non-sentient 
beings all have the same Buddha- wisdom." 

We should be as respectful to non-sentient be- 
ings as to Buddhas. For example, tables and chairs 
are non-sentient beings. Our respect to them 
should be the same as that to Buddhas, without any 
difference. This is the practice of Samantabhadra. 
When we see tables and chairs, we put them in 
their proper places and keep them clean. This is 
showing our respect to them. The respect in our 
hearts is exactly the same, though how we express 
the respect differs. Practicing respect for all 



5 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Buddhas starts from this point [the impartial re- 
spect for all beings] . 

Respect — everything should start with it, not 
just when we are learning the supreme Buddha- 
dharma. "Single-minded respect"— we often read 
these words in the repentance section that appears 
in the Buddhist practice book. Single-mindedness 
is the practice of Samantabhadra. It signifies im- 
partiality. Single-mindedness is maintaining the 
same mind whether we encounter Buddhas, peo- 
ple, animals, or tables and chairs. With two minds, 
differences and discrimination arise. Therefore, 
with two minds or three minds, we are not quite 
respectful and not following the practice of 
Samantabhadra. We must clearly understand this 
before we know how to learn. 

The second vow is "to praise Tathagata." 1 What 
is the difference between "Tathagata" and 
"Buddha"? From the aspect of form, we say 
"Buddha." We should single-mindedly and equally 
respect all [Buddhas, all beings]. From the aspect 



One of the ten titles of the Buddha. — Trans. 

4 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



of nature, we say "Tathagata." If something accords 
with the true nature, then it is good and we should 
praise it. If it does not accord with the true nature, 
then it is bad. We should be respectful to all but we 
should not praise bad things or wrongdoers. We 
should keep our distance [i.e., not learn from them] 
and continue to be respectful. In our respect, there 
should be no difference. 

Sudhana's visiting fifty- three wise teachers 2 is a 
very good example of this. Normally, when he vis- 
ited a wise teacher, he would first pay respect and 
then praise the teacher. But among the fifty-three 
wise teachers, all of whom he showed respect to, 
there were three he did not praise. The first of the 
three teachers was a Brahman named Jayosmaya, 
who symbolized ignorance. The second was a king 
named Anala, who symbolized anger. The third 
was a woman named Vasumitra, who symbolized 
greed. To these three teachers who symbolized 
greed, anger, and ignorance, Sudhana showed re- 
spect but did not praise them. 

2 The accounts of Sudhana's visits to the fifty-three wise 
teachers are from a chapter in the Avatanuaka Sutra — Trans. 

5 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



From this we understand that when we praise, 
we praise the good, not the bad. But when we pay 
respect, we do not differentiate between good and 
bad. There is a significant difference between 
praising and paying respect. We must realize this. 

I will not go into detail about the Ten Great 
Vows, as I have done so elsewhere. 

The ten vows of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva 
sum up infinite practices and vows. But the forty- 
eight vows of Amitabha Buddha are more detailed 
than the Ten Great Vows. However, the most im- 
portant of all is to be "replete." Are we "replete"? If 
we have belief and practice but no vows, 5 then we 
will not be able to attain rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land. If we truly want to attain rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land in this lifetime, we must chant 
the forty-eight vows in the Infinite Life Sutra as our 
morning cultivation every day. By chanting them 
every day and constantly learning them, we make 



5 Belief, vow, and practice are the three requisites for being 
reborn in the Pure Land. — Trans. 

6 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



the forty-eight vows our causal vows. 4 Then we are 
"replete" with the vows. Amitabha Buddha's forty- 
eight vows are infinite practices and vows, and in- 
clude the Ten Great Vows of Samantabhadra 
Bodhisattva and the Four Great Vows. 

"All . . . steadfastly dwelt in the virtues and 
merits of all dharmas." "The virtues and merits of 
all dharmas" is "Namo Amituofo." During the Sui 
and Tang dynasties, eminent monks compared the 
sutras from the Buddha's forty-nine years of teach- 
ing to determine which was number one. They 
agreed that the Avatanwaka Sutra was number one. 
It was the king of the sutras and the fundamental 
Dharma-wheel. Next, they made a comparison be- 
tween the Avatanwaka Sutra and the Infinite Life 
Sutra and concluded that the Infinite Life Sutra was 
number one. Why? At the end of the Avatanwaka 
Sutra, Samantabhadra taught the Ten Great Vows 
and guided all beings to the Western Pure Land, 
and with this the sutra was perfectly completed. 
On the other hand, the Infinite Life Sutra, from the 

4 Causal vows are vows made before one becomes a 
Buddha — Trans. 



7 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



beginning to the end, describes the Western Pure 
Land. Hence, the Infinite Life Sutra sums up and 
fulfills the final goal of the Avatanuaka Sutra. The 
Infinite Life Sutra is thus number one of all number 
ones. 

Mr. Xia Lianju divided the Infinite Life Sutra 
into forty-eight chapters. Which chapter is number 
one? The chapter with the forty-eight vows. The 
forty-eight vows were spoken by Amitabha 
Buddha himself and are the most important part of 
the entire sutra. 

Of the forty-eight vows, which vow is number 
one? The eminent monks said that the eighteenth 
vow is number one. Why did they say so? The 
eighteenth vow says that through mindful chanting 
of "Amituofo" ten times at the end of one's life one 
can attain rebirth in the Western Pure Land. This 
illustrates the inconceivability of the merit of the 
name of Amitabha Buddha. This is why the name 
of Amitabha Buddha is "the virtues and merits of 
all dharmas." 

When the name of Amitabha Buddha is elabo- 
rated on, we have the forty- eight vows. When the 



8 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



forty-eight vows are elaborated on, we have the 
Infinite Life Sutra. When the Infinite Life Sutra is 
elaborated on, we have the Avatanwaka Sutra. 
When the Avatanutaka Sutra is elaborated on, we 
have all the sutras from Sakyamuni Buddha's 
forty-nine years of teaching. 

Therefore, the name Amitabha Buddha is the 
key guiding principle. When we master this guid- 
ing principle, we will thoroughly understand the 
entire Dharma, all the sutras, and all the Dharma 
doors. 

"Steadfastly dwelt in" means focusing one's 
mind on Amituofo. For a true practitioner who 
wants to have a fast, assured success in his or her 
practice in this lifetime, the Buddha- name is all he 
or she needs. One chants and reads the sutras to 
understand the truth. Once confidence is estab- 
lished upon one's understanding of the principles 
and the truth, one will naturally let go of every- 
thing else. 

Not only did Sakyamuni Buddha use this 
method as the foremost method to teach all beings, 
but all Buddhas do the same also. The Pure Land 



9 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



method is hard to believe but easy to practice. 
Only when one has great good fortune and great 
wisdom will one be able to believe this method. In 
the Theravada tradition for example, Sariputra 5 is 
foremost in wisdom. In the Mahayana tradition, 
Manjusri is foremost in wisdom. Therefore, if one 
is not superior in wisdom, one cannot believe this 
method. 

Let's think about this. Not only can our wisdom 
not compare with that of Manjusri Bodhisattva, it 
cannot even compare with that of Elder Sariputra 
of the Theravada tradition. But when we hear the 
Pure Land method, we are immediately delighted, 
believe and accept it, and are willing to learn and 
practice it. From this viewpoint, we are not inferior 
to Manjusri Bodhisattva. He chose this method, so 
have we. His choice was a wise one, so is ours. 

"Steadfastly dwelt" means our minds will no 
longer waver once we understand the principles 
and the phenomena of the truth, after which our 



Both the Elder Sariputra and Manjusri Bodhisattva are 
listed in the assemblies listening to the Amitabha Sutra and the 
Infinite Life Sutra. — Trans. 

10 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 

minds will truly settle in "Namo Amituofo." This 
[Namo Amituofo] is "the virtues and merits of all 
dharmas." 6 



These are the virtues and merits of Buddhahood. — 

11 



Trans. 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Two 

With the power of meditative concentration 
and wisdom, they subdued Mara's enmities. 



"Mara" does not refer to demons but to various af- 
flictions that torture and torment us. The sufferings 
in this world are so painful that they are even more 
terrifying than encountering demons. 

"Enmities" refers to enemy. The sutras talk 
about "ten evils the enemy." The ten evils are the 
physical activities of killing, stealing, and sexual 
misconduct; the verbal activities of using false 
speech, divisive speech, harsh speech, and enticing 
speech; and the mental activities of greed, anger, 
and ignorance. These are the ten kinds of enemies 
within us. All beings are unwilling to do away with 
these "Mara's enmities," so the beings' every 
thought and every deed strengthen and increase 
the ties to them. The knot of enmity becomes very 
hard to unravel and evil karmas continue to be 



12 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



committed. Consequently, the beings suffer in this 
lifetime and will suffer even more in the next life- 
time. 

This is why when one transmigrates within the 
Six Paths, one's future lifetimes will get worse and 
worse, and one will sink into a lower and lower 
path. This is the truth. If we observe calmly, it will 
not be hard to see this. 

"Subduing Mara's enmities" is to teach us how 
to elevate our states and how not to retrogress any 
more. The Diamond Sutra talks about subduing 
one's mind. This mind [in the Diamond Sutra] is 
"Mara's enmities" mentioned above. What is this 
mind? The mind of the ten evils. The mind of wan- 
dering thoughts. The mind of afflictions. The mind 
of delusion. How do we subdue it? With meditative 
concentration and wisdom. 

Therefore, we must cultivate meditative con- 
centration. Only when we have meditative concen- 
tration will wisdom arise. When the Buddha taught 
all beings, his aim was for people to achieve the 
Three Learnings of precept observation, meditative 
concentration, and wisdom. Observation of the 



13 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



precepts leads to the achievement of meditative 
concentration. And from meditative concentration, 
wisdom arises. 

Meditative concentration is pivotal to one's 
learning and cultivation of Buddhism. Observation 
of the precepts is the means to achieve meditative 
concentration. Meditative concentration is the 
means to uncover wisdom. Uncovering wisdom is 
the true objective because only wisdom can help us 
solve all problems. Meditative concentration helps 
us suppress, subdue, and control Mara's enmities; 
wisdom helps eliminate them. Therefore, when our 
wisdom comes forth, the Ten Evil Karmas will be- 
come the Ten Virtuous Karmas and one's enemies 
will become one's great teachers and great support- 
ers. This way, one is transformed from an ordinary 
person into a sage; suffering is transformed into 
happiness; and the Ten Dharma Realms are trans- 
formed into the One True Dharma Realm. 

For every Buddhist school and Dharma door, 
wisdom is the objective of cultivation and medita- 
tive concentration is the key. 

The Buddha-name chanting method is the most 



14 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



wondrous method of the eighty-four thousand 
methods. But after chanting the Buddha-name for 
a long time, why haven't we achieved meditative 
concentration? The reason is that we do not have 
the foundation of precept observation. So, how can 
we attain the Buddha-name Chanting Samadhi 
when we have not even achieved Constant Mind- 
fulness of Amitabha Buddha? From this we can see 
that observation of the precepts is immensely im- 
portant. The precepts, however, are not limited to 
the Five Precepts, the Ten Precepts, the bodhi- 
sattva precepts, or the monastic precepts. 

Some people think that they are abiding strictly 
by the precepts and thus feel great about them- 
selves. They often criticize others for breaking the 
precepts. If this is how they "observe" the precepts, 
then they will never achieve meditative concentra- 
tion. Why? Because when they see others trans- 
gressing the precepts, afflictions arise, and their 
minds become disturbed and are no longer pure. 

Master Huineng put it aptly, "If one is a true 
practitioner, one will not see the faults of others." 
We should strictly adhere to the precepts with a 



15 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



pure mind. We should not be concerned whether 
others are pure or not, we should just keep our 
own mind pure. 

If we think that we are observing the precepts 
and yet daily sees the faults of others, such cultiva- 
tion will bring, at the most, only a little good for- 
tune for us in the next lifetime. In addition, the 
good fortune may not be enjoyed in the human or 
heavenly paths because we may not be reborn as a 
human or heavenly being. 

Even animals, such as the pets kept by wealthy 
families, can have good fortune. In the path of 
hungry ghosts, there are also those with good for- 
tune. For example, city gods, village gods, and 
mountain gods all enjoy offerings from people 
every day. [Good fortune notwithstanding,] when 
one's cultivation leads one to such a plight, all of 
one's efforts will be wasted! 

Since ancient times in China, there were practi- 
tioners, both lay and monastic, who succeeded in 
their cultivation after three to five years of practice. 
Why is it that we don't have any success today, 
even after twenty or thirty years of effort? If we 



16 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



say that it is because our intelligence or wisdom 
cannot compare with theirs, I don't believe it. If we 
say that our good fortune cannot compare with 
theirs, I believe it even less. 

What is the reason? It is that the practitioners 
in the past listened to their teachers, but nowadays 
we do not. They inherited their teachers' lineage; 
today, people forsake their teachers. 

When one's teacher indicates a path for one, a 
path that will lead to success, [and if one follows 
that path accordingly] one then "inherits the 
teacher's lineage." The teacher would help one lay 
a foundation for learning and practice. This is the 
teacher's duty. If one does not have the foundation, 
one must not leave the teacher, just like a child 
must not leave its parents. When the child grows 
up and becomes independent, then he or she will 
be allowed to leave home. 

In the past, one could leave one's teacher only 
when one had attained fundamental wisdom. Fun- 
damental wisdom is meditative concentration. 
When one attains meditative concentration, wis- 
dom will arise. When empowered with meditative 



17 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



concentration and wisdom, one will then be al- 
lowed to leave one's teacher and travel all over to 
learn from others. 

Take Sudhana's visits to fifty-three teachers, for 
example. Under the guidance of Manjusri Bodhi- 
sattva, he attained fundamental wisdom, which is 
"with the power of meditative concentration and 
wisdom." With this ability, he was then allowed to 
visit fifty- three teachers. His visiting all fifty- three 
teachers is "subduing Mara's enmities." 

The fifty-three teachers represent the fifty-three 
categories under which all walks of life are sub- 
sumed. In other words, we can interact with any- 
one, whether male or female, young or old, and 
from any occupation. By doing this, we are perfect- 
ing our acquired wisdom. 

Remaining unaffected and giving no rise to 
greed in a favorable situation, and remaining un- 
moved and not tempted in an adverse situa- 
tion—this is attaining meditative concentration. In 
any situation, when one understands and is clear 
about everything — this is attaining wisdom. Thus, 
the "power of meditative concentration and wis- 



18 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



dom" is the true basis of one's learning and prac- 
tice. 

Nowadays the teacher's lineage is broken. The 
only remedy is to take an ancient accomplished 
practitioner as our teacher. 

In my life, my greatest good fortune was com- 
ing into contact with the tradition of a teacher's 
lineage. When I was studying Buddhism in Tai- 
chung, Mr. Li Bingnan said modestly "With my 
knowledge and virtue, I am not qualified to be your 
teacher." He advised me to take Great Master Yin- 
guang, who was his teacher, as my teacher. 

Great Master Yinguang had already passed 
away, but his writings were still available. Single- 
mindedly learning and practicing the Collection of 
Great Master Yinguang'd Writing*) is becoming his 
student. Reading the great master's books, follow- 
ing his teaching, and practicing accordingly is in- 
heriting the teacher's lineage. 

As Pure Land practitioners, we take Amitabha 
Buddha as our teacher. Where is Amitabha 
Buddha? He is in the Infinite Life Sutra, the 
Amitabha Sutra, and the Visualization Sutra. When 



19 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



we single-mindedly and earnestly study these three 
sutras, we are taking him as our teacher and are his 
good students. 

Chanting the sutras is cultivating the precepts, 
cultivating meditative concentration, and cultivat- 
ing wisdom. When chanting a sutra we simply read 
the words, without thinking of their meaning. 
Chanting sincerely this way is cultivating the pre- 
cepts, meditative concentration, and wisdom. 

The spirit of the precepts is "do nothing that is 
bad and do everything that is good." "Do nothing 
that is bad" is the essence of the Theravada pre- 
cepts. "Do everything that is good" is the essence 
of the bodhisattva precepts. In all the precepts, 
nothing falls outside of "do nothing that is bad and 
do everything that is good. " 

When we respectfully and single-mindedly 
chant a sutra without wandering thoughts, dis- 
crimination, and attachments, then nothing bad is 
being done. The Theravada precepts are fulfilled. 
The sutras are words of truth flowing from the 
Buddha's true nature. Nothing surpasses these 
words in virtuousness. Therefore, chanting a sutra 



20 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



is "doing everything that is good." All the precepts 
are thus fulfilled. 

Single-mindedly chanting a sutra without wan- 
dering thoughts, distractions, or doubt — this is cul- 
tivating meditative concentration. From start to 
finish, enunciating clearly every word without mis- 
take or omission — this is cultivating wisdom: fun- 
damental wisdom. Thus, chanting a sutra is culti- 
vating simultaneously the precepts, meditative con- 
centration, and wisdom. 

If we think about the meaning of the sutra 
while chanting it, it will ruin the cultivation of pre- 
cept observation, meditative concentration, and 
wisdom. This is treating the sutra as a worldly 
book. 

Chanting a sutra is cultivating the precepts, 
meditative concentration, and wisdom, as is sitting 
in meditation in the Zen school and reciting man- 
tras in Tibetan Buddhism. The methods are differ- 
ent, but the results to be attained are the same. As 
it is said, "All Dharma doors are equal, and no one 
Dharma door is superior or inferior to another." 

When chanting a sutra, one should focus on 



21 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



chanting. If one wants to study it, one should find 
another time to do so and should not mix chanting 
with studying. Otherwise, one will fail completely 
in both. 

When one attains meditative concentration and 
wisdom, the daily interaction with people and han- 
dling of matters and affairs will go smoothly. Ob- 
stacles will decrease naturally. One will be able to 
turn the ten evil thoughts into the ten virtuous 
thoughts and truly subdue Mara's enmities. Bud- 
dhism often talks about "breaking through delusion 
and attaining enlightenment, and leaving suffering 
behind and attaining happiness." These effects will 
truly manifest. 



22 



essence of the infinite life sutra 
Excerpt Three 

Constantly, they used the Dharma sound to 
awaken all the worlds. 

"Dharma" refers to methods and principles. 

The teaching in the previous two excerpts is for 
self-cultivation and self-benefit. The teaching in 
this excerpt is for benefiting others. When we 
benefit from our learning and practice, we should 
use the experience, through words and our exam- 
ples, to help others achieve the same results we 
have. 

"All the worlds" refers to the beings in the Nine 
Dharma Realms. 



25 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Four 

[They] . . . cleansed dirt and pollution, and 
revealed cleanliness. 

This excerpt is a metaphor. The purpose of our 
chanting the sutras and the Buddha-name is to 
cleanse the contamination in our character, 
thoughts, and views so as to "reveal cleanli- 
ness"— to restore a pure mind. 

The full title of the Infinite Life Sutra is Buddha 
Speakd the Mahayana, Infinite Life, Adornment, Purity, 
Impartiality, and Enlightenment Sutra. 

Purity, impartiality, and enlightenment are the 
guidelines for learning and practicing. What are we 
learning? We are learning to (1) cultivate a pure 
mind, (2) cultivate an impartial mind, and (3) be 
awakened and not deluded. Purity, impartiality, 
and enlightenment are one in three and three in 
one. The Pure Land school focuses on the cultiva- 
tion of a pure mind. When the mind is pure, the 



24 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



land will be pure. The connection between us and 
Amitabha Buddha of the Western Pure Land lies in 
a pure mind. 

In the present age, pollution is an extremely 
serious problem. The whole world is urgently call- 
ing for protection of the environment. Scientists 
also warn that if the pollution on earth is not 
abated, then in fifty years it will not be a fit place 
for the human race to live. From this we can see 
how serious pollution is. 

Although many people try to reduce pollution, 
their efforts produce very little results. Why? Be- 
cause they only know the phenomena — they do not 
realize the noumenon [the underlying root cause of 
pollution] . All the efforts for environmental protec- 
tion provide only superficial solutions: they do not 
get to the root cause. What is the root cause? It is 
the polluted human nature — a polluted mind, pol- 
luted thoughts, polluted views, and polluted feel- 
ings. This kind of pollution is much more harmful 
than environmental pollution! 

Twenty years ago, when I was at Mr. Fang 
Dongmei's home one day, two officials from the 



25 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Department of Education happened to be there on 
a visit. At that time, the Taiwan government was 
promoting the revival of Chinese culture. An offi- 
cial asked Mr. Fang, "Is there a method that can 
revive Chinese culture?" Mr. Fang looked very se- 
rious and was silent for several minutes. Then he 
said, "Yes, there is." The officials happily asked him 
what the method was. He said, "The publication of 
all the newspapers and magazines in Taiwan must 
stop. All the television and radio stations must also 
shut down." Upon hearing this, they shook their 
heads. "Impossible!" they said. Mr. Fang ex- 
plained, "Newspapers, magazines, and television 
and radio programs are polluting the human nature 
and destroying traditional Chinese culture every 
day. As long as these things exist, efforts to revive 
Chinese culture will be ineffective." 

This is why I often urge Buddha-name chant- 
ing practitioners not to read newspapers and 
magazines or to watch television, in order to shield 
their pure mind. 



26 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Five 

Their minds constantly and truly dwell on the 
Way to enlighten all beings. 

The first of the Four Great Vows is "Sentient be- 
ings are innumerable; I vow to help them all." Al- 
ways having this thought is "the Way to enlighten 
all beings." 

This excerpt is about generating the bodhi 
mind — a mind that constantly abides by the Four 
Great Vows. 

But before we can help others, we must first 
succeed in our practice. The Four Great Vows not 
only refer to a great bodhi mind, they also spell out 
the sequence for our cultivation and attainment. 
The vows are our guide as well as our driving 
force. 

Cultivation should start with the eradication of 
afflictions. Following one teacher helps us eradi- 
cate afflictions. When we eradicate afflictions com- 



27 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



pletely, Mara's enmities are no more, and we ac- 
complish meditative concentration and wisdom. 
We next learn the boundless Dharma doors. 

People today forsake the first two of the Four 
Great vows and start with the third one, "Dharma 
doors are boundless; I vow to master them all." 
Many of them spend only a few days learning and 
then start telling others that they are incarnates of 
a certain Buddha or bodhisattva. This is complete 
nonsense. They are deceiving themselves as well as 
others. 

In the past, when one started to learn Bud- 
dhism, one had to first learn the precepts for five 
years. The precepts refer to the teachings and rules 
set by the teacher. One had to spend at least five 
years learning from one teacher before one was 
able to achieve meditative concentration and wis- 
dom. With this foundation [achievement of medita- 
tive concentration and wisdom], one was allowed 
to learn extensively. In the past, when life was 
much simpler than today, five years were required 
for following the teacher's rules. Today, the living 
environment is very polluted, more than ten times 



28 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



what it was before. Therefore, if five years were 
required in the past, fifty years are required for 
learning the precepts today. 

But if we tell everyone to do so for fifty years, 
then no one will want to learn Buddhism. 

Therefore, it is best to mindfully chant "Namo 
Amituofo" unceasingly, and only after we meet 
Amitabha Buddha do we learn extensively. 

Our cultivation of the Four Great Vows should 
be divided into two stages. Presently, we cultivate 
only the vows of "helping innumerable sentient be- 
ings" and "ending inexhaustible afflictions." When 
we get to the Western Pure Land, we then cultivate 
the vows of "learning boundless Dharma doors" 
and "attaining supreme Buddhahood." This is the 
correct sequence. If we start with cultivating the 
last two vows, this will obstruct our Buddha-name 
chanting practice. This is why it is a matter of im- 
mediate urgency to wholeheartedly chant 
"Amituofo" and seek rebirth in the Western Pure 
Land. 



29 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Six 

To all living beings they were friends, [who 
would help] without being asked. 



When teaching all beings, the bodhisattvas have 
this vow of compassion: on their own accord, they 
become good friends to all beings. When we emu- 
late the bodhisattvas, we should learn to perceive 
the suitable way and the right time to teach a be- 
ing. If we do not help this being when the condi- 
tion is mature, then we would be failing the being. 
By helping the being when the condition has not 
matured, we are courting a rebuff. 

Every being is different in capacity; addition- 
ally, the condition for learning Buddhism is not the 
same for every being. If a being likes Zen medita- 
tion, let the being sincerely cultivate Zen medita- 
tion. If a being likes to recite mantras, let the being 
do so respectfully. All methods are equal, and no 
one method is superior or inferior to another. To 



30 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



accommodate people with different capacities, the 
Buddha taught many methods. If a method could 
help every being, then there would be no need for 
Sakyamuni Buddha to teach all these methods. 

We Pure Land practitioners cannot make peo- 
ple practice the Pure Land method. When some- 
one's condition has matured, we should voluntarily 
introduce Buddhism to help the person. There are 
many stages in learning Buddhism. As the person 
gradually advances in practice, he or she will natu- 
rally find the most direct route — the wondrous 
Pure Land method. Therefore, to help all beings 
skillfully and expediently, we should be patient. 



31 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Seven 

Great compassion arose from these 
bodhisattvas. They empathized with all 
sentient beings. With a heart of 
compassion, they lectured on the 
teachings, taught by example, and also 
imparted the Dharma Eyes. They blocked 

all evil paths and opened the door of 
virtuousness. They regarded all beings as 

themselves. They rescued and helped 
living beings and shouldered the burden of 
helping them all cross over to the 
other shore. 

"Arose" means came forth. The words "taught by 
example" mean to demonstrate through behavior. 
"Lectured on" means to speak the Dharma. Not 
only did the bodhisattvas teach with words, but 
they also taught by example. In "imparted the 
Dharma Eyes," "imparted" means to pass on, 



7>2 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"Dharma" means method of practice, and "Eyes" is 
a metaphor. This metaphor refers to helping others 
understand the truth of all phenomena and princi- 
ples. 

In "blocked all evil paths," "blocked" means to 
prevent and be on guard and "evil paths" means 
the Bad Realms. "The door of virtuousness" means, 
simply put, the virtuous teachings that enable one 
to be reborn in the human or heavenly path. 

Sentient beings are deluded. They indulge in 
the Five Desires 7 and the Six Dusts 8 — in worldly 
pleasures. We should generate a mind of great 
compassion, empathize with sentient beings, and 
introduce the Pure Land method to them. Compas- 
sion and empathy must be put into action. This is 
enthusiastically propagating the Pure Land 
method. With all our hearts we must do our best — 
we must treat this task as the most important thing 
in this lifetime. 



The Five Desires are wealth, sex, fame, food, and sleep. — 
Trans. 

8 The Six Dusts are pollutants of the Six Senses of sight, 
sound, smell, taste, touch, and thought. — Trans. 

33 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"With a heart of compassion, they lectured on 
the teachings, taught by example, and also im- 
parted the Dharma Eyes. They blocked all evil 
paths and opened the door of virtuousness." These 
sentences describe the method of teaching. We do 
not need to be onstage to expound on Buddhism, 
but we should do so whenever and wherever we 
encounter someone. We introduce Buddhism to 
that person in a way that is most suitable for that 
person. If he or she cannot accept Buddhism at all, 
simply say "Namo Amituofo." As time goes by and 
the person gradually understands, that person will 
also say "Namo Amituofo" the next time we meet. 
In this way, we will have accomplished our goal. 
This is just one of many ways. 

For example, a practitioner is always happy 
and healthy, something everyone very much envies. 
If we are truly healthy and happy, others will 
surely ask us, "Why are you always happy?" We 
tell them, "Because I mindfully chant the Buddha- 
name." Practicing Buddha-name chanting will lead 
to true happiness and good health. If they feel 
happy in listening to our explanation, then we are 



54 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



making good use of the opportunity to teach them. 
"Taught by example" refers to us living a happy 
satisfied, and joyful life. This is a good signboard 
for the Buddha's teaching. When people see this, 
they will like it and will want this happiness for 
themselves. Hence, they will want to learn Buddhism. 

How does one avoid falling into the evil paths? 
If one does not create evil karmas, naturally one 
will not fall into the evil paths. Evil paths are due 
mainly to evil thoughts — evil thought is the cause. 
Evil conduct is unvirtuous karma and bad retribu- 
tions will surely follow. The law of cause and effect 
never fails. 

If we do not want to have any bad retributions, 
we should not have any bad thoughts. With pure 
and proper thoughts, we will definitely not have 
any bad retributions. 

The words "opened the door of virtuousness" 
mean urging people to end wrongdoings and to 
practice virtuous conduct. When people end 
wrongdoings and practice virtuous conduct, the 
benefit will go to them; the benefit does not involve 
us. Those who do this will receive the benefit. It is 



35 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



not that others practice and we benefit. Definitely, 
when we practice we benefit. When this happens, 
we are proving to others that good rewards come 
from ending wrongdoings and practicing virtuous 
conduct. 

There are people who become scared when we 
tell them about transcending the Three Realms 9 
and attaining Buddhahood. But they get happy 
when we talk about them becoming immensely rich 
and important in their next lifetime. When we en- 
counter such people, we should teach them the 
methods of being born as a human or a heavenly 
being. There are also people who have great aspira- 
tions. They know that the Three Realms are filled 
with sufferings, and that even in the heavenly path 
—where good fortune is great and the life span is 
long — the heavenly beings will still die one day. 
For these people with great aspirations, their wish 
is to transcend the Three Realms. We should teach 
them the methods of transcending the Three 



Three Realms: Desire, Form, and Formless realms. The 
Desire realm consists of the paths of hells, hungry ghosts, 
animals, humans, asuras, and desire heavens. — Trans. 

36 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Realms. This is a door of great virtuousness. 

Frankly, the only method of practice that al- 
lows one to succeed in one lifetime is the Buddha- 
name chanting method. In all my forty-plus years 
of learning Buddhism, this is what I have realized. 
The Buddha-name chanting method is truly won- 
drous. If we introduce it to others, we are opening 
the door of utmost virtuousness. Nothing is more 
virtuous than this. 

"They regarded all beings as themselves. They 
rescued and helped living beings and shouldered 
the burden of helping them all cross over to the 
other shore." When we treat others like we would 
treat ourselves, that is, with no difference whatso- 
ever, it is "unconditional compassion for all others 
as we are all one entity" as taught in Mahayana 
Buddhism. We should treat all impartially. As long 
as a person accepts our help, we should whole- 
heartedly help this person. 

Buddhist practitioners should have this vow: 
help all beings far and wide, uphold the proper 
teachings, and pass on the Buddha's wisdom to fu- 
ture generations. 



7,7 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Eight 

The Thus Come One commiserates with the 
beings in the Three Realms with infinite great 
compassion. This is why he appears in the 
world: to expound Buddhist teachings and 
spread them everywhere, like light; to help all 
beings; and to bring true benefit to them. 

"Light" has the meaning of reaching places far and 
wide. "Expound" means to teach and to propagate. 
"Buddhist teachings" refers to the way to transcend 
life and death and to perfectly attain Buddhahood. 
"Help" means to save and to rescue. "True benefit" 
refers to fulfilling the wishes of all beings. 

This excerpt explains the reason why the 
Buddha came to this world. Why did he appear in 
India and not in China? Although Chinese culture 
had already existed for a long time, the highest as- 
piration of the Chinese was to be reborn in the 
heavens. They did not have the thought of tran- 



38 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



scending the Three Realms. For rebirth in the hu- 
man or heavenly paths, Confucian teachings and 
Taoist teachings were sufficient. Therefore, the 
Buddha did not need to go there. 

At the time in India when Sakyamuni Buddha 
appeared, many religions were flourishing. The su- 
tras mentioned six major non-Buddhist masters. 
The practitioners of Brahmanism, the Yoga system, 
and Samkhya were able to attain very high levels 
of meditative concentration: they were able to be 
reborn in the Fourth Formless Heaven, a feat that 
the Chinese had not been able to accomplish. 
Frankly, when the Chinese were reborn in the 
heavens, they could only get to the heavens in the 
Desire Realm. They could not get to the heavens in 
the Form Realm. 

Indians could be reborn in the heavens in the 
Form Realm and even in the Formless Realm, but 
they could not transcend them. They thought that 
the Fourth Meditation Heaven or the Fourth 
Formless Heaven was the state of nirvana. It was a 
great misconception. 

Therefore, at that time, only the people in In- 



39 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



dia, out of all the people in the world, had the right 
capacities and mature conditions. The Buddha 
"commiserated with the beings in the Three 
Realms" and appeared there to help them tran- 
scend the Six Paths and attain the true Bodhi and 
nirvana. 

The Buddha was impartial. When the condi- 
tions of the beings in a place were mature, he 
would use the most appropriate method to teach 
them. As stated in "Universal Door Chapter": 10 
"For those who will only be liberated upon the 
manifestation of a Buddha, then the manifestation 
in the form of a Buddha will appear to present the 
teachings." In India, they needed a Buddha to 
teach them and in China, they needed a bodhi- 
sattva. The manifestations were different but the 
objective was the same. The objective was "to help 
all beings; and to bring true benefit to them. " 

If a person wants to be reborn in the heavens, 
the Buddha will teach the method to that person, 
and he or she will be truly reborn there. This is 



This chapter is from the Lotuj Sutra. — Trans. 

40 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



bringing true benefit to that person. 

The absolutely perfect, true benefit is attaining 
Buddhahood. Becoming a Bodhisattva of Equal 
Enlightenment is not yet ultimate and perfect. The 
Infinite Life Sutra teaches us the method of seeking 
rebirth in the Western Pure Land through belief, 
vow, and mindful Buddha-name chanting. It is the 
ultimate and perfect true benefit. 

As mentioned in the three Pure Land sutras, we 
can perfectly accomplish the goal of rebirth in the 
Land of Ultimate Bliss in one lifetime — without 
waiting until the next lifetime. There, in the four 
lands, each with nine grades, the environment as 
well as all the beings are wondrously magnificent. 

The teaching of Sakyamuni Buddha at this 
Dharma assembly is absolutely true. The Buddha 
mentioned "true" three times in this sutra. It is very 
rare for the word "true" to be mentioned three 
times in a sutra. 



41 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Nine 

May I attain the pure sound of a Buddha and 
may my Dharma voice spread everywhere 
limitlessly propagating the teachings of 
precept observation, meditative 
concentration, and diligence. May I 
thoroughly understand the profound, 
wonderful Dharma. May my wisdom be as 
vast and as deep as the sea. May my mind be 
pure, void of dust and toil. May I transcend 
boundless doors of the evil paths and quickly 
reach the shore of ultimate enlightenment. 
May I be forever free of greed, anger, and 
ignorance, and with the power of samadhi 
end all delusions and faults. 

"May I attain the pure sound of a Buddha and may 
my Dharma voice spread everywhere limitlessly." 
This is a magnificent vow of Amitabha Buddha. 
The purpose of being a Buddha is to universally 



42 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



help all beings. This is done by lecturing on the 
Dharma. This verse is even clearer than what Mas- 
ter Huineng said in the Platform Sutra, as it reveals 
the purpose of becoming a Buddha. We Buddhist 
practitioners should aspire to this. 

We bring nothing with us at birth and we take 
nothing with us at death. Not fame, nor prestige, 
nor wealth, nor gain. If every day we wished for 
them, it would be very foolish of us. As the 
Diamond Sutra says: "All phenomena are illusory." 
It also says: "All conditioned existences are like a 
dream, an illusion, a bubble, or a shadow." 

Therefore, we should constantly think about 
spreading the Dharma and benefiting all beings 
throughout all the Dharma Realms. This way, we 
will be of the same mind, the same vow, and the 
same practice as all Buddhas without realizing it. 
We will definitely attain Buddhahood! 

The words "propagating the teachings of pre- 
cept observation, meditative concentration, and 
diligence" refer to the Six Paramitas that bodhi- 
sattvas cultivate, which are giving, precept obser- 
vation, patience, diligence, meditative concentra- 



45 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tion, and prajna wisdom. 

But only precept observation, meditative con- 
centration, and diligence are listed here. They refer 
to the Six Paramitas, which are the practice of 
Mahayana bodhisattvas. If precept observation, 
meditative concentration, and wisdom were listed 
here, then this would be referring to the Three 
Learnings. 

The words "thoroughly understand the pro- 
found, wonderful Dharma" mean "enlightening the 
mind and seeing the true nature," as taught in Ma- 
hayana Buddhism. If one cannot thoroughly un- 
derstand the profound, wonderful Dharma, one 
will not be able to help all beings extensively. 

In this sutra, the sense of these words is more 
thorough, more complete. Based on the principles, 
method, and level of practice taught in this sutra, 
we can see that the profound, wonderful Dharma 
refers to this wondrous teaching of the Pure Land 
school: "This mind is Buddha, and this mind be- 
comes Buddha. Enlighten the mind and reach the 
original nature. Mindfully chant the Buddha-name, 
attain rebirth in the Western Pure Land, and, 



44 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



without retrogression, attain Buddhahood. " This 
teaching is not found in any other Mahayana sutra. 
The words "the profound, wonderful Dharma" 
convey this meaning specifically. 

The forty-eight vows open up the supreme 
Dharma door for us — this is completely the state of 
Tathagata at the attainment stage. This Dharma 
door teaches us to mindfully chant the Buddha- 
name and attain rebirth in the Western Pure Land. 
This is taking [Amitabha Buddha's] rewards and 
making them our causes. Great Master Ouyi said 
that the sentient beings in the Nine Dharma 
Realms (bodhisattvas, sound-hearers, pratyeka- 
buddhas, and the beings in the Six Paths) who rely 
on themselves alone cannot understand this. That 
is why this is "the profound, wonderful Dharma. " 

The Avatanwaka Sutra and the Lotud Sutra are 
both wonderful Dharma. But when they are com- 
pared with the Infinite Life Sutra, the latter is num- 
ber one. Therefore, the Infinite Life Sutra is "the 
profound, wonderful Dharma." 

It is not hard to believe the teaching in the 
Avatamdaka Sutra and the Lotud Sutra, but it is hard 



45 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



to believe the teaching in the Infinite Life Sutra, 
which is the most hard-to-believe method. There- 
fore, if we introduce the Infinite Life Sutra to others, 
it is quite normal that they will not believe it. If a 
person believes it when we introduce it to them, 
this person is not an ordinary person. As stated in 
the Infinite Life Sutra, this is a bodhisattva who has 
manifested as a human being; he or she is not an 
ordinary person. 

"May my wisdom be as vast and as deep as the 
sea." To widely help all beings, one must first help 
oneself. To help others achieve in their practice, 
one must first achieve perfect wisdom. In this way, 
one will have the ability to help others. After stat- 
ing the great vow of helping others, Dharmakara 
Bhiksu said that he then sought deep, vast wisdom. 
This deep, vast wisdom is innate in the true nature, 
not attained from the outside. How does one attain 
profound wisdom? The next sentence tells us the 
method. 

"May my mind be pure, void of dust and toil." 
"Dust" refers to pollutants: when something is 
tainted with dust, it gets dirty. "Toil" refers to af- 



46 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



flictions. In order to restore a pure mind, we must 
stay far away from all pollutants and eradicate af- 
flictions. 

"May my wisdom be as vast and as deep as the 
sea. May my mind be pure, void of dust and toil." 
The two sentences complement each other. Be- 
cause they complement each other, boundless 
Dharma bliss will arise. The more one achieves in 
practice, the more wisdom one will have. The more 
wisdom one has, the deeper is one's belief and thus 
the more one will achieve in practice. As one 
achieves more in practice, one will have even more 
wisdom. This is how meditative concentration and 
wisdom complement each other perpetually. When 
one practices this way, one will transcend all evil 
paths. 

"May I transcend boundless doors of the evil 
paths." The cause to achieve this is cultivation of a 
pure mind. Once the mind is pure, all obstacles 
that prevent us from obtaining good fruits from our 
cultivation will be eliminated, and one will stay 
away from the evil paths. When one is free of an- 
ger, one will transcend the door of hells. When one 



47 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



is free of ignorance, one will transcend the door of 
animals. When one is free of greed and miserliness, 
one will transcend the door of hungry ghosts. 
Therefore, when one eradicates greed, anger, and 
ignorance, one will transcend the Three Evil Paths. 
And if one does not have the slightest yearning for 
the good fortune in the human and heavenly paths, 
one will transcend the Six Paths. 

The sentence in the excerpt is also a statement 
of comparisons. When the path of hungry ghosts is 
compared with the path of hells, the path of hungry 
ghosts is good and the path of hells is bad. When 
the path of animals is compared with the path of 
hungry ghosts, the path of animals is good and the 
path of hungry ghosts is bad. When the realm of 
arhats and pratyekabuddhas of the Theravada tra- 
dition is compared with that of Mahasattvas, the 
realm of arhats and pratyekabuddhas is bad and 
the realm of Mahasattvas is good. When the realm 
of bodhisattvas is compared with that of Buddhas, 
the realm of bodhisattvas is bad and the realm of 
Buddhas is good. Therefore, "boundless doors of 
the evil paths" also encompasses the realms of 



48 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



sound-hearers, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisatt- 
vas. Only when one perfectly attains Buddhahood 
will one transcend the evil paths. 

In "quickly reach the shore of ultimate enlight- 
enment," the words "shore of ultimate enlighten- 
ment" refer to perfect and complete Buddhahood. 
In other words, "boundless doors of the evil paths" 
means that the path of the bodhisattvas of the Pro- 
visional Teaching and all the paths below are bad 
paths. Therefore, the bad paths include not only 
the Six Paths but also the realms of sound-hearers, 
pratyekabuddhas, and the bodhisattvas of the Pro- 
visional Teaching. 

"Forever free of greed, anger, and ignorance" is 
saying that the three kinds of affliction — Affliction 
of Views and Thoughts, Affliction of Dust and 
Sand, and Affliction of Ignorance 11 —are com- 
pletely eradicated. This is the state of Tathagata at 
the attainment stage. 

The words "with the power of samadhi end all 
delusions and faults" are saying that one is no 



The three kinds of afflictions refer to attachments, dis- 
criminations, and wandering thoughts respectively. — Trans. 

49 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



longer deluded about anything in this world and 
beyond. Whether cultivating, teaching, interacting 
with people, or engaging in tasks, one will defi- 
nitely not commit wrongdoings. How does one 
achieve this? With the power of samadhi. "Sa- 
madhi" used here refers to the Buddha-name 
Chanting Samadhi. 

The last few sentences [starting from "May my 
wisdom be as vast and as deep as the sea"] were 
Amitabha Buddha's guidelines for learning and 
practice when he was at the causal stage. Compare 
our practice to that of Amitabha Buddha at the 
causal stage. Do we also seek wisdom as our ulti- 
mate goal and seek nothing else? 

If one seeks wisdom, one must achieve a pure 
mind. When one has a pure mind, wisdom mani- 
fests. A pure mind is like a mirror. Its function is to 
see everything clearly in its reflection. This [seeing 
everything clearly] is having wisdom. If one wants 
to have a pure mind, one's mind must not be con- 
taminated even in the slightest way — by mundane 
teachings (the Five Desires and the Six Dusts) or 
by supramundane teachings (that is, Mahayana, 



50 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Theravada, True Teachings, or Provisional Teach- 
ings) . This is very important. One must try to have 
a mind of the utmost purity, and speech and behav- 
ior of the utmost virtuousness. 

There are two approaches in learning Bud- 
dhism. The first is practice — here one starts with 
cultivating a pure mind. The other is understand- 
ing—here one studies the teachings. Which ap- 
proach is more advantageous? Practice. As long as 
one has a pure mind, it does not matter that one 
has no knowledge of Buddhism. If one eradicates 
affliction, then the mind is pure and the Buddha 
Land will also be pure. One will be able to attain 
rebirth in the Western Pure Land. 

If one uses the approach of understanding, af- 
ter one is clear about all the principles, methods, 
and states, one still needs to practice, starting from 
the basics. One cannot achieve in one's cultivation 
with only knowledge and no practice. When one 
uses the approach of practice, one mainly cultivates 
mindfulness; understanding of the teachings is 
supplementary. One need not make painstaking 
effort to seek understanding — it will come natu- 



51 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



rally. Practice is the correct approach. If one uses 
this approach, whether one reads the sutras or lis- 
tens to lectures, one will benefit from each particu- 
lar sentence that one understands. If one does not 
understand a sentence, it does not matter, as one 
will understand it when one listens to the lectures 
again. One will naturally understand after listening 
to lectures a few times. One need not get stuck on a 
sentence or a paragraph; otherwise, one's mind will 
become disturbed. 

In the title of this sutra are the words "purity, 
impartiality, and enlightenment." These three are 
one in three and three in one. When we attain one, 
we attain all three. Of the three, cultivating a pure 
mind is the easiest. The way to cultivate a pure 
mind is to mindfully chant the Buddha- name. 
When we are not chanting the Buddha-name, we 
should listen to the chanting of the Buddha-name. 
It is best if we can listen to our own chanting. So, 
we could record our chanting, and when we are 
not chanting, listen to this recording. This is very 
effective. This is cultivating a pure mind. 

[In the part of the excerpt that talks about 



52 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Dharmakara Bhiksu's practice for his own enlight- 
enment,] Dharmakara Bhiksu put wisdom as his 
first priority and the result of his practice is this: 
with the power of samadhi he ended all delusions 
and faults. [This samadhi places] equal emphasis 
on both meditative concentration and wisdom. The 
purpose [of Dharmakara practicing this way] is 
tremendously profound. It truly provides a very 
valuable reference for our learning practice. 



53 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Ten 

I will constantly practice the Six Paramitas of 
giving, precept observation, patience, 
diligence, meditative concentration, and 
wisdom. For those sentient beings who are 
not yet awakened, I will help them attain 
awakening. For those who are awakened, 
I will help them attain Buddhahood. Rather 
than make offerings to sages as countless as 
the Ganges sands, I would perseveringly and 
courageously seek proper enlightenment. 

The statement "I will constantly practice the Six 
Paramitas of giving, precept observation, patience, 
diligence, meditative concentration, and wisdom" 
describes the conduct of bodhisattvas in this world. 
In other words, it is the standard for their mindset 
and practice. We should learn this. 

"Giving" is letting go — letting go of everything 
in this world. All the afflictions, even illnesses, 



54 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



birth and death, and the root cause of transmigra- 
tion come about because one is unwilling to let go 
of wandering thoughts and attachments. One truly 
reaps the fruit of one's actions. The purpose of giv- 
ing is to help one let go of one's concerns, worries, 
afflictions, wandering thoughts, discriminations, 
and attachments. 

Many people think that they are walking the 
bodhisattva path, practicing giving and making of- 
ferings everywhere. But their intent is to gain a lot 
through giving a little. They give some money be- 
cause they want to have wealth and give teachings 
because they want to have intelligence and wis- 
dom. 

If one practices giving with such thinking, one 
is not a bodhisattva. Such thinking comes from an 
ordinary being's wandering thoughts of greed, an- 
ger, ignorance, and arrogance. 

The purpose of bodhisattvas practicing giving 
is to let go of their wandering thoughts. When they 
let go of all the wandering thoughts, boundless 
wisdom, capabilities, and wealth innate in the true 
nature will naturally manifest. [Once we let go,] 



55 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



there is no longer a need to seek or to cultivate. 

When Master Huineng attained enlightenment, 
he said, "Who would have expected that inherent 
nature is originally complete in itself? . . . Who 
would have expected that inherent nature can pro- 
duce myriad things?" 12 All enjoyment is as one 
wishes and manifests from one's thoughts. 

When the Buddha taught giving, he was teach- 
ing us to let go of wandering thoughts and to un- 
cover innate virtues. This is a true benefit. 

A big problem with ordinary beings is that we 
cannot let go. Therefore, we trouble the Buddhas 
and bodhisattvas to use various expedient means to 
indirectly and tactfully help us gradually let go. 
Bodhisattvas set examples with their behavior to 
teach us to practice giving and to let go of fame, 
prestige, gain, wealth, the Five Desires, the Six 
Dusts, affliction, worry, and birth and death. When 
we let go of everything, we will attain great free- 
dom. 

The Diamond Sutra says: "Even the Dharma has 

12 The Sutra of Hui-neng, trans. Thomas Cleary (Shambhala, 
Boston and London, 1998), 11. 

56 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



to be laid aside, let alone worldly teachings." 
"Dharma" refers to the Buddha- dharma. One 
should not be attached to the Buddha- dharma ei- 
ther. Any attachment is a mistake. The Buddha- 
dharma is like a boat, something we use for cross- 
ing a river. Upon reaching our destination, we 
should let go of the tool that got us there. The 
Buddha-dharma is to help us overcome difficulties. 
When we have done so, we should not be attached 
to the Buddha-dharma and should let go of it too. 

"Precept observation" means abiding by laws. 
When one abides by laws, one will naturally have 
peace of mind and be free of all fears. Etiquette 
taught in Confucianism and the precepts taught in 
Buddhism are the norms for our daily behavior. 
The most important fundamental precepts set by 
the Buddha are these four: no killing, no stealing, 
no sexual misconduct, and no lying. These four of- 
fenses are intrinsically wrong. Regardless of 
whether we have received the precepts, we commit 
an offense when we do any of these four acts. 

The precept of not taking intoxicants is a pre- 
ventive measure. When we carefully look at people 



57 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



who committed grave offenses, we will see that a 
lot of them were alcohol related — one loses reason 
when drunk. This was why the Buddha included 
not taking intoxicants as a major precept. 

In addition, we should also abide by the coun- 
try's laws and customs. This way, we will get along 
harmoniously with others. This is the true meaning 
of precept observation. 

"Patience" is forbearance. The Prajna Sutra 
says: "All accomplishments are attributed to pa- 
tience." Therefore, patience requires resolute en- 
durance. Considerable patience is needed for any 
accomplishment in worldly undertakings, let alone 
in learning Buddhism. One must be able to exer- 
cise patience. When one is patient, one will be able 
to maintain a tranquil mind and advance in one's 
cultivation. If one is not patient, one will not have 
any progress in one's cultivation no matter how 
diligently one cultivates. Patience requires true ef- 
fort. It is a prerequisite for meditative concentra- 
tion. 

The Chinese term for "diligence" is jingjin. Jlng 
means "unadulterated" and jin means "making pro- 



58 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



gress." Many practitioners resolve to exert them- 
selves but their efforts are unfocused. They learn 
many things, but they get all mixed up. This is 
adulterated progress, so they cannot achieve in 
their practice. 

When one concentrates on one Dharma door, 
one's progress will be rapid. For example, if a per- 
son learns only one sutra, after one year this person 
will achieve in his or her learning. On the other 
hand, if another person simultaneously learns ten 
sutras, his or her achievement in learning cannot 
compare with that of the person who concentrates 
on one sutra. 

After one learns a sutra, for example the 
Amitabha Sutra, and studies it for ten years, wher- 
ever one goes in the world, people will say 
"Amitabha Buddha is here" or "You are Amitabha 
Buddha manifested." If one learns the Kditigarbba 
Sutra for ten years, one will become Ksitigarbha 
Bodhisattva. If one learns the "Universal Door 
Chapter" for ten years, one will become 
Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva. The question is 
whether one is able to focus on one sutra. 



59 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



People today like to learn extensively; that is, to 
learn many things. This concept is wrong, and such 
thinking will lead to failure — definitely not success. 

I had a little exposure to my teacher's lineage. I 
followed the teaching of my teacher Mr. Li Bing- 
nan but not completely. Had I completely followed 
his teaching, I would have achieved more than I 
have today. I am regretful now. 

In ten years I learned five sutras under Mr. Li's 
guidance. He set a rule that a student had to learn 
one sutra well, before starting the second sutra. 
What was the criterion for "learning well"? Mr. 
Li's acknowledgement. If he did not think that the 
student had learned it well, the student had to con- 
tinue learning it. As a Chinese saying goes, "If one 
does not listen to the advice of an elder person, one 
will soon suffer disadvantages." Young people have 
little experience and act rashly. They do not believe 
the experience of older people and thus suffer dis- 
advantages. 

"Meditative concentration" means being in con- 
trol and not being disturbed by the environment. 
In the Buddha-name chanting method, it is One 



60 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Mind Undisturbed, which is a pure mind. "Wis- 
dom" is rational and not the same as mundane in- 
telligence. When one has wisdom, one will not 
make any mistake when interacting with people 
and engaging in tasks. 

The statement "I will constantly practice the 
Six Paramitas of giving, precept observation, pa- 
tience, diligence, meditative concentration, and 
wisdom" talks about the Six Perfections. The first 
five are about cultivation. When one cultivates ac- 
cording to the methods and principles, wisdom will 
naturally be uncovered. How does one know when 
one's wisdom is uncovered? It can be seen in one's 
daily life. These six are the norms for the daily be- 
havior of a bodhisattva. When wisdom is present in 
giving, one will practice giving without being at- 
tached to the act of giving — "the Three WbeeLf lz are 
essentially empty." This is wisdom. In observing 
the precepts without attachment to form, one natu- 
rally conforms to the standards of the precepts. 
When wisdom is present in one's activities — in pa- 

^ The Three wheels refers to the person who gives, the per- 
son who receives the giving, and that which is given. — Trans. 

61 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tience, in diligence, and in meditative concentra- 
tion — the same applies. This way, one will truly be 
able to leave suffering behind and attain happiness. 

"For those sentient beings who are not yet 
awakened, I will help them attain awakening." For 
those who have not been in contact with Bud- 
dhism, we should find ways and opportunities to 
introduce Buddhism to them; for those who do not 
understand Buddhism, we should find ways and 
opportunities to help them understand Buddhism. 

"For those who are awakened, I will help them 
attain Buddhahood." For those who have learned 
Buddhism and aspire to quickly achieve in their 
practice, we should teach them the Buddha-name 
chanting method to help them achieve in one life- 
time. 

"Rather than making offerings to sages as 
countless as the Ganges sands, I would persever- 
ingly and courageously seek proper enlighten- 
ment. " This sentence is very important. Many peo- 
ple in this world seek good fortune. They make of- 
ferings every day in order to get good fortune, lon- 
gevity, and wealth. The Buddha said that it is bet- 



62 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ter to have firm aspiration and confidence, and 
courageously and diligently seek rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land. When one is reborn in the 
Western Pure Land, one will attain Buddhahood in 
one lifetime. 

The good fortune from making offerings to 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas is tremendous. But not 
only can we not make offerings to a Buddha or a 
bodhisattva today, we cannot even meet an arhat or 
a stream-enterer. The offerings we can make are 
only to the images of Buddhas or bodhisattvas. Is it 
possible to accrue any good fortune by making of- 
ferings to these images? It depends on how we go 
about making offerings. 

The offerings are symbolic. The flowers offered 
to a Buddha image symbolize cause. Just as a plant 
blooms first and then bears fruit, fruit symbolizes 
effect. The flowers offered serve to remind us to 
have belief, vow, and mindfully chant the Buddha- 
name. This is cultivating the cause. Attaining re- 
birth in the Western Pure Land in the future and 
being close to Amitabha Buddha is the effect. Mak- 
ing offerings in this way will bring good fortune. 



63 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The simplest offering is a glass of water. Water 
serves to remind us to maintain a mind as pure, as 
impartial, and as tranquil as water— without the 
slightest dust, pollution, or ripple. 

Lamps offered symbolize light. Our minds 
should be as just and as honorable. We should help 
others, even at our expense. The lamps offered 
should be oil lamps. The burning of oil represents 
sacrificing oneself to illuminate others. This is great 
compassion. Today, light bulbs are used and this 
symbolic representation [of the oil lamps] is hardly 
seen. 

Therefore, these things seen in a Buddhist cul- 
tivation center are educational in nature and serve 
to remind the practitioners [of the Buddha's teach- 
ings] at all times. But today many people forget the 
true meaning of the offerings. They use the offer- 
ings as a way to fawn on or to ingratiate themselves 
with Buddhas and bodhisattvas. A true gentleman 
in this mundane world would not accept any flat- 
tery, let alone Buddhas and bodhisattvas. Hence, 
we must understand the true meaning of making 
offerings. 



64 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Eleven 

I will constantly use compassion to uproot 
[the misery of] sentient beings and to awaken the 
boundless beings who are suffering. 



"Constantly" refers to time, and "boundless" refers 
to space. Time and space cover all manner of be- 
ings. Amitabha Buddha, out of great compassion, 
wants to teach and help all the beings in all the 
Dharma Realms. 



65 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twelve 

If one wholeheartedly seeks the Way and 
ceaselessly makes focused and diligent 
progress, one will surely attain Buddhahood. 
There is no wish that one cannot fulfill. 



It is difficult to attain the Way. When one can at- 
tain what is difficult, one can surely attain every- 
thing else. But one must first know the principles 
and methods of seeking. The principles lie in the 
word "wholeheartedly." "Wholeheartedly" means 
having a true sincere mind, that is, one with the 
utmost sincerity. Mr. Zeng Guofan 14 once said, 
"Not having a single thought arise is called sincer- 
ity." Master Huineng said, "Originally, there was 
nothing at all." This describes the true mind. If one 
seeks the Way with this mind, one will attain what 
one seeks because everything in the world is gen- 

^ 181 1-1872. An eminent government official, military gen- 
eral, and Confucian scholar of the Qing dynasty. — Trans. 



66 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



erated by the true mind. 

Buddhas and bodhisattvas have extraordinary 
powers and can make boundless treasures appear. 
Why is it that they can do so but we cannot? Be- 
cause their minds are the true mind and ours are 
the false mind. The true mind can create [every- 
thing]. Everything in the Ten Dharma Realms is 
created by the true mind. The Mahayana sutras 
say, "All phenomena are created by the true mind 
and altered by the consciousness." 

The beings in the Western Pure Land make 
food and clothing appear at will. This is because 
their minds are pure. A pure mind is the true mind. 
Today we have numerous wandering thoughts, af- 
flictions, worries, and concerns— we do not have 
the true mind. The "wholeheartedly" is important. 

Learning and practicing Buddhism is nothing 
other than letting go of wandering thoughts, dis- 
criminations, and attachments. When one does so, 
the true mind will manifest. It is true that "in Bud- 
dhism, every wish can be fulfilled." 

"Ceaselessly make focused and diligent pro- 
gress"— this is how one should seek. When one 



67 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



makes progress, one will not go backward. "Fo- 
cused" means heading in one direction and towards 
one goal. Be it Buddhism or worldly pursuits, one 
will surely succeed in one's seeking. There are 
many Buddhist practitioners who seek progress in 
their cultivation but have little success. What is the 
reason? They learn too many things, and the things 
they learn are too varied. They are not making fo- 
cused and diligent progress; instead, the progress 
they make is unfocused. This is why their efforts 
are to no avail. 

There are many sutras. From the aspect of 
principle, every method is number one. All meth- 
ods are equal, and no one method is superior or 
inferior to another. But from the aspect of phenom- 
ena, every person's capacity, intelligence, and living 
environment differ. They find some methods easier 
to learn and practice, and others harder. Hence, the 
question of easiness or difficulty does not lie in the 
methods. It lies in a person's capacity and living 
environment. 

The Buddha-name chanting method is suitable 
for everyone to learn and practice regardless of 



68 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



one's capacity. Other methods such as Zen medita- 
tion and Tibetan Buddhism are not as easy for one 
to learn and practice. The Buddha-name chanting 
method is simple and convenient. It does not mat- 
ter whether one has a Buddha image at home or if 
one has flowers to offer. Everyone can learn and 
practice. This method does not emphasize appear- 
ances or learning environment. It is the most con- 
venient method. 

Everyone has a different capacity. If one forces 
oneself to learn an unsuitable method, one will 
have a difficult time. But if one learns a method 
that one is interested in, then the learning will be 
easier. Will one be able to attain rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land if one practices another 
method? Yes, one will. It is clearly stated in the 
Infinite Life Sutra that if a practitioner of another 
method dedicates merits to be reborn in the West- 
ern Pure Land, he or she will attain rebirth there. 
From this we can see that Amitabha Buddha did 
not say that one has to learn the Infinite Life Sutra 
and mindfully chant "Amituofo" to achieve rebirth 
in the Western Pure Land. 



69 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Regardless of which method one learns and 
practices, one must be able to suppress one's afflic- 
tions and vow to seek rebirth in the Land of Ulti- 
mate Bliss where one will be close to Amitabha 
Buddha. If one cannot suppress one's afflictions, 
one will not be able to attain rebirth there. This is 
the true requirement. 

As long as we grasp the principle of "focused 
and diligent progress," we will surely achieve in 
our practice. Ancient accomplished practitioners 
said that mastering one is more important than 
studying many. It is also said, "When one masters 
one sutra, one naturally masters all sutras." If we 
want to have a deep understanding of the Buddhist 
Canon, what should we do? Should we learn many 
or delve deeply into one method? 

Historically, many of those who delved deeply 
into one method achieved in their learning and 
practice. Of those who learned many methods, 
very few succeeded in their cultivation. Those who 
learned a variety of methods and succeeded were 
exceptionally talented. People who have a medium 
or low capacity do not have the ability to learn 



70 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



many methods and succeed. 

Therefore, we should delve deeply into one 
method. 

If one "ceaselessly makes focused and diligent 
progress, one will surely attain Buddhahood. There 
is no wish that one cannot fulfill." If we understand 
the principles and methods, we will be able to fulfill 
any wish. Be it academics, one's work, or a Bud- 
dhist practitioner's cultivation, applying this prin- 
ciple and method will lead to complete success. 

It will not be hard to accomplish any undertak- 
ing in this world or beyond if we have a sincere 
mind. What makes it difficult is our deviated 
thoughts. Obstacles are created by us. Indeed, "no 
phenomena exist outside the mind; the mind does 
not exist outside any phenomena. " We must under- 
stand this. 



71 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirteen 

Dharmakara heard the Buddha's discourse 

and saw everything shown to him. He 
aspired to make supreme, wondrous vows. 
He thoroughly contemplated 15 what was 
good and bad about heavenly and human 
beings and what was wonderful and inferior 

about their lands. 16 He single-mindedly 
selected what he wanted and formed his great 
vows. For five kalpas, he diligently sought 
and explored, respectfully and carefully 
persevered, and cultivated merits and virtues. 
He thoroughly understood all the merits and 
adornments of the twenty-one kotis 17 of 
Buddha Lands as thoroughly as he 
understood one Buddha Land. 



Contemplated also means understood. — Trans. 

16 All the Buddha Lands in the ten directions. — Trans. 

17 The edge, the highest point. As a numeral, koti means one 
hundred thousand, one million, or ten million. — 

http ://www. sutrasmantr as. info/glossary. html#koti 

72 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The Buddha Land he created surpassed all 
Buddha Lands. 

"Dharmakara heard the Buddha's discourse." 
"Dharmakara" was the Dharma name of Amitabha 
Buddha at the causal stage, when he was a bhiksu. 
"Heard" refers to listening to his teacher's intro- 
duction. Here "Buddha" refers to Lokesvararaja 
Tathagata, Dharmakara Bodhisattva's teacher. 

Dharmakara Bodhisattva told his teacher about 
his aspirations and asked his teacher to teach him 
how to fulfill them. When a student has a virtuous 
and great aspiration, the teacher will always 
wholeheartedly help the student accomplish it. 
Therefore, Lokesvararaja Tathagata not only ex- 
plained to Dharmakara what he wanted to know 
but also used extraordinary powers to display the 
Buddha Lands in the ten directions to him, and 
that allowed him to see them clearly. 

At the beginning of the Visualization Sutra, 
a similar situation is described, which was the 
cause of Sakyamuni Buddha speaking the sutra. 



77, 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Queen Vaidehi encountered family misfortunes. 
Her son killed his father the king, harmed her, and 
usurped the throne. Having encountered such 
great misfortune, she became disheartened and 
asked Sakyamuni Buddha if there was a better and 
safer place where she could be reborn. Instead of 
directing her to one specific Buddha Land, 
Sakyamuni Buddha displayed all the Buddha 
Lands in the ten directions for her to choose from. 
This was the same method that Lokesvararaja 
Tathagata employed for Dharmakara Bodhisattva. 

Queen Vaidehi chose Amitabha Buddha's 
Western Pure Land. And then Sakyamuni Buddha 
taught her the method to attain rebirth in the Land 
of Ultimate Bliss. This is essentially the content of 
the Visualization Sutra. 

Lokesvararaja Tathagata displayed all the 
Buddha Lands in the ten directions to Dharmakara 
Bodhisattva. After seeing all these, he "aspired to 
make supreme, wondrous vows. He thoroughly 
contemplated what was good and bad about their 
heavenly and human beings and what was wonder- 
ful and inferior about the lands." "Their" refers to 



74 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



all the Buddha Lands in the Ten Directions. In the 
Six Paths in all Buddha Lands there were good and 
bad beings. This is talking about the living environ- 
ment, which involves living beings and situations. 

The Land of Ultimate Bliss did not come from 
Amitabha Buddha's baseless imagination or 
dreams. He truly saw many Buddha Lands, and 
they all differed vastly from one another. Some 
lands were very wonderful, and others had many 
shortcomings. "What was wonderful and inferior 
about those lands" refers to the material environ- 
ment [which involves inanimate things]. "Inferior" 
refers to a very bad environment. "Wonderful" re- 
fers to a very good and beautiful environment. The 
environment of every being is different. The causes 
every being creates are different and result in dif- 
ferent effects [environments]. Dharmakara Bodhi- 
sattva understood the principles and truths. 

"He thoroughly contemplated. . . . He single- 
mindedly selected what he wanted and formed his 
great vows." How was the Western Pure Land cre- 
ated? Dharmakara Bodhisattva visited various 
Buddha Lands and adopted their strengths and re- 



75 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



jected their shortcomings. In other words, the 
Land of Ultimate Bliss is an amalgamation of the 
excellent qualities of all the Buddha Lands. 

He saw that all the Buddha Lands in the ten 
directions had Six Paths, and the suffering was 
tremendously intense, especially in the Three Evil 
Paths. Thus he wanted his first vow to be that 
there would be no Three Evil Paths in the land he 
would create. This is how this great vow came to 
be. 

The Chinese often say, "Read ten thousand 
books, travel ten thousand miles." Listening to lec- 
tures on the sutras is like reading books, and seeing 
all the Buddha Lands is like traveling ten thousand 
miles. Because he heard with his own ears and saw 
with his own eyes, Dharmakara Bodhisattva's 
knowledge and wisdom were true. He had such 
abundant knowledge and experience that he was 
able, by selection, to create his own land. This was 
how the Land of Ultimate Bliss came about. 

The causes and conditions for how the Land of 
Ultimate Bliss came about were different from 
those for the other Buddha Lands. The causes and 



76 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



conditions for the latter were complicated and not 
simple: good ones and bad ones were mixed to- 
gether. In the Western Pure Land, Dharmakara 
chose only pure and virtuous dharmas. His pur- 
pose was to provide a wonderful learning and prac- 
tice environment for the beings from all the 
Buddha Lands in the ten directions who truly gen- 
erate the great mind and who aspire to [understand 
and] transcend the cycle of birth and death, and 
attain Buddhahood in one lifetime. He wanted to 
provide the best learning and living environment. 

"For five kalpas, he diligently sought and ex- 
plored, respectfully and carefully persevered, and 
cultivated merits and virtues." 

The words "sought and explored" mean that 
one needs to clearly recognize and understand the 
virtuous dharmas and the bad dharmas, and the 
good and bad retributions. And then one needs to 
end all wrongdoings and to cultivate all virtues. 

The words "respectfully and carefully perse- 
vered" mean that one needs to be respectful when 
interacting with people and engaging in tasks. A 
respectful mind is the true mind. In addition to be- 



77 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ing respectful, one needs to carefully persevere, so 
that one will not lose what one has learned and 
practiced. 

The word "cultivated" means correcting one's 
faults and applying one's learning to life. 

"Five kalpas" is the time Dharmakara spent 
cultivating and forming vows. There are several 
ways to measure kalpas. "Increasing and decreas- 
ing kalpas" is the one that is most often heard of. 
Sakyamuni Buddha said that in the Saha world, 
the shortest life span of humans averages about ten 
years. At this point, the suffering in this Saha 
world is tremendously intense. Every one hundred 
years, the life span increases by one year, until the 
life span reaches eighty-four thousand years. Then 
subsequently, every one hundred years, the life 
span decreases by one year until the life span is 
again down to ten years. One cycle of an increasing 
and a decreasing life span is a small kalpa. Twenty 
small kalpas make up one medium kalpa. Four me- 
dium kalpas make up one great kalpa. The kalpas 
mentioned in the Mahayana sutras refer to great 
kalpas. 



78 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Dharmakara Bhiksu spent such a long time 
cultivating that he was able to truly take in all the 
strengths of all the Buddha Lands and reject the 
shortcomings. 

"He thoroughly understood all the merits and 
adornments of the twenty-one kotis of Buddha 
Lands as thoroughly as he understood one Buddha 
Land. The Buddha Land he created surpassed all 
Buddha Lands." 

"Twenty-one" is not an actual number. It repre- 
sents perfection. For example, in the Amitabha 
Sutra, the number seven represents perfection. It 
signifies the four directions, the zenith, the nadir, 
and center. In the Avatanuaka Sutra, ten is used to 
represent perfection. Counting from one to ten, ten 
is a complete and perfect number. Ten tens is one 
hundred, also a complete number. 

Tibetan Buddhism uses sixteen and twenty-one 
to represent perfection. 

"The Buddha Land he created surpassed all 
Buddha Lands." "The Buddha Land he created" 
refers to the Land of Ultimate Bliss that he estab- 
lished. "All Buddha Lands" refers to the twenty- 



79 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



one kotis of Buddha Lands. The Western Pure 
Land is an amalgamation of the wonderful 
strengths of all the Buddha Lands. It has all the 
strengths of the Buddha Lands and is free of all the 
shortcomings. Naturally, it surpasses all these 
Buddha Lands and fulfills Dharmakara's great 
vows. This sentence from the excerpt is saying that 
the Land of Ultimate Bliss has been created. 

The prerequisite for rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land is a pure mind. When the mind is pure, 
the land will be pure. The Buddha taught us to cul- 
tivate a pure mind with "belief, vow, and practice." 
True belief, sincerely vowing, and single-mindedly 
chanting "Amituofo" will help us suppress wander- 
ing thoughts, discriminations, and attachments. In 
doing so, we will meet the initial standards for pu- 
rity and be reborn [in the Pure Land] in the Land 
Where Sages and Ordinary Beings Dwell To- 
gether. 



80 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fourteen 

He dwelt in true wisdom and courageously 
made focused and diligent progress. 

The Buddha mentioned "true" three times in the 
Infinite Life Sutra. Here, we have "true wisdom." 

Of all the teachings, one gets to know Bud- 
dhism. Moreover, one learns the Pure Land 
method of Mahayana teachings. Also, one chooses 
"belief, vow, and Buddha-name chanting" and 
seeks rebirth in the Western Pure Land, and one's 
mind steadfastly dwells in this. Such is "dwelling in 
true wisdom." 

In practicing the Pure Land method, one fol- 
lows the principle of "no doubt, no intermingling, 
and no interruption." One also diligently learns and 
practices using the method of "the perfect control 
of the six senses with continuous pure thoughts" 
taught by Mahasthamaprapta Bodhisattva. This is 
"courageously making focused and diligent pro- 



81 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



gress." 

Everything in this world is illusory. We need to 
be truly awakened! People often say "We bring 
nothing with us at birth and we take nothing with 
us at death." Only mindfully chanting the Buddha- 
name and seeking rebirth in the Western Pure 
Land, where our life span will be as infinite as that 
of Amitabha Buddha, is real. Without life, every- 
thing is futile. This is true wisdom. Nothing is truer 
than this ! 



82 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifteen 

He accumulated and nurtured moral 
conduct. He gave no rise to any thoughts of 
greed, anger, ignorance, or desire. He was 
not attached to form, sound, smell, taste, 
texture, or mind object. 

Accumulating merits and virtues should start with 
"giving no rise to any thoughts of greed, anger, ig- 
norance, or desire" as well as "not being attached 
to form, sound, smell, taste, texture, or mind ob- 
ject." When there is no greed, anger, ignorance, 
desire, or wandering thoughts, and when one does 
not yield to external temptations— this is merit. If 
one cultivates this way, one will attain a pure mind, 
from which wisdom will arise. 

When one has meditative concentration and 
wisdom, one has great benefit. Meditative concen- 
tration and wisdom come forth when the true mind 
is active. As a result, one is able to control one's 



83 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



destiny anywhere in the universe. When one does 
not have meditative concentration and wisdom, one 
is controlled by affliction and temptation. This is 
pitiable. 

Therefore, cultivation is nothing but this: inter- 
nally, ridding oneself of greed, anger, and igno- 
rance; and externally, cutting off all temptations. 

This excerpt teaches us a principle of learning 
and practice. When we have "thoughts of greed, 
anger, ignorance, or desire," our behavior will not 
be proper and will need reforming. This excerpt is 
the standard for [differentiating between] proper 
and deviated. 

Master Huineng said, "Originally, there was 
nothing at all." He was talking about the true mind 
because there is nothing in the true mind. Greed, 
anger, ignorance, and arrogance are the false mind. 
Because these illusory things are there, even 
though we have the true mind, it is unable to func- 
tion. When we eradicate greed, anger, ignorance, 
and arrogance, our minds will become pure. Even 
when forms, sounds, smells, tastes, textures, and 
mind objects from the external environment try to 



84 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tempt us, we will not have any thoughts of greed, 
anger, ignorance, and arrogance. 

The major sutras say "All beings are Buddhas 
in nature." So why have we become the way we 
are? The Avatanwaka Sutra puts it aptly: it is be- 
cause of wandering thoughts and attachments. 
Wandering thoughts are ignorance. Attachments 
turn into greed and anger. These are the root prob- 
lems of sentient beings. 



85 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Sixteen 



He planted numerous roots of virtue and did 
not mind [his] varied sufferings. He had few 
desires and was content. He pursued only 
white dharmas 18 and brought benefits to all 
beings. He was tireless in pursuing his 
aspirations and vows, achieving results 
through the power of patience. He constantly 

harbored compassion and patience for all 
sentient beings. With a kind expression and 
caring words, he advised, taught, urged, and 
encouraged them. He was respectful to the 
Three Jewels and attended to his teachers 
without any insincerity or flattery in his 
heart. All of his conduct was magnificent, and 
he was a role model in every way. He 
regarded all dharmas as illusory and 
remained in the samadhi that is eternally 



18 White dharmas mean wholesome dharmas. — Trans. 

86 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



quiescent. He guarded well his verbal karmas 
and did not ridicule others' faults. He 
guarded well his bodily karmas and did not 
transgress any precept or codes of behavior. 
He guarded well his mental karmas and kept 
himself pure and uncontaminated. 



The words "planted numerous roots of virtue" 
mean to accumulate merits and virtues. "Roots" are 
the foundation; they can give rise to myriad virtues. 
That which can give rise to something is the root. 
The root of virtue for the Pure Land school is this 
phrase: Homage to Amitabha Buddha. When one 
focuses on and practices only the Pure Land 
method, one continuously and mindfully chants the 
Buddha- name. This method will help us to keep 
our minds in an unperturbed and tranquil state 
from within (where no affliction arises) and not be 
attached to any phenomena from without. Actually 
all of the eighty-four thousand Dharma doors aim 
to achieve this state. 

Of all the methods, the Buddha-name chanting 



87 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



method is the most convenient and the easiest in 
which to succeed. When one mindfully chants the 
Buddha-name, one's cultivation will be enhanced 
by the supportive powers of Amitabha Buddha and 
all other Buddhas in the ten directions. This is why 
all the other methods cannot compare with this 
one. 

The words "did not mind [his] varied suffer- 
ings" mean that Dharmakara did not mind any of 
the sufferings he underwent: he accepted them 
peacefully. Sufferings are brought about by the evil 
deeds committed in the present and past lifetimes. 
When we understand the causes of the sufferings, 
we will willingly undergo them and not blame oth- 
ers. 

How should we live our lives? We should let go 
of any situation or condition, whether favorable or 
adverse, and just concentrate on chanting the 
Buddha- name. 

Dharmakara "had few desires and was con- 
tent." When one has few desires and is content, 
one's afflictions will be reduced. Every day, it is 
enough for one to have a full stomach, adequate 



88 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



clothing, and a place to shield one from wind and 
rain. A content person is often happy. When one is 
content, one will want few things. The less one 
wants, the more at ease and the happier one is. If 
one truly does not compete with others or crave 
anything, one will be happier than a celestial being. 

When one has meditative concentration, one 
will keep the mind in an unperturbed and tranquil 
state from within and not be attached to any phe- 
nomena from without. 

Every aspect in one's life should be simple. 
Simplicity leads to a long life. The ancient Chinese 
often said, "Illness enters through the mouth." 
Nowadays, many people contract strange illnesses, 
which come mostly from the food consumed. In the 
past in China, there were people in the countryside 
who maintained a simple diet, but they were 
healthy and lived a long life. This proves that the 
simpler the food, the healthier one is. 

A pure mind with no wandering thoughts, a 
regular routine, a simple diet, few desires, and con- 
tentment—these are the essentials for good health. 

"He pursued only white dharmas." Black signi- 



89 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



fies bad, and white signifies good. Ancient Indians 
used black and white, and the Chinese used bad 
and good. Pursuing only white dharmas means 
pursuing only wholesome dharmas; that is, single- 
mindedly seeking goodness. 

What are wholesome dharmas? And what are 
unwholesome dharmas? The Buddha said that any- 
thing that benefits oneself is unwholesome and that 
anything that benefits all beings is wholesome. 
Why is benefiting oneself bad? 

One transmigrates within the Three Realms 
and the Six Paths because of ego-attachment. In 
other words, when one's every thought is of oneself 
and for oneself, then one will transmigrate within 
the Six Paths. Arhats transcend the Six Paths by 
eradicating ego-attachment. When ego-attachment 
is eradicated, there is no more transmigration. 

When dharmas-attachment is eradicated, the 
Ten Dharma Realms no longer exist. At this point, 
one has enlightened the mind and seen the true na- 
ture. Dharmas-attachment is hindrance arising 
from the attachment to our knowledge. Ego- 
attachment is hindrance arising from our afflic- 



90 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tions. When one has ego-attachment, one has af- 
fliction. When one has dharmas-attachment, one 
has ignorance. Therefore, when one eradicates ego- 
attachment, one transcends the cycle of birth and 
death. 

If our every thought is of ourselves, ego- 
attachment will worsen day by day. How then can 
we transcend the Three Realms? This is why the 
Buddha taught us to always think of benefiting all 
beings. This way, the thoughts of benefiting our- 
selves will gradually diminish and go away. Our 
every thought and every deed should be for all be- 
ings, not for ourselves. When all beings have good 
fortune, we too have good fortune, because we are 
also one of the beings. Similarly, we cannot avoid 
misfortune if all beings have misfortune. 

Having all beings in one's every thought and 
wholeheartedly helping them is "pursuing only 
white dharmas." It is also "bringing benefits to all 
beings." "Bringing" means giving. Benefiting living 
beings is sacrificing oneself to benefit others. 

"He was tireless in pursuing his aspirations and 
vows." We seek wholesome dharmas, sacrifice our- 



91 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



selves to benefit others, and serve them tirelessly 
and diligently. If we are healthy and have a long 
life, then this is good fortune for all beings. 19 If we 
have a short life, then this is misfortune for all be- 
ings. Our physical body has no relevance to our 
self. It also has no relevance in any of our gains or 
losses, our benefit or harm. Our body is only a tool 
used to benefit all beings. This is the attainment of 
great freedom! When we complete a meritorious 
deed, the merit is not ours. When we fail, it is not 
our fault. With no merit or fault and with the 
benefit belonging to all beings, we will be tireless in 
accomplishing our aspirations and vows. 

The words "achieving results through the 
power of patience" mean accomplishing the 
paramita of patience, one of the Six Paramitas that 
bodhisattvas practice. One can be patient even 
when it is difficult to do so. Of course, one also 
needs to have true wisdom. When one has true 
wisdom, one will know how to benefit all beings. 



By having a longer life we have more time to help more 
beings. With a shorter life, we have less time to help 
beings. — Trans. 



92 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Although accomplishing a meritorious deed re- 
quires certain opportunities and conditions, proce- 
dures, and sequential order, one still must have pa- 
tience to accomplish it. As the Diamond Sutra says: 
"All accomplishments are attributed to patience." 
Of the Six Paramitas, which are practiced by 
bodhisattvas, the paramita of patience is crucial to 
one's success or failure. 

"He constantly harbored compassion and pa- 
tience for all sentient beings." "All sentient beings" 
refers to all beings, in particular those beings who 
are suffering, who have committed evil karmas, 
and who are deluded. We should always treat them 
with empathy. This sentence teaches us that when 
interacting with people and engaging in tasks, we 
should do so with the mindset of compassion and 
tolerance. 

"With a kind expression and caring words" de- 
scribes the demeanor in which one presents one- 
self: with a pleasant expression and gentle manner. 
"Caring words" does not refer to pleasant words 
but to words that come from love and the wish to 
protect. These words can benefit people and help 



93 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



them break through delusion and attain awaken- 
ing. 

In the sutras, all the words spoken by the 
Buddha are caring words. Even a scolding or a 
reprimand are caring words if the words truly 
benefit someone. Why bother to reproach or disci- 
pline someone, if we don't truly care about that 
person? 

"He advised, taught, urged, and encouraged 
them." This is using expedient means to encourage 
people and help them make progress. 

The following examples are all wholesome 
dharmas, the true source of all happiness. 

"He was respectful to the Three Jewels and 
attended to his teachers." The mention of the Three 
Jewels here is not just a reference to the Three 
Jewels of the Three Refuges: it means we need to 
dwell in and uphold the Three Jewels. The empha- 
sis of the Three Refuges is the Three Jewels of 
True Nature — awakening, correct understanding, 
and purity, which are our true refuges. 

The Three Jewels in our true nature are awak- 
ening, correct understanding, and purity. The 



94 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Buddha signifies the awakening of our true nature, 
the Dharma signifies the correct understanding of 
our true nature, and the Sangha signifies the purity 
of our true nature. We should be respectful to 
them. Every day, in our every thought we should 
ask ourselves if we are awakened? Do we have 
correct understanding? Are our thoughts and 
views correct? Are our minds pure? The purpose 
of dwelling in and upholding the Three Jewels is to 
constantly remind us of the Three Jewels of True 
Nature. 

We receive the Buddha's teaching and take him 
as our teacher. There are two meanings in our mak- 
ing offerings to a Buddha image. The first is to re- 
member and appreciate where we come from, and 
to never forget. The second is to remind us of the 
awakening of the true nature. What does the 
Buddha signify? To be awakened, not deluded. 
From morning till night, are we awakened or not 
when interacting with people, engaging in tasks, 
and handling objects? A Buddha image constantly 
reminds us to be awakened, not deluded; to main- 
tain a pure mind, one beyond pollution; and to 



95 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



have correct thoughts and views at all times, in all 
places, and in all situations, whether favorable or 
adverse. This is being "respectful to the Three 
Jewels." 

"Attended to his teachers" is respecting one's 
teachers and their teachings. Like Confucianism, 
Buddhism is also founded on filial piety to one's 
parents and respect for one's teachers. Confucian 
teaching flourished because of this foundation, as 
did the Buddha's teaching. Filial piety is thus very 
important, for only when one is filial will one re- 
spect teachers. If one truly respects one's teachers, 
one will receive the Way taught by the teachers. If 
one does not respect one's teachers, they will not be 
able to teach one anything no matter how good 
they are. Why? Because one will not believe them 
nor be willing to learn from them. When one re- 
spects one's teachers, one will listen to their teach- 
ing and diligently practice accordingly, thus receiv- 
ing merits and benefits. Respecting one's teachers 
is respecting the Way and receiving it. 

The words "without any insincerity or flattery 
in his heart" teaches us to not only treat the Three 



96 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Jewels and teachers with sincerity, but also all be- 
ings. We should cultivate this habit in daily life. 

"All of his conduct was magnificent and he was 
a role model in every way." The word "magnifi- 
cent" conveys the "truth, goodness, and beauty" 
that ordinary people often speak of. But such 
"truth, goodness, and beauty" exists as a concept, 
not a reality. On the other hand, truth, goodness, 
beauty, and wisdom truly exist in the Western Pure 
Land. 

When we abide by the Buddha's teachings, and 
interact with people and handle matters with a sin- 
cere, respectful, pure and great compassionate 
heart, our minds and conduct will be "magnificent." 
So, when we mindfully chant " Amituofo, " we must 
take Amitabha Buddha's causal vows as our causal 
vows. 

Dharmakara "was a role model in every way." 
He was a role model not only for practitioners but 
also for the general public. The meaning of these 
words is infinitely profound and broad. 

Whatever our occupation or status in society, 
we should set a good example for everyone, espe- 



97 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



cially our peers. In the chapter "Sudhana's Visits to 
Fifty-three Wise Teachers" in the Avatanwaka Sutra, 
of the fifty-three bodhisattvas, five appeared as 
monastics and the others as men and women of all 
ages and all walks of life. Their behavior set good 
examples for society. 

Bodhisattvas not only teach by words. Their 
every action is also a good example for others. This 
shows the bodhisattvas' great compassion. Only by 
doing so can they change prevailing habits and cus- 
toms for the better, and encourage and reform peo- 
ple. To encourage and reform people, one teaches 
not only by words: one's every action and thought 
should also be for the benefit of them. If a lay prac- 
titioner, regardless of his or her occupation, works 
for the benefit of society and all beings, he or she is 
a bodhisattva, a role model. 

"He regarded all dharmas as illusory and re- 
mained in the samadhi that is eternally quiescent." 
This sentence describes Dharmakara's inner state. 
All phenomena, whether mundane or supramun- 
dane, are illusory. As the Diamond Sutra says: "All 
conditioned existences are like a dream, an illusion, 



98 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



a bubble, or a shadow." Why take them seriously? 

"Samadhi" is a Sanskrit word. The Chinese 
translation is "proper enjoyment." The "proper en- 
joyment" of bodhisattvas is purity, quiescence, and 
Nirvana. Purity, quiescence, and Nirvana are the 
enjoyment of Buddhas and Mahasattvas. Lay 
bodhisattvas can also enjoy them. 

Some practitioners have built up large busi- 
nesses. They tell me, "Master, I am in great suffer- 
ing. Employees do not follow my orders and it is 
hard to do business. I have a lot to worry about 
every day." Actually, what is there to worry about? 
The Buddha taught us to "regard all dharmas as 
illusory and remain in the samadhi that is eternally 
quiescent." If we truly practice this, we will lead a 
very happy and very free life ! How then can there 
be suffering? 

There are many entrepreneurs who learn Bud- 
dhism. But their learning is not thorough enough. 
They do not thoroughly understand the principles 
taught by the Buddha. If they truly understood, 
their situations would be different. 

In Chinese history, the prosperity in the early 



99 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



years of the Qing dynasty was unprecedented. The 
flourishing age during the rule of Emperors 
Kangxi, Yongzheng, and Oianglong lasted for 
more than one hundred and fifty years. During 
these years, each emperor would lead all the gov- 
ernment officials and military officers in chanting 
the Infinite Life Sutra every day at the imperial 
court. They abided by the Buddha's teachings and 
practiced accordingly. 

If the owner and the employees of a company 
know the wondrous benefit of doing this, and they 
chant a sutra for fifteen to twenty minutes every 
morning, then they are abiding by the Buddha's 
teachings. They are the Buddha's students, and 
they are practicing accordingly. So how can the 
company not flourish? Doing this is establishing 
consensus based on the Buddha's teaching. 

It requires wisdom to "regard all dharmas as 
illusory." When one understands the truth of eve- 
rything, it will be easy to handle matters without 
making any mistake. Because one does not under- 
stand the truth, wrong steps are taken and one 
ends up making mistakes. 



100 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"He guarded well his verbal karmas and did not 
ridicule other's faults." This describes 
Dharmakara's external behavior. The sentence "He 
regarded all dharmas as illusory and remained in 
the samadhi that is eternally quiescent" describes 
his attainment and wisdom. "Regarding all dhar- 
mas as illusory" is wisdom. "Remaining in the sa- 
madhi that is eternally quiescent" is meditative 
concentration. 

When one truly has meditative concentration 
and wisdom, one's external behavior will reflect 
that — "he guarded well his verbal karmas and did 
not ridicule other's faults." When seeing the faults 
of others, one does not talk about them. 

The Platform Sutra says: "If one is a true practi- 
tioner, one will not see the faults of others." Why 
will one not see the faults of others? Because one 
regards all dharmas as illusory! There is no fault. 
There is no merit. There is no good and no evil. 
One's mind is impartial: without discrimination or 
attachment, there is neither good nor evil, neither 
right nor wrong, and neither true nor false. One 
will naturally not speak of the faults of others. 



101 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Therefore, good or evil, right or wrong, and true or 
false — these are unfounded discriminations formed 
by people in this world. 

"He guarded well his bodily karmas and did not 
transgress any precept or codes of behavior." Sim- 
ply put, one's demeanor and behavior naturally 
conform with proper customs: there will be no lack 
of courtesy; there will be no wrongdoing. 

"He guarded well his mental karmas and kept 
himself pure and uncontaminated." Of the three 
kinds of karmas, the hardest to guard is one's men- 
tal karmas, and the easiest bad karmas to commit 
are verbal karmas. This is why verbal karma is 
listed first. 

In the title of this sutra are the words "purity, 
impartiality, and enlightenment." Purity, impartial- 
ity, and enlightenment are one in three and three in 
one. When the mind is pure, it is also impartial. 
Since it is pure, it must also be enlightened. When 
the pure mind is functioning, that is enlightenment. 
An enlightened mind is definitely pure and impar- 
tial. 

In learning Buddhism, one needs only to culti- 



102 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



vate a pure mind. When one has a pure mind, one 
will naturally be impartial and enlightened. At all 
times, in all places, and in all situations, whether 
favorable or adverse, one needs to maintain a pure 
and uncontaminated mind. 

The mind will naturally be pure when (1) in- 
ternally, greed, anger, ignorance, and arrogance do 
not arise in one, and (2) externally, one is not at- 
tached to any environment, good or bad. A pure 
mind is the true mind and is true wisdom. When 
handling any situation, one will do it correctly and 
completely, without any mistakes. All mistakes 
arise from desire and thoughts of gain and loss. 



103 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Seventeen 

Always using the practice of the Six 
Paramitas of giving, precept observation, 
patience, diligence, meditative concentration, 
and wisdom, he taught and transformed 
beings to help them steadfastly establish a 
bodhi mind. 

"Always" means forever and never changing. One 
should follow these six principles at all times. 

The first paramita is giving. For us, this means 
letting go and helping others. There are three kinds 
of giving: the giving of wealth, the giving of teach- 
ings, and the giving of fearlessness. Giving is a 
karmic cause. If we want to have wealth, we 
should practice the giving of wealth. If we want to 
be intelligent and wise, we should practice the giv- 
ing of teachings. If we wish to have good health 
and a long life, we should practice the giving of 
fearlessness. In the giving of fearlessness, the most 



104 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



important thing is not to harm any being. In addi- 
tion to not killing beings, we should not even cause 
them to have afflictions. A vegetarian diet is a form 
of the giving of fearlessness: We do not eat the 
flesh of animals or cause them to have afflictions. 
To be more proactive, we should free captured 
animals. 

I was supposed to be a person with little good 
fortune and a short life span. But I have lived to 
this age and my good fortune seems to increase 
year by year. Both are the rewards from my learn- 
ing the Buddha's teaching and practicing it accord- 
ingly in this lifetime. 

One should not enjoy the good fortune oneself 
because one will use it up very quickly. When one 
has good fortune, one should share it with others. 
This way, one's good fortune will never be used up. 
This is the truth. 

As I gained more wisdom, I saw the ins and 
outs of everything more clearly than before. Thus, 
I was able to do things that benefited others in a 
more appropriate and perfect way. Moreover, I did 
not ask to have my life extended but it was. This is 



105 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



true freedom ! 

In the bodhisattva practice, giving is listed first. 
My rewards from the three kinds of giving can be 
clearly seen by everyone. 

The second paramita is precept observation. 
We should observe the precepts and codes of be- 
havior that the Buddha laid out. The teachings in 
the sutras that the Buddha earnestly and patiently 
taught us should be followed too. We should also 
abide by the laws and customs of our countries. If 
we abandon the precepts, then the practice and 
upholding of the Buddha's teachings will disappear. 
So even if we lecture on the Dharma, and study 
and discuss it every day, it will be futile. Why? Be- 
cause our lives are disconnected from the teach- 
ings, we are not applying what we are learning. No 
matter how profoundly or how well we can lecture 
on Buddhism, nothing will be achieved. That is 
why Buddhism has always emphasized practice. 

The Buddha taught "three cumulative pure 
precepts." "Three cumulative" means three main 
categories. 

The first category is "uphold precepts and 



106 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



codes of behavior." This encompasses all the 
teachings that the Buddha taught in the sutras. We 
should practice all that the Buddha wants us to do 
and not otherwise. 

The second category is "uphold precepts by 
practicing virtuous dharmas." A deed that is good 
should be done. A deed that is bad should not be 
done. We should know that the spirit of the pre- 
cepts is to prevent wrongdoing or stop evil con- 
duct; it helps us to end wrongdoings and to prac- 
tice virtuous conduct. 

Even though the Buddha did not list everything 
we should or should not do, we need to adhere to 
the spirit of his teachings. For example, the 
Buddha did not tell us not to smoke, but we know 
that smoking is not good for us or for others. 
Therefore, we should not smoke. Things of this na- 
ture fall under "uphold precepts by practicing vir- 
tuous dharmas." 

The third category is "uphold precepts by 
bringing lasting benefits to all sentient beings." 
When a deed benefits beings, we should do it. 
There are three kinds of beneficial deeds. The first 



107 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



kind is the deed that will bring immediate benefit 
but will have a harmful effect in the future. This 
kind of deed should not be done. The second kind 
is the deed that will bring benefit not only now but 
also in the future. This kind of deed is truly benefi- 
cial. The third kind is the deed that will not bring 
immediate benefit but will bring great benefit in the 
future. This kind of deed is also beneficial. 

This shows that Buddhas and bodhisattvas look 
far ahead, not only at the immediate future. 

The third paramita is patience. 20 To accomplish 
any undertaking, one needs to bear any hardship 
that one encounters. In the process of cultivation, 
one will surely encounter frustration. The more 
diligent one is, the greater the amount of frustra- 
tion one faces. Why is there so much frustration? 
Because of the evil karmas that one has committed 
over countless kalpas, obstacles from karmic forces 



The cultivation of this virtue involves two aspects: to be 
patient without anger in the face of harm done by others and 
to endure various afflictions and suffering and to be unafraid 
of the implications of such Mahayana teachings as empti- 
ness. — Damien Keown, Dictionary of Buddhum (Oxford Uni- 
versity Press, Oxford, 2003), 148. 



108 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



are unavoidable. The only solution is to tolerate 
any hardship. This will decrease karmas. If one has 
meditative concentration, it can eliminate karmas. 
One should face obstacles with wisdom, resolve 
them with forbearance, acquiesce, and make dili- 
gent progress. Only with the paramita of patience 
will one be able to improve. If one is not patient, 
one will encounter obstacles. 

The fourth paramita is diligence. 21 The Chinese 
term for "diligence" is jingjin. Jlng means "pure and 
unadulterated" and Jin means "making progress." 
For bodhisattvas, diligence is their only good 
root. 22 

Nowadays, many Buddhist practitioners make 
the mistake of learning too many different things, 
resulting in a mixture. Although they make pro- 
gress every day, their progress is adulterated. They 

21 Diligence means to courageously cultivate good dharmas 
and end evil dharmas. It is to focus and to progress 
tirelessly. — Trans. 

22 Diligence is the only good root of the bodhisattvas because 
they are already replete with worldly good roots of no greed, 
no anger, and no ignorance. This good root of diligence al- 
lows the bodhisattvas to advance in cultivation without re- 
gression until they attain enlightenment. — Trans. 

109 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



spend a lot of time and effort but their accom- 
plishment is very limited. 

The little achievement I have in this lifetime is 
due to having a good teacher. He forbade me to 
proceed in an unfocused and random way. I 
learned from Mr. Li Bingnan in Taichung for ten 
years. His teaching method was that even if a stu- 
dent was very smart and had an exceptional capa- 
bility, he or she could simultaneously learn only 
two sutras at most. If the student wanted to learn 
three sutras [at one time], he would not teach this 
student. Students who did not have a good capabil- 
ity learned only one sutra. Only when Mr. Li con- 
sidered that a student had learned a sutra well 
enough would he teach the student a new one. 
Otherwise, he would not allow the student to learn 
a new sutra. During my ten years with Mr. Li, I 
learned five sutras, whereas in a Buddhist college, 
the students study more than five sutras in one se- 
mester. 

The first sutra I learned was the Sutra on 
Ananda Asking about the Good Fortune and Misfortune of 
Learning the Buddha d Teachings; the second was the 



110 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Amitabha Sutra; the third was the "Chapter of the 
Vows and Practices of Samantabhadra"; the fourth 
was the Diamond Sutra; and the fifth was the 
Surangama Sutra. I spent ten years learning only 
these sutras. Mr. Li's criterion was that only when 
one learned one sutra well enough could one learn 
a new one. "Well enough" meant that the student 
could explain the sutra thoroughly on stage to an 
audience. When the student lectured on stage, Mr. 
Li would sit in the last row. Without using a mi- 
crophone, the student had to talk loud enough for 
Mr. Li to hear. Heading toward one direction and 
one goal, his students were thus laying a good 
foundation and would naturally understand the 
other sutras. 

"When one masters one sutra, one naturally 
masters all sutras." The question is whether one 
has truly learned and understood the sutra and en- 
tered into the states described in the sutra. 

The fifth paramita is meditative concentration. 
It means being in control of one's mind. Within, the 
mind is unmoved; without, the mind is not attached 
to phenomena. One should not be easily tempted 



111 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



by any external phenomena. For example, when 
one learns a sutra, one concentrates on this sutra. 
This way one would be in control of one's mind. 

The sixth paramita is wisdom. Simply put, 
when one interacts with people and engages in 
tasks, one should do so based on reason, not on 
emotions. 

This excerpt teaches us the six principles for 
interacting with people and engaging in tasks in 
daily life. These are also the guidelines that bodhi- 
sattvas use in teaching and transforming beings to 
help them be steadfastly established [in the bodhi 
mind] . 



112 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Eighteen 

Brings forth the bodhi mind, observes all the 
precepts, firmly abides in them without any 
transgression, brings abundant benefits to 
sentient beings, and offers them all the good 
roots that one has cultivated to help them 
attain peace and happiness. 



This excerpt sets the standard, throughout our 
lives, for interacting with people and engaging in 
tasks. "Bodhi" is Sanskrit, meaning "enlighten- 
ment." "Bringing forth the bodhi mind" means 
bringing forth the mind to attain enlightenment 
and be free of confusion and delusion. An ordinary 
being is called an ordinary being because such a 
person is confused and deluded. 

The excerpt also teaches us to interact with 
people and engage in tasks with a sincere mind. We 
should not deceive them or act falsely. Sincerity is 
the bodhi mind. The Visualization Sutra talks about 



113 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"a mind of the utmost sincerity." This is the nou- 
menon of the bodhi mind. 

How can one be truly free of confusion or delu- 
sion? Let us observe a truly awakened person. This 
person has a clear understanding of him- or herself 
as well as the living environment. Understanding is 
awakening. What is the standard for understand- 
ing? 

The Buddha was a truly awakened person. He 
is our standard. The Buddha said that the truth of 
this world is "suffering, emptiness, and imperma- 
nence." This is the truth of this mundane world. 
No one can escape from this. 

This world is filled with suffering, is empty in 
nature, and is impermanent. We must clearly un- 
derstand this. When we do, we should abandon 
"suffering, emptiness, and impermanence" in this 
world and seek the state of "permanence, joy, true 
self, and purity." Achieving this, we are truly 
awakened. The state of "permanence, joy, true self, 
and purity" is the state of Buddhas and bodhisatt- 
vas. 

Buddhism talks about "understanding the cycle 



114 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



of birth and death and transcending the Three 
Realms." When one clearly understands the truth 
of life and death and of transmigration within the 
Six Paths, one is an awakened person. When one 
understands the truth, the next step is transcending 
the Six Paths and freeing oneself from samsara. 
This is what Buddhas and bodhisattvas do. 

When one is clear about the truth, how should 
one cultivate? When the Buddha was in this world, 
which was during the Dharma-perfect Age, people 
had high capacities and the majority could succeed 
in any method that they chose to practice! After 
the Buddha's time, during the Dharma-semblance 
Age, people did not have as high a capacity as ear- 
lier. With that, the quality of the Buddha's teach- 
ings gradually deteriorated as they were passed 
down. But it was not that the sutras had degener- 
ated; rather, it was the lecturers' interpretation of 
the sutras that had worsened. As time went by, the 
lectures on the Dharma became more and more 
incorrect. Now it is the Dharma-ending Age, more 
than three thousand years after the Buddha's par- 
inirvana. The deterioration has reached a point 



115 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



where we do not know what to do. It gets more 
and more difficult for us to attain realization from 
learning and practicing Buddhism. 

Three thousand years ago, the Buddha knew 
completely what was going to happen in society 
today! He did not fail those of us who truly sought 
transcendence, who truly sought enlightenment. 
The Buddha, in the Great Collection Sutra, said that 
in the Dharma-perfect Age, one could succeed in 
cultivation by observing the precepts; in the 
Dharma-semblance Age, one could succeed in cul- 
tivation by practicing meditative concentration; 
and in the Dharma-ending Age, one could succeed 
in cultivation by learning the Pure Land method. 
The Buddha was telling us, the people of today, 
that we will definitely succeed in our cultivation if 
we learn and practice the Pure Land method. 

The Dharma-ending age lasts ten thousand 
years. One thousand years have passed, and there 
are nine thousand years to go. The Infinite Life Sutra 
says that at the end of that nine thousand years, the 



116 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Dharma will be lost 23 to our mundane world. The 
Infinite Life Sutra, however, will remain in this 
world for another one hundred years. At the end of 
that one hundred years, even the Infinite Life Sutra 
will also be lost to the world. But there will still ex- 
ist the six syllables "Namo Amituofo." 

From this we can see the inconceivable merit of 
"Namo Amituofo." The people who live after the 
Dharma-ending Age will be able to attain libera- 
tion by relying on "Namo Amituofo." Today, we 
have a better chance. 

Great Master Daochuo of the Tang dynasty 
was a patriarch of the Pure Land school. During 
his lifetime, he lectured only on the three Pure 
Land sutras, and he did so more than two hundred 
times. From this we can see that practicing and 
propagating only one Dharma door is the perfect 
bodhi mind. 

To understand the cycle of birth and death, one 



The Dharma will be lost because no one understands the 
teachings completely to teach us, because the teachings are 
misinterpreted, or because no one knows the existence of the 
sutra. — Trans. 



117 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



must first know that life is filled with suffering, and 
that the suffering in future lifetimes will become 
even worse than in the current lifetime. If one does 
not want to be reborn in the human path, can this 
wish be fulfilled? Unless one mindfully chants the 
Buddha-name and seeks rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land, one's wish may not be fulfilled. There- 
fore, one must be determined to attain rebirth there 
in this lifetime. This is the true bodhi mind. 

When one has an awakened mind, one's behav- 
ior also needs to be awakened. In other words, one 
should lead the life of an awakened person. In daily 
life, when one interacts with people and engages in 
tasks, one's every thought should be awakened, not 
deluded. The following sutra text is the Buddha's 
teaching of the correct activities and practice for 
the bodhisattvas in this world. 

In "...observe all the precepts, firmly abide in 
them without any transgression," the meaning of 
observing the precepts, in a broad sense, is abiding 
by laws and the codes of behavior. 

The spirit of the precepts is "do nothing that is 
bad and do everything that is good." "Do nothing 



118 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



that is bad" is the spirit of the Theravada precepts. 
"Do everything that is good" is the spirit of the 
bodhisattva precepts. 

There are various levels for good and bad. For 
example, in the Five Vehicles of Buddhism, there 
are five levels: the human vehicle, the heavenly ve- 
hicle, the sound-hearer vehicle, the pratyekabud- 
dha vehicle, and the bodhisattva vehicle. The hu- 
mans and heavenly beings are still within the Three 
Realms and have not yet transcended the cycle of 
rebirth. The sound-hearers and the pratyeka- 
buddhas have truly transcended transmigration 
within the Six Paths. 

The perfect Dharma, however, is founded on 
being a good human being. If one is not a good 
person, how can one become a Buddha? Where 
should one start with learning Buddhism? One 
starts with learning to be a good person. 

The Visualization Sutra teaches the Three Con- 
ditions. The first condition includes being filial to 
and providing and caring for parents, being re- 
spectful to and serving teachers, being compas- 
sionate and not killing any living beings, and culti- 



119 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



vating the Ten Virtuous Karmas. This first condi- 
tion is the basis for being a good person. 

The Five Precepts are the fundamental pre- 
cepts, which Buddhas and bodhisattvas also abide 
in. When we expand the scope of the precepts, we 
have laws. All the laws, moral values, and customs 
of our countries should be followed. They are all 
within the scope of the precepts. In addition, we 
should control our sensual desires. We should 
firmly abide by the precepts and not transgress 
them. 

This is "do nothing that is bad," the spirit of the 
Theravada precepts. 

"Brings abundant benefits to sentient beings" 
describes a Mahayana precept. "Sentient beings" 
encompasses not only people but also animals and 
plants. "Abundant benefits" refers to not just the 
most abundant but also the highest benefits. 

We should do our best to perform deeds that 
will benefit others. Maybe there is a limit to what 
we can do, but if we perform deeds with a sincere, 
respectful, and pure mind and with patience, we 
will have the support of Buddhas and bodhisattvas. 



120 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Our wishes will surely be fulfilled. 

The Buddha said: "All dharmas are created by 
the mind." When we think about a matter [that will 
benefit others] every moment of every day never 
forgetting it, then this matter will be successfully 
accomplished. If we think "This is so difficult. I 
cannot do it. Forget it!" then this matter will not be 
accomplished. Why? Because when we stop think- 
ing of benefiting others, we stop generating energy. 
Thoughts will truly generate inconceivable ener- 
gy—this is continual mindfulness. 

When one understands this principle, one sees 
that those who are mindful of Buddha will attain 
Buddhahood. A practitioner who chants the 
Buddha-name will definitely attain rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land — this is also the same princi- 
ple. When one mindfully chants "Amituofo" and is 
mindful of the Western Pure Land — being dili- 
gently mindful without any interruption — then 
Amitabha Buddha will definitely come to one. 

We should wholeheartedly do things that will 
bring true, vast and great benefits to all beings. We 
must ensure that this thought does not cease. 



121 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"Offer them all the good roots that one has cul- 
tivated to help them attain peace and happiness" 
teaches us to broaden our minds. Before we began 
to learn Buddhism, we used to always think of our- 
selves—our happiness and our family's. We seldom 
thought about the country or society. This means 
that we were not broad-minded. 

After we began to learn Buddhism, we read 
about the great vows of Amitabha Buddha, whose 
state of mind encompasses the entire Dharma 
Realm. That is the perfect manifestation of the true 
mind. We should learn this. 

In doing any deed, no matter how small, one 
should dedicate the merit accrued to all beings, 
wishing that all suffering beings could leave suffer- 
ing behind and attain happiness. This is a form of 
Dharma offerings: by giving of ourselves for all 
beings. 

One does not personally enjoy the good fortune 
one has cultivated but shares it with all beings. 
This is the meaning of dedication. One shares one's 
wisdom, good fortune, skills, and abilities with all 
beings, wishing that all beings could have peace 



122 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



and happiness. This is a bodhisattva practice. Can 
this be done? Yes. If one truly practices, others will 
benefit. If these people are about to encounter a 
disaster, and there is someone who has great good 
fortune and merits, either they will not encounter 
the disaster or the severity of the disaster will be 
reduced. 

To help avert world disasters, we must ear- 
nestly learn and practice. All we need to do is sin- 
cerely do our best, with our every thought of doing 
it for the suffering beings. We will definitely not 
want to enjoy the merits accrued but offer them 
universally to all beings. 

Bodhisattvas are courageous and diligent. 
Where do they get their energy from? From this 
thought of great compassion, they work for all be- 
ings, not for themselves. An awakened person will 
surely behave this way. If one does not behave this 
way and thinks of oneself and one's family, or even 
a small group of people, one is not awakened. 
One's mind is still very narrow. An awakened per- 
son would undoubtedly have a very broad mind. 



123 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Nineteen 

They should practice good deeds, such as (1) 
no killing, (2) no stealing, (3) no sexual 
desire, (4) no lying, (5) no enticing speech, 
(6) no harsh speech, (7) no divisive speech, 
(8) no greed, (9) no anger, and (10) no 
ignorance. 

"They should practice good deeds" refers to the 
Ten Virtuous Karmas, which are the standards for 
our thoughts and for our interacting with others 
and engaging in tasks. If one behaves in accor- 
dance with the Ten Virtuous Karmas in one's life- 
time, one is a good person. The Ten Virtuous Kar- 
mas are the most basic standards for good and bad. 

The Visualization Sutra teaches the Three Con- 
ditions. The first includes being filial to parents, 
and providing and caring for them; being respect- 
ful to and serving teachers; being compassionate 
and not killing any living beings; and cultivating 



124 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



the Ten Virtuous Karmas. This is the most impor- 
tant foundation for learning Buddhism. When we 
are filial to our parents, respect our teachers, and 
are compassionate, then the Ten Virtuous Karmas 
are fulfilled. Of the Ten Virtuous Karmas, three are 
physical karmas, four are verbal karmas, and three 
are mental karmas. The three virtuous physical 
karmas are no killing, no stealing, and no sexual desire. 

The first virtuous physical karma is no killing. 
The scope of "killing" is very extensive. It includes 
personally doing the killing; killing verbally (in 
other words, telling someone to kill); feeling happy 
when seeing an act of killing; and giving rise to an 
intention to kill because of anger and hatred. These 
are all included in "killing." In other words, no kill- 
ing means that one has absolutely no thought of 
harming others. This way we nurture compassion. 

The second virtuous physical karma is no steal- 
ing. The scope of "stealing" is very extensive. In 
Buddhism, stealing is defined as taking without 
permission. If we handle something that is owned 
by somebody else without their permission, this is 
an act of stealing. Those who steal will have to repay 



125 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



the debt in the future. It is said that one has to repay 
a life with a life and money with money. The law of 
cause and effect never fails. When one steals from 
one person, the resultant offense is relatively light: 
the karmic ties are fewer. But, some things are owned 
by many people, such as the public facilities in a 
city. If one steals anything from a public facility, 
one has to pay back all the residents of this city, 
because they pay taxes and are thus the owners. If 
one steals from the facilities of a state or federal 
government, one will have to pay back the whole na- 
tion. With stealing, the resultant offense of stealing 
"property of the Three Jewels" 24 is the most seri- 



"Property of the Three Jewels" is a Buddhist terminology 
that refers to the property of a temple or monastery. The 
statue of a Buddha, the worship hall, flowers, canopi- 
es — these are the property of the Buddha Jewel. Sutras, sta- 
tionery, containers and linens for protecting sutras — these are 
the property of the Dharma Jewel. Dormitories and farms of 
monasteries; clothing, alms bowls, and other personal items 
belonging to monastics — these are property of the Sangha 
Jewel. The items for each Jewel must only be used for that 
Jewel and not otherwise. For example, the flowers in the 
chanting hall should not be used as a personal item. — Practwal 
Buddbut Dictlxinary "Sbl Yong Fo Xue Ci DLaii " compiled by Gao 
Guan Lu, 1934 (Buddhist Book Store, China). 



126 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ous — such properties are things belonging to a 
temple or monastery. The Buddha-dharma is 
owned by the entire Dharma realm, which has no 
boundary. In other words, all the monastics are the 
owners. If one steals something from a cultivation 
center, the transgression is inconceivably grave. 
One who steals the property of the Three Jewels 
will surely fall into the hells realm. 

Stealing is the easiest offense to commit and the 
one most frequently committed. For example, there 
are some in business who always try to pay less 
tax. This is stealing. Stealing in this manner is a 
very grave transgression. One must know that one 
should feel remorse and then make amends by cul- 
tivating goodness. 

In the history of Buddhism in China, Great 
Master Yongming is the one most famous for doing 
good deeds with the use of public funds, funds he 
was not authorized to use. Before he became a mo- 
nastic, he was a low- ranking government clerk in 
the taxation department. He often used govern- 
ment money to free captured animals. After it was 
reported that he had taken money, he was sen- 



127 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tenced to death, according to the law. 

When the emperor heard that he used the pub- 
lic funds solely to free captured animals, he gave 
these instructions to the official supervising the 
execution: "If he shows fear before the execution, 
execute him. But if he does not show the slightest 
fear, then bring him to me." 

When the clerk was about to be beheaded, he 
did not show any signs of fear. The supervising of- 
ficial asked him, "Why are you not afraid?" He 
said, "I exchange my life for tens of thousands of 
lives. It's worth it! I am happy!" The official re- 
ported this to the emperor. The emperor asked the 
clerk, "Do you have any wish?" The clerk replied, 
"I want to become a monastic." The emperor 
granted his wish and became his Dharma protec- 
tor. 

After Great Master Yongming attained great 
enlightenment through Zen meditation, he focused 
on the Pure Land teachings and concentrated on 
mindfully chanting the Buddha-name. His biogra- 
phy says that he was Amitabha Buddha mani- 
fested. 



128 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The master's stealing is not the same as when 
we ordinary people do it. Ordinary people steal for 
personal enjoyment; he stole to benefit all beings. 
Hence, the Buddha-dharma truly is flexible. It 
adapts to circumstances, but there is only one ob- 
jective: to benefit all beings and society. If we steal 
for our enjoyment, the transgression is inconceiva- 
bly grave. This example is worthy of our deep con- 
templation. 

The third virtuous physical karma is no sexual 
desire. Whether one is a lay practitioner or a mo- 
nastic, sexual desire will increase one's greed and 
deviated thoughts and obstruct one's pursuit of the 
supramundane teachings. Therefore, in order to 
achieve true purity of mind and attain a higher re- 
birth grade, one must not have sexual desire. If one 
cannot end sexual desire, one must at least not 
commit sexual misconduct. The Ten Virtuous 
Karmas teach no sexual misconduct. This means 
having no sexual conduct with anyone other than 
with one's spouse. This is absolutely forbidden. 

The four virtuous verbal karmas are no lying, 
no enticing speech, no harsh speech, and no divi- 



129 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



sive speech. 

The first virtuous verbal karma is no lying. In 
learning Buddhism, to generate the bodhi mind 
where should one start? One starts with no lying. 
If one keeps on lying, how can one's true mind 
come forth? One must be sincere and not deceive 
oneself and others. This is the very foundation of 
the Buddha-dharma. 

We want to truly understand the Buddha's in- 
tention in laying down the precepts as well as 
know the spirit of the precepts. This way, we will 
know how to be flexible in observing the precepts 
in daily life. This is very important. 

Here's an example from a sutra. A hunter was 
chasing a rabbit and came to a crossing. He saw a 
person there and asked, "Did you see a rabbit?" "It 
went that way, " the person replied. The rabbit had 
actually run the other way but the person at the 
crossing, in order to save the rabbit, told a lie to 
keep the hunter away from it. His lying was lifting 
the precept, not transgressing it. What he did saved 
not only the animal but also the hunter. Although 
the hunter had intended to kill the rabbit, he did 



130 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



not succeed; so his offense was light. 

This tells us that with all precepts, if what we 
do is to benefit beings, it is lifting the precepts, and 
if what we do is to benefit only ourselves, then we 
are transgressing the precepts and are guilty of of- 
fenses. When we benefit all beings, we have merit. 
When we sacrifice ourselves to benefit others, we 
are bodhisattvas. 

The second virtuous verbal karma is no entic- 
ing speech. Enticing speech means using inviting 
words to deceive others or to lure them to commit 
bad deeds. Today's songs, dance, dramas, movies, 
novels, and even some literature — known as art 
nowadays — are full of enticing speech from the 
viewpoint of Buddhism. They teach people to kill, 
to steal, and to commit sexual misconduct. The of- 
fenses are immensely grave. Let us carefully look at 
the karmic effects: many famous movies stars come 
to a bad end. That is their karmic retribution in this 
lifetime. Their future karmic retributions will be 
even worse. 

I lecture on the Dharma and earnestly urge 
people to do good deeds, but few people come to 



131 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



listen. Those entertainment shows require entrance 
fees, and at very high prices too, yet many people 
attend them. From this we can see that people 
would rather listen to enticing words than to good 
advice. 

The third virtuous verbal karma is no harsh 
speech, which is offensive language. It hurts peo- 
ple's dignity. 

The fourth virtuous verbal karma is no divisive 
speech. Divisive speech stirs up trouble, whether 
one does so intentionally or unintentionally. If one 
does so intentionally, the offense is grave. If one 
does so unintentionally, it is a fault, and the out- 
come determines the gravity of the offense. If one 
causes discord between two persons or two groups 
of people, the gravity of the offense depends on the 
extent of the discord. If one causes two countries to 
go to war, which results in the loss of many lives 
and damage to much property, then the offense is 
immensely grave. 

From the above, when one's divisive speech 
causes extensive damage and the damage lasts a 
long time, one will fall into the tongue -pulling hell 



132 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



or the Avici hell. Therefore, we must be very care- 
ful with our speech. 

The three virtuous mental karmas are no greed, 
no anger, and no ignorance. These are also called 
the Three Good Roots. All the wholesome dharmas 
arise from them. Greed, anger, and ignorance are 
the Three Poison Afflictions, and all the evil dhar- 
mas arise from them. Therefore, the three mental 
karmas are truly the determinant and the root 
cause of one's suffering and happiness. We must be 
careful. 

People in this world crave fame, prestige, gain, 
wealth, the Five Desires, and the Six Dusts. If one 
gets something that one craves, it is because one is 
destined to have it. If one is not destined to have 
something, no matter what one does, one will not 
get it. After reading Liaofan '<> Four Leddoiu, we will 
understand this: if one is destined to have some- 
thing, one cannot get rid of it no matter what; if 
one is not destined to have something, one cannot 
get it no matter what. 

Mr. Yuan Liaofan is a good example. The good 
thing about Liaofan was that he knew his destiny, 



133 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



and knowing his destiny made him content with his 
lot. Destiny is natural. He accepted his karmic ret- 
ributions that he was destined to have. Therefore, 
he did not have any wandering thoughts. His mind 
was pure. 

If everyone understands the law of cause and 
effect and is content with his or her present life, the 
world will be at peace. There will be no conflict. 
When everyone's mind is calm, he or she will truly 
have happiness in this lifetime. This good fortune 
can be had by the rich and those in high position. 
And also by the poor and lowly. Everyone will be 
happy. 

The most frightening thing is that people do not 
know the existence of destiny or understand the 
law of cause and effect, nor believe in it. Conse- 
quently, people behave as they like and commit 
wrongdoings every day. 

Although one's destiny is predetermined, it 
changes every day in accordance with one's behav- 
ior. So, can one change one's destiny? Yes, one can. 
If one's behavior every day adds a little to or sub- 
tracts a little from good fortune — by one doing 



134 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



small good acts and committing small bad acts — 
then one's life will be governed by one's destiny, 
and there will be no change. But if one does major 
deeds — either good or evil — then one's destiny will 
be changed. 

Therefore, one's destiny after one is forty years 
old is greatly influenced by one's behavior in this 
lifetime. One's destiny before one is forty years old 
is pre-determined, greatly influenced by one's good 
and evil deeds done in past lifetimes. If one is truly 
awakened and diligently ends wrongdoings and 
practices virtuous conduct, one's destiny will 
change for the better after one is forty years old. 
This is very important. 

Buddhism can help us enjoy good fortune in 
this lifetime. If we truly believe it and diligently 
practice, we will become happier and happier in 
our old age. This depends on our cultivation. The 
Buddha taught us to practice the Ten Virtuous 
Karmas. If we practice diligently, worldly good for- 
tune will naturally come to us without our seeking. 

The first virtuous mental karma is no greed. In 
addition to worldly things, one should also not 



135 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



have greed for supramundane teachings. One must 
completely let go of everything before one's mind 
can become pure. One should not be attached to 
what one has or crave for what one does not have. 
The most important thing is to maintain a pure 
mind — having is no different from not having. 

People often say that one brings nothing with 
one at birth and one takes nothing with one at 
death. When we die, we cannot take anything that 
we own with us. We must clearly understand this 
truth. Does anything we have now belong to us? 
No. If we think that what we have belongs to us, 
this is ignorance! What we have we are just using 
temporarily, like when we stay in a hotel. Nothing 
belongs to us. If we can thoroughly understand this 
reality, we will not have greed. We will be at ease 
regardless of what we encounter in life and will not 
mind or take anything seriously. 

When we understand the truth, we will have 
peace of mind. When we have peace of mind, we 
will surely see the truth. Therefore, we should let 
go of everything that is irrelevant — we should ab- 
solutely give no rise to greed. We should enthusias- 



136 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tically do more good deeds for all beings and soci- 
ety. 

The second virtuous mental karma is no anger. 
When things do not go as one wishes, one usually 
gets angry and becomes unhappy. This is very 
harmful. We often talk about accumulating merits. 
Merits are like a forest. We cultivate a lot of merits, 
but when we get angry, the fire of anger will burn 
away all the merits. This is described as "Fire 
burns away the forest of merits." 

We should ask ourselves "How much merit do 
we have?" If we had lost our temper this morning, 
then we would end up, since that bout of anger, 
with only a few hours of merits. If we lose our 
temper at the end of our lives, then we will burn 
away completely all the merits accumulated in this 
lifetime. 

Anything that causes us to lose our temper is a 
manifestation of Mara. Mara sees that we have ac- 
cumulated many merits, and he cannot destroy 
them — so he induces us to burn our forests of merits. 

Hence, when one who truly has wisdom and is 
awakened faces an adverse situation, this person 



137 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



will absolutely not burn away his or her merits, will 
absolutely not lose his or her temper. [To achieve 
this,] this person must practice patience. 

When we have patience, we will have medita- 
tive concentration. When we have meditative con- 
centration, we will have wisdom. Of the Six Para- 
mitas, giving and precept observation allow us to 
cultivate merits. Patience allows us to preserve 
merits. If one cannot practice patience, one will de- 
stroy one's own merits. 

Merits are precept observation, meditative con- 
centration, and wisdom. When one loses one's tem- 
per, one will not have any precept observation, 
meditative concentration, and wisdom. 

If one cultivates good fortune but loses one's 
temper often, harbors hatred and jealousy, is arro- 
gant, or loves to outdo others, one will have no 
merits but will still have great good fortune. This is 
because good fortune cannot be burned away. 
Which path will this kind of people be reborn in? 
The Buddha said that they will be reborn in the 
path of asuras. Asuras have good fortune but no 
virtues. They are prone to anger and lose their 



138 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tempers easily, and hurt others. But when they use 
up their good fortune, they will fall into a bad 
realm. Buddhism often talks about "anger and re- 
sentment in the third lifetime" — one cultivates good 
fortune in the first lifetime, enjoys it in the second 
lifetime, and falls into a bad realm in the third life- 
time. 

We must know that our anger harms us more 
than others: it harms us 70 percent and others 30 
percent. 

The third virtuous mental karma is no igno- 
rance. Ignorance means no wisdom. There are 
many smart people, eloquent in debate or skillful at 
talking or writing, but they do not have wisdom. 
What is wisdom? The ability to truly differentiate 
between true and false, proper and deviated, right 
and wrong, and beneficial and harmful. 

If an old village lady, one who has never re- 
ceived any formal education and is illiterate, when 
told to mindfully chant "Amituofo" does so sin- 
cerely during the remainder of her lifetime, then 
she has true wisdom. Why? Because she chooses to 
mindfully chant "Amituofo" to seek rebirth in the 



139 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Western Pure Land, which is true, not false; 
proper, not deviated; beneficial, not harmful; and 
good, not bad. Her choice is correct in every as- 
pect. This is true wisdom! 

Many intelligent people in this world doubt the 
Buddha-name chanting method. They even slander 
it. This act is totally without wisdom. This is igno- 
rance ! They do not get any benefit. Moreover, they 
obstruct others from learning and practicing this 
method, even to the point of causing them to stop 
their practice. This offense is very grave, and the 
future karmic retributions are unthinkable. 

No greed, no anger, and no ignorance — these 
are the roots of all wholesome dharmas in the 
world. If one cultivates virtuousness from the root, 
then one is an intelligent person. 



140 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty 

One should single-mindedly cultivate a pure 
mind, set body and mind upright, and 
eradicate desire and eliminate worry. One 
should maintain a compassionate mind and 
make focused and diligent progress. One 

should not be angry or jealous or be 
gluttonous or stingy. One should not have 
regret halfway or have doubts. One should 
be filial, have utmost sincerity, be loyal, and 
be trustworthy. One should believe that the 
Buddha's teachings in the sutras are 
profound. One should believe that doing 
good deeds will bring good fortune. 

"Should single-mindedly cultivate a pure mind, set 
body and mind upright, and eradicate desire and 
eliminate worry. One should maintain a compas- 
sionate mind and make focused and diligent pro- 
gress." These words are of great significance to our 



141 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



cultivation of behavior and thoughts, as well as our 
health, longevity, and happiness. When one has a 
long life, one wants to have good health and not 
show one's age — this is true happiness. How does 
one achieve this? By single-mindedly cultivating a 
pure mind. 

The Buddha said: "Dependent rewards change 
according to proper rewards." 25 Proper rewards 
refer to the mind, or thoughts. But thoughts are not 
the true mind — they are the false mind. The true 
mind neither arises nor ceases. It is pure and has 
no need to do anything. All phenomena — that are 
manifested by the true mind and that also neither 
arise nor cease — are called the One True Dharma 
Realm. 

If the true nature is mired in delusion, the true 



Dependant reward is the part of the reward on which one 's 
existence depends; the secondary and circumstantial part of 
the reward which one receives in this life as the result of acts 
in previous lives, such as house, utensils and surroundings . . . 
The proper reward is the principal reward which one receives 
in this life as the result of acts in previous lives, namely, one's 
own body and mind. . . Hisao Inagaki, A Dictwna/y of Japanese 
Buddh'ut Teriru (Nagata Bunshodo, Kyoto, 2003, 5 th Edition), 
43 and 311. 



142 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



mind — which neither arises nor ceases— will 
change into a mind that arises and ceases. Today, 
we have wandering thoughts. When a thought 
ceases, another one arises. This arising and ceasing 
is called cotwciou<me<i<i — the One True Dharma 
Realm is thus changed to the Ten Dharma Realms. 
How does the change occur? It is "altered by the 
consciousness." In other words, "all dharmas are 
created by the mind. " 

Thoughts are consciousness. The true mind has 
no thoughts. The Ten Dharma Realms are created 
by the mind. In other words, thoughts (conscious- 
ness) can change and can create. All the magnifi- 
cent proper and dependent rewards 26 in the Ten 
Dharma Realms are what are being changed and 
created. 

If one wants to stay healthy and young, know- 

26 Proper rewards are also described as main rewards. "De- 
pendent and main rewards are based on past karmic actions. 
The 'main rewards' refer to living beings, while the 'depend- 
ent rewards' refer to the physical environment on which the 
living beings 'depend,' such as the land, ponds, trees, and so 
forth."— Van Hien Study Group, The Seeker v Gloddary of Bud- 
dbLim (Sutra Committee of the United States and Canada, 
New York, 2003, 2nd Edition), 180. 

143 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ing this principle and method will help one change 
one's physical condition. If one does not know the 
principle and method, one will be affected by one's 
emotions and the external environment. One will 
not be in control and thus will suffer. 

What kind of mind should one maintain? Be 
single-minded and have a pure mind. The purer the 
mind, the healthier the mind. When the mind is 
healthy, the body will be healthy. If one's mind and 
body are pure, how can one not be healthy! One's 
physical condition changes in accordance with 
one's thoughts and emotions. Control invariably 
lies in one's thoughts. 

The standard for Buddha-name chanting is 
One Mind Undisturbed. We should always focus 
our minds on "Amituofo." We should take refuge in 
Amitabha Buddha, turning away from everything 
else and single-mindedly relying on him. When we 
truly do so, we will be free of all pollution and will 
attain purity. "Single-mindedly cultivate a pure 
mind" is very important! 

"Set body and mind upright, and eradicate de- 
sire and eliminate worry." Before this line, we have 



144 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"single-mindedly cultivate a pure mind," which re- 
fers to keeping the mind proper. When our every 
gesture, movement, word, and smile accord with 
the teachings of the Buddha, we are keeping our 
behavior proper. Setting one's body and mind up- 
right is behaving in an impressive and dignified 
manner. This is respectfulness. This is about codes 
of behavior. In other words, when one behaves in 
accordance with codes of behavior, one shows re- 
spect to the Buddha and the Dharma. 

There are great obstacles when body and mind 
are not upright. One obstacle is desire, and the 
other is worry. When these two obstacles are 
eliminated, body and mind will be upright. The ob- 
stacle to the body is desire, for it leads the body 
astray. Our minds will be filled with misery and 
hardship. Therefore, if one wants to truly make 
one's mind and body upright, one must "eradicate 
desire and eliminate worry. " 

Not only should one not have desire for fame, 
prestige, gain, wealth, the Five Desires, and the Six 
Dusts, one should also not have desire for bringing 
"abundant benefits to sentient beings" or helping 



145 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



others. 

It is aptly put in the Diamond Sutra that the 
Buddha helped boundless beings to awaken, but 
there were really no beings for the Buddha to help. 
Why did the Buddha say that he did not help a sin- 
gle being? Because, in everything it is good to ac- 
cord with conditions. According with conditions is 
to accord with the natural way of things. When 
conditions are available, wholeheartedly do the 
best, but take no credit for any of it. When condi- 
tions are not available, do not actively seek such 
conditions. 

"One should maintain a compassionate mind 
and make focused and diligent progress." Person- 
ally, one should maintain a pure mind, and towards 
others, one should maintain a compassionate mind. 
"Progress" means to keep on moving forward 
without retrogressing. "Focused and diligent," 
which also refers to progress that is pure and un- 
adulterated, means to courageously and diligently 
head in one direction and towards one goal. True 
cultivation is to have compassion for all, because 
when one cultivates, one is a role model for all be- 



146 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ings. When one succeeds in one's cultivation, one 
will definitely help all beings. 

"One should not be angry or jealous." Anger is 
a great obstacle. It is said, "A moment of anger will 
open up the door to millions of obstacles." Why 
does anger arise? Because one takes everything in 
this world as real. The Buddha told us "all phe- 
nomena are illusory" and "all conditioned exis- 
tences are like a dream, an illusion, a bubble, or a 
shadow." Nothing is real! Relationships between 
humans as well as between humans and all beings 
and everything else are all about causes, condi- 
tions, and effects. 

Conditions may be favorable or adverse. When 
an adverse condition appears, one should know 
that it results from a bad cause planted in the past. 
If a person displeases one or goes against one, then 
one should just laugh it off, as this will cancel out 
the karmic debt incurred in the past. If one be- 
comes angry, one will incur another debt on top of 
the old debt. Instead of canceling out the old debt, 
one will have even more problems. As it is said, "If 
one owes money, one will repay with money. If one 



147 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



owes life, one will repay with life. Reprisal breeds 
reprisal. It is cyclical and never ending." 

A person who is truly awakened will have a 
very calm and contented mind. When a favorable 
condition comes along, one will not feel happy, and 
when an adverse condition appears, one will not 
feel angry. One always maintains a pure and hon- 
orable mind. When the mind is pure, one will see 
clearly the causes and effects of a matter and will 
not become angry. 

One is jealous because one cannot bear to see 
others do well. A person receives something good 
because this person had cultivated a good cause — 
this is his or her reward. What is there to be jealous 
of? If we want good rewards, we only need to plant 
good causes. We should know to rejoice at others' 
meritorious deeds and help them accomplish them. 
When it comes to bad deeds, we should not help 
people commit them. 

"One should not ... be gluttonous or stingy." 
In a narrow sense, "gluttonous" means being fussy 
about food. In a broader sense, it includes all mate- 
rial enjoyment. A stingy person is someone who is 



148 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



unwilling to give to others. 

From giving, the merits are tremendous: in our 
present life, we can end afflictions and eliminate 
karmic obstacles; in our cultivation, we can break 
through ignorance and see the true nature. This is 
why bodhisattvas' cultivation is the practice of giv- 
ing. 

There are three types of giving: the giving of 
wealth, the giving of teachings, and the giving of 
fearlessness. The Six Paramitas are various forms 
of giving. Precept observation and patience are 
forms of the giving of fearlessness. For example, if 
we observe the precept of not stealing, people will 
not be on guard against us or fear us. This is the 
giving of fearlessness. If we practice patience, we 
will not mind when someone unintentionally says 
something offensive to us. 

Diligence, meditative concentration, and wis- 
dom are forms of the giving of teachings. The Six 
Paramitas dictate all forms of practice. The bound- 
less Dharma doors practiced by bodhisattvas do 
not fall outside the Six Paramitas — and the Six 
Paramitas are all subsumed under giving. From 



149 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



this we can see that the merit of giving is truly in- 
conceivable. 

We just need to single-mindedly cultivate a 
pure mind, set the body and the mind upright, and 
practice giving more often. We will receive incon- 
ceivable merit. 

Being gluttonous and stingy — residual habits 
from countless kalpas — are great obstacles to the 
practice of giving and must be overcome. One 
should live a thrifty life and maintain this simple 
life. Even when one becomes successful and has 
great wealth in the future, one should still live 
thriftily. This way, one will truly have good for- 
tune. 

A good example in Chinese history is the Prime 
Minster Fan Zhongyan of the Song dynasty. He 
came from a poor family. When he was a county- 
level scholar, he was so poor that every day he 
would divide the porridge that he cooked into four 
portions, eating a portion for each meal. Even 
when he became the prime minister, he still main- 
tained a very simple life. He had a very high salary, 
which he spent on charity and the poor. During the 



150 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



time when he was the prime minister, he supported 
more than three hundred households with his in- 
come. Therefore, he led a very hard and austere 
life. Great Master Yinguang greatly admired him 
and considered him a person worthy of respect and 
emulation, and in China, second only to Confucius. 

Nowadays, many old people set aside an 
amount of money for future medical bills. The 
Buddha said: "All dharmas are created by the 
mind. " If every day we think about getting old and 
falling sick, how can we not look old or get sick? If 
we change our way of thinking and give the money 
that has been set aside to help those who are poor 
and sick, we will not get sick. Why will we not fall 
sick? Because there is no money set aside for get- 
ting sick [for we no longer think and worry about 
it]! 

When we learn Buddhism, we should learn 
wisdom like this. 

I do not get sick because I know the law of 
cause and effect. This is why I have donated my 
medical-contingency money. I am truly at ease ! 

One should not be stingy. Helping others is 



151 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



helping oneself. If one thinks about aging and sick- 
ness every day, one will truly bring harm to oneself. 

"One should not have regret halfway." When 
we do a good deed, regretting it halfway through 
will result in our early efforts counting for nothing. 
For example, one learns and practices the Pure 
Land method, but after a period of time, one hears 
that there is another method that is better. Regret- 
ting one's previous choice, one starts to practice 
another method. This is wrong. No matter what 
others say, one should not have second thoughts — 
just continue with the Pure Land method. 

"Not . . . have doubts" means that we should 
absolutely not doubt the teachings of the sages or 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas. This way, we will be 
able to truly make focused and diligent progress. 

"One should be filial." Filial piety is the abso- 
lute foundation of Buddhism. Frankly, only when 
one attains Buddhahood can filial piety be prac- 
ticed to perfection. Only a Buddha can be perfectly 
filial. 

If we want to practice filial piety to perfection, 
we just need to single-mindedly chant the Buddha- 



152 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



name and seek rebirth in the Western Pure Land. 
When we meet Amitabha Buddha, our filial piety 
will then be perfect. It is because [once we are in 
the Pure Land] we will be able to recognize our 
parents and also all our parents from past lifetimes 
and clearly know which paths they are in, so that 
when the conditions are mature, they will listen 
and accept our advice to mindfully chant the 
Buddha-name when we urge them to. This way, we 
will have the ability to help them. We will be able 
to help our families, friends, and those who have an 
affinity with us — from every one of our life- 
times—transcend the Six Paths, attain rebirth in 
the Western Pure Land, and attain Buddhahood. 
This is great filial piety! This is true filial piety! 

Presently, it is good if we can take good care of 
our parents, in particular their spiritual well-being 
when they are advancing in age. The most impor- 
tant of all is to urge them to mindfully chant the 
Buddha-name. This is true filial piety. If our par- 
ents do not accept our advice, this is because we 
have not learned Buddhism well enough. If we 
really follow the Buddha's way, they will naturally 



153 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



accept our advice. When we diligently learn Bud- 
dhism, we will influence our parents. This requires 
patience and waiting for the proper time and right 
conditions. 

"Have utmost sincerity, be loyal, and be trust- 
worthy." "Utmost sincerity" means being abso- 
lutely and completely sincere. When we are sincere 
to the Buddha, to the Dharma, and to our teachers, 
we will truly benefit. 

Loyalty and trustworthiness are the norms 
when we interact with others and engage in tasks. 

"One should believe that the Buddha's teach- 
ings in the sutras are profound." This is true wis- 
dom. In particular, the Pure Land texts, such as the 
Amitabha Sutra, the Infinite Life Sutra, and the 
Visualization Sutra, are as the Buddha said — 
Dharma that is hard to believe. This is because 
even though the texts do not seem to be profound, 
the meanings and the states described are actually 
infinitely profound and broad. Great Master 
Shandao said in his Commentaries on the Visualization 
Sutra that it is not just ordinary people who cannot 
thoroughly understand the teachings in these three 



154 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



sutras, but also arhats, pratyekabuddhas, and the 
bodhisattvas of the Provisional Teaching. There- 
fore, not only do ordinary beings find it hard to be- 
lieve the sutras, even the great bodhisattvas still 
have doubts. These sutras are truly Dharma that is 
hard to believe. 

Although the Dharma is hard to believe, it is 
easy to practice. If we practice accordingly, we will 
succeed! We have to believe that these teachings 
describe the state of Buddhas at the attainment 
stage, not the states of bodhisattvas. This is why it 
is hard to believe and understand. 

"Should believe that doing good deeds will 
bring good fortune." The previous sentence, "One 
should believe that the Buddha's teachings in the 
sutras are profound," is about the Buddha- dharma. 
This phrase, "... should believe that doing good 
deeds will bring good fortune," is about mundane 
teachings. This teaches us to deeply believe in cau- 
sality: a virtuous mind will surely bring about good 
fortune; evil thoughts will surely bring about mis- 
fortune. Good and bad thoughts are causes, and 
good fortune and misfortune are results. 



155 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty-one 

They completely realize that all dharmas are 
like a dream, an illusion, or an echo. 



"Echo" refers to reverberated sounds. If we shout 
in a valley, there will be echoes. This excerpt sen- 
tence conveys the same meaning as this teaching in 
the Diamond Sutra: "All conditioned existences are 
like a dream, an illusion, a bubble, or a shadow." 
Both explain the truth of all phenomena in the uni- 
verse. 

All phenomena exist but they do not truly exist 
because their existence does not last forever but 
changes from moment to moment. That is why 
phenomena are said to be impermanent. 

Therefore, we can use and enjoy the phenom- 
ena but should not be attached to them. When we 
are attached, we will suffer. All afflictions, evil 
karmas, and retributions arise from attachment. 

All phenomena, including our bodies, are im- 



156 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



permanent. Therefore, we should also not be at- 
tached to our bodies; where the body is concerned, 
we should just accord with conditions. If we be- 
come ill, we can cure the illness with a pure mind 
and we will recover. The body changes according 
to the mind. When the mind is pure, all the organs 
in the body will naturally work properly — there 
will be no illnesses. 

This excerpt is to teach bodhisattvas to have 
true wisdom, to truly and thoroughly awaken, and 
to realize that all phenomena are not real. If one is 
truly awakened, one will naturally be unperturbed 
in any situation and one can enter very deep medi- 
tative concentration — being unperturbed is achiev- 
ing meditative concentration. When one's mind is 
not perturbed, one will truly understand all phe- 
nomena. This understanding is wisdom. Being free 
of discrimination and attachment is meditative con- 
centration. When we have both meditative concen- 
tration and wisdom, meditative concentration and 
wisdom are perfect and complete. This is where we 
start to cultivate meditative concentration and wis- 
dom. This is real. 



157 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The Diamond Sutra says: "All conditioned exis- 
tences are like a dream, an illusion, a bubble, or a 
shadow, like a dewdrop or a flash of lightning. 
Contemplate them thus." "Dewdrop" refers to the 
morning dew. "A flash of lightning" exists for an 
extremely short time. "Contemplate them thus" 
means that this view is correct and is the truth. In 
all situations, when one's mind has no thoughts of 
gain or loss, true or false, good or bad, right or 
wrong, and beneficial or harmful — one's mind will 
be completely pure. 

The Buddha talked about true and false, right 
and wrong, good and bad, and beneficial and 
harmful. Who are these teachings for? For ordi- 
nary beings. For those who cannot see through to 
the truth. When one cannot see through, one has 
attachment. When there is any single thought of 
discrimination or attachment, in everything there is 
truth and falsehood, there is right and wrong, and 
there is good and bad. In his aim to guide people to 
end wrongdoings and practice virtuous conduct, 
the Buddha had no choice but to use expedient 
teaching. 



158 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



We should know that the Buddha, in his expe- 
dient teaching, used diametrically opposed princi- 
ples. This duality helps us to not fall into the Three 
Evil Paths. We should first keep ourselves in the 
Three Good Paths and avoid falling into the Three 
Evil Paths. This is, however, not the true purpose 
of the Buddha's teaching. The true purpose is to 
help all beings transcend the Three Realms and 
attain Buddhahood in one lifetime. But because the 
beings cannot accept this, the Buddha used expedi- 
ent teaching. As to the true teaching, there is no 
teaching to expound on. 



159 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty-two 

They thoroughly understand the nature of all 
dharmas: everything is empty and 
without self. 



The word "dharmas" refers to phenomena. The 
word "nature" refers to innate character or noume- 
non. The noumenon of all phenomena is empty and 
quiescent. When the Buddha said that all phenom- 
ena are empty, he meant that the noumenon is 
empty: phenomena do not have self-nature and are 
empty in themselves. Everything is empty and 
without self. "Self" implies being in control. "Eve- 
rything is empty and without self" means that no 
one controls the phenomena. Then, how do phe- 
nomena come about? They arise from the combina- 
tion of various conditions. Boundless conditions 
gather and generate them. Therefore, phenomena 
do not have self-nature or self-identity. 

When we are clear about this truth, we should 



160 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



absolutely not attach to any phenomena or give rise 
to any thought. The mind should always be pure, 
impartial, and awakened. 



161 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty-three 

They completely understand all the Buddhas' 
profound teachings. They tame all their 

faculties. Their bodies are supple and their 
minds are gentle. They delve deeply into true 

wisdom and no longer have residual habits. 



The word "profound" conveys depth, not secrecy. 
Secrecy means that there is something that cannot 
be revealed to others, and so this something must 
not be a good thing. Buddhism has no secrets. 
"Profound" in Buddhism means that— with the ca- 
pacities of the beings being low, and with the 
Buddha's teachings being tremendously profound 
in noumenon and broad in meaning — careless peo- 
ple cannot understand the teachings. This is why 
Buddhism is "profound." 

What is "all the Buddhas' profound teachings"? 
It is "Namo Amituofo" — this is the profound teach- 
ing of all the Buddhas in the ten directions and 



162 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



three time periods. This is why the merit of the 
name of Amitabha Buddha is inconceivable. 

The Buddha's great wisdom, virtues, and capa- 
bilities, and his skillful use of expedient teaching in 
helping all beings are very profound. We cannot 
understand any of these but the bodhisattvas born 
in the Western Pure Land all "completely under- 
stand." If we can completely understand, we will 
be no different from the bodhisattvas of the West- 
ern Pure Land. 

If one truly and thoroughly understands, one 
will dedicate oneself to mindfully chanting the 
Buddha-name and have absolutely no doubts. 
Then one is a bodhisattva of the Land of Ultimate 
Bliss. Although one is currently not there yet, one 
will definitely be reborn there. 

There are very few who understand all the 
Buddha's profound teachings. Great Master 
Shandao said that many bodhisattvas are not even 
aware that this method is the fastest, most reliable, 
and perfect method for attaining Buddhahood. In 
Chinese history, many patriarchs and eminent mas- 
ters of other schools turned to the Pure Land 



163 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



teachings after they truly understood the Pure 
Land method in their old age. All of them concen- 
trated on mindfully chanting the Buddha-name and 
sought rebirth in the Western Pure Land. 

Anyone who clearly understands this method 
will practice it. 

The Western Pure Land is an ultimate, perfect 
state. If a person wants to learn a particular 
method, this person, whatever his capacity, will 
hear the method that accords with his or her capac- 
ity. For example, if one has the capacity for Thera- 
vada teachings, one will hear Buddhas and bodhi- 
sattvas lecturing on Theravada teachings. If one 
has the capacity for Mahayana teachings, one will 
hear nothing but Mahayana teachings. A being will 
immediately hear what he or she wants to hear, and 
immediately see what he or she wants to see — all at 
the level of the being's capacity. This is great per- 
fection and truly ultimate. 

Therefore, in the Western Pure Land, every- 
thing that one's faculties [that is, six sense organs] 
come into contact with is (1) the state of the 
Buddha-dharma and (2) revealed from the innate 



164 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



virtues of Amitabha Buddha. In such a wondrous 
environment, how could one be deluded? How 
could afflictions arise? Therefore, all of one's facul- 
ties are naturally tamed. 

"They tame all their faculties." "Faculties" re- 
fers to the body, a strong body without any prob- 
lems. We all want a strong body. How do we get 
it? If we learn to tame all our faculties, our bodies 
will naturally become strong. 

There are many ways to tame our faculties. Zen 
meditation is a major method. There are also other 
methods such as (1) damatba and vipcwyana, (2) ob- 
serving and illuminating, (3) chanting mantras, and 
(4) chanting a Buddha's name. But no method sur- 
passes the Buddha-name chanting method. Why? 
Because when one mindfully chants the Buddha- 
name, one will receive help from the Buddhas. 

Some people may say that when one chants 
mantras, one will also get help from Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. Indeed, when chanting mantras as 
practiced by the Esoteric school, the Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas will also be there to help, but it is not 
as good as chanting the name of Amitabha Buddha. 



165 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



When one chants mantras, one will have the help 
of one or two Buddhas or bodhisattvas. To have 
the help of three to five Buddhas and bodhisattvas 
is incredible. But when one mindfully chants the 
name of Amitabha Buddha, one will have the help 
of all the Buddhas in the ten directions and in the 
three time periods. This is why the merit of the 
name of Amitabha Buddha is inconceivable ! 

At all times, when one single-mindedly chants 
the Buddha-name, the mind will be free of all wan- 
dering thoughts, afflictions, worries, and concerns. 
Mindfully chanting the Buddha- name will thus 
tame all of one's faculties. One's body will be sup- 
ple and one's mind will be gentle. One will be able 
to achieve physical and mental well-being. 

We may want to ask, "What is the method that 
the bodhisattvas of the Western Pure Land prac- 
tice to achieve taming all their faculties and having 
a supple body and gentle mind?" It is mindfully 
chanting "Amituofo." As Mahasthamaprapta 
Bodhisattva said, "I and fifty- two fellow practi- 
tioners. ..." "Fifty- two" refers to the ten stages of 
faith, ten stages of abiding, ten stages of practice, 



166 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ten stages of dedication, ten stages of ground, the 
stage of equal enlightenment, and the stage of 
wondrous enlightenment. "Fellow practitioners" 
refers to practitioners who shared the same aspira- 
tion and focused on practicing the Pure Land 
method. This tells us that from Mahasthamaprapta 
Bodhisattva's initial generation of the bodhi mind 
until attainment of Buddhahood, he practiced the 
chanting of "Amituofo," without any changes. This 
is truly inconceivable! Chanting "Amituofo" en- 
ables us ordinary beings to attain Buddhahood. 

After attaining Buddhahood, what method is 
used to universally help all beings? It is still mind- 
fully chanting "Amituofo." This is the Mahastha- 
maprapta Dharma door. 

Mr. Xia Lianju wrote in Eddentiald for Practice of 
the Pure Land School that Mahasthamaprapta Bodhi- 
sattva is the first patriarch of the Pure Land school. 
When I first read it, I felt great admiration. That 
Mr. Xia could make such a statement is not an easy 
thing! 

Mahasthamaprapta Bodhisattva is the first one 
in the entire Dharma Realm to advocate practicing 



167 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



only the Pure Land method. Therefore, he is the 
first Pure Land patriarch in the Dharma Realms. 

In the Avatamdaka Sutra, Samantabhadra 
Bodhisattva taught the Ten Great Vows and guided 
all beings to rebirth in the Western Pure Land. 
Thus, Samantabhadra Bodhisattva is the first Pure 
Land patriarch in the Saha world. 

During the Eastern Jin dynasty, Great Master 
Huiyuan built a cultivation hall on Mt. Lu and 
brought together one hundred and twenty-three 
fellow practitioners to practice solely the Buddha- 
name chanting method. He is the first Pure Land 
patriarch in China. 

All these patriarchs advocated the practice and 
propagation of only the Pure Land teachings. 

When we are clear about all these, we will be 
able to dissolve doubt and develop belief. We need 
nothing but the Amitabha Sutra (or the Infinite Life 
Sutra) and the chanting of "Amituofo." Our doubts 
will truly be dissolved. 

If we diligently learn and practice this way, af- 
ter three to five years we will be sure of attaining 
rebirth in the Western Pure Land and will not 



168 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



waste this lifetime. As stated in the sutras, once one 
has done what needs to be done, one will no longer 
be in samsara. One can truly achieve this. 

But if we learn in an unfocused way, our re- 
birth into the Pure Land is not guaranteed, and we 
will have to depend on the conditions at the end of 
our lives. We must know this. 

"They delve deeply into true wisdom." When 
the mind is pure, wisdom will manifest. When the 
pure mind is at work, it is true wisdom. Not only 
have the bodhisattvas of the Western Pure Land 
perfectly attained it, but if we learn and practice 
according to this method, we will also enjoy physi- 
cal and mental well-being and be free of any illness. 

The cause of all illnesses in this world is an im- 
pure mind. When the mind is pure, how can one 
become ill! When the mind is pure, the body will 
be tamed. When the body is tamed, one's physiol- 
ogy will be normal and will completely accord with 
the natural law. When everything is normal, there 
will be no obstruction. 

When one has afflictions or worries, there will 
be changes in one's physiology, which will cause 



169 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



abnormalities. One thus becomes ill. 

When we understand this principle and truth, 
we will be able to cultivate a healthy body. Fur- 
thermore, we will be able to attain freedom from 
life and death. When we are about to pass away, 
we will know the time in advance. We will not suf- 
fer from any illness. We can choose when to leave. 
This shows true achievement in cultivation. 

"No longer have residual habits" means that 
one has completely eliminated all residual habits. It 
is not easy to achieve this in our practice here in 
this world. Residual habits are truly difficult to 
eliminate. But when we are reborn in the Western 
Pure Land, we will be able to achieve this. 



170 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty-four 

What they have said is sincere and true. They 
delve deeply into the meanings and flavor. 

They enlighten all sentient beings. They show 
by example and teach the proper Dharma. 



"What they have said is sincere and true." "Sin- 
cere" means that what they [the bodhisattvas of the 
Western Pure Land] say is the truth; it is abso- 
lutely not a lie. This excerpt sentence is praising 
the teachings in the Buddhist sutras— where every 
word and every sentence are words of truth. 

The word "meanings" in "they delve deeply into 
the meanings and flavor" means principle. "Flavor" 
refers to the flavor of the Dharma. When we truly 
delve deeply into the meanings and flavor, we will 
find that the meanings and flavor in the sutras are 
boundless. Not only that, but we will also find the 
name of Amitabha Buddha to have boundless 
meanings and flavor. 

How do we get to taste the flavor? By single- 
mindedly chanting the Buddha-name, we will taste 
boundless meanings and flavor. After we taste the 
flavor of the Dharma, there will be no stopping us. 
During our learning, we will truly feel joy and will 
definitely be making courageous and diligent pro- 
gress. 

Now, when we chant the Buddha-name we do 
not taste any flavor of the Dharma because when 
we chant "Amituofo" we are thinking of other 
things. This is the reason that our cultivation has 
not gone anywhere. We should diligently continue 
with our chanting. Anything that obstructs us from 
single-mindedly chanting should be discarded. In 
addition, we should chant with a sincere, pure, and 
respectful mind. After chanting in this way for half 
a year, we will taste the flavor of the Dharma. 
When we do, we will have confidence in attaining 
rebirth in the Western Pure Land. The more we 
chant, the firmer our confidence. We will be able to 
know in advance the time of our rebirth. 

Those who are very advanced in their cultiva- 
tion can attain rebirth at their own will. They can 



172 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



go anytime they want. If they want to go now, they 
can. If they want to go at a later time, they can. 
They have truly attained freedom in life and death. 

Frankly, every one of us can achieve this. The 
question is whether we are willing to concentrate 
on chanting. Jueming Miaoxing Bodhisattva 
clearly said in Pointing Clearly to the Wedt that our 
chanting should not be intermingled with anything. 
Intermingling is not concentrating. 

"They enlighten all sentient beings. They show 
by example and teach the proper Dharma." "En- 
lighten" means to help. They help their students; 
they show by example and lecture on the true 
Dharma. 

How does one show by example? By practicing 
according to the teachings. If we teach people to 
act one way but we ourselves act another way and 
do not practice what we teach, then those who lis- 
ten to us may not believe our words. For example, 
if I tell you to mindfully chant the Buddha-name 
and I do not do so myself, would you believe my 
words? You would not. 

One must practice what one teaches. This is 



173 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"show by example." One is not putting on a show; 
one understands the teachings and principles in the 
sutras and actually practices them fully. One does 
what the Buddha teaches one to do and does not 
do what the Buddha teaches not to do. 

All the methods that the Buddhas and bodhi- 
sattvas use to teach the beings are expedient teach- 
ings, which serve as guides [to the ultimate teach- 
ings]; they are not the latter. The ultimate teaching 
is the teaching of mindfully chanting the Buddha- 
name and seeking rebirth in the Western Pure 
Land. The Avatamjcika Sutra, in its conclusion, 
teaches practitioners to mindfully chant the 
Buddha-name and seek rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land. But most ordinary beings do not be- 
lieve or accept this Buddha-name chanting method. 
It is a method that is hard to believe. To make peo- 
ple believe and accept this method — this is the dif- 
ficulty. 

Buddhas and bodhisattvas are compassionate. 
They earnestly and patiently urge us, and skillfully 
use various means to lead us to achieve the state of 
attainment. When we achieve this state, we will 



174 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



truly feel grateful to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas 
for their kindness. Only by practicing the Buddha- 
name chanting method can we succeed 27 in one 
lifetime. If we do not practice this method, we will 
only plant a few good roots in this lifetime and will 
continue to transmigrate within the Six Paths. 



Success in one lifetime refers to transcending the Ten 
Realms and attaining Buddhahood in one lifetime. The Ten 
Realms consists of the Six Paths and the Four Sage Dharma 
Realms. — Trans. 

175 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty-five 

They travel to all the Buddha Lands. There is 
none that they like or dislike; and there is no 

thought of wanting or of not wanting. 
Neither do they have thoughts of "others" or 
of "I," nor thoughts of dissatisfaction and 
enmity. 

The bodhisattvas of the Western Pure Land go of- 
ten to the Buddha Lands in the ten directions to 
teach and help all beings. Some Buddha Lands are 
magnificently adorned with seven jewels, but oth- 
ers are very polluted or unpleasant. When there is 
affinity, the bodhisattvas will go there, whether a 
situation is favourable or not. Moreover, they do 
not like or dislike any situation. In other words, 
they travel around all the Buddha Lands without 
feeling attachment or aversion. They do not give 
rise to any thought, discrimination, or attachment. 
When we go abroad to visit other countries, if 



176 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



we feel like or dislike, then our minds are polluted. 
We should cultivate meditative concentration and 
wisdom during the trips. When we see and under- 
stand everything clearly, we have wisdom. When 
we do not have any like or dislike, we have medita- 
tive concentration. Therefore, when we visit other 
countries we should simultaneously cultivate medi- 
tative concentration and wisdom. 

Furthermore, in daily life when we interact 
with people and engage in tasks, we should also 
cultivate meditative concentration and wisdom. For 
example, if someone tries to anger us and we are 
able to not give rise to any thought, we are cultivat- 
ing One Mind Undisturbed. The person who tries 
to anger us is a good teacher for us. Without him or 
her, how can we achieve the paramita of patience? 

These situations — someone says charming 
words to us but we do not attach to the words, or 
someone tries to stir up trouble but we feel no an- 
ger — help us to cultivate and attain meditative con- 
centration and wisdom. 

One Mind Undisturbed and the Buddha-name 
Chanting Samadhi taught in Pure Land Buddhism 



177 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



are both attained in this way. If one's mind is per- 
turbed by others gossiping or starting rumors 
about us, one should immediately feel remorse: "I 
am wrong again. I am affected by the external en- 
vironment again." 

Daily in every thought, stay awakened and do 
not be deluded when interacting with others and 
engaging in tasks. Any situation at any time is a 
good teacher for us. 

"And there is no thought of wanting or of not 
wanting." It is erroneous to wish for something. 
When one wishes for something, suffering follows. 
When one gains something, something will be lost. 
Both are painful. 

It is also erroneous to [have thoughts of] not 
wishing for something, because one would reject all 
opportunities. [Thoughts of] wishing for something 
is seeking affinities. [Thoughts of] not wishing for 
something is also seeking affinities. Therefore, 
bodhisattvas practice the Middle Way: when they 
teach beings, they are according with conditions, 
not seeking affinities. 

"Neither do they have thoughts of 'others' or of 



178 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



T,' nor thoughts of dissatisfaction and enmity." The 
thoughts of "others" and "I" are in the four marks 
taught in the Diamond Sutra: the Mark of Self, the 
Mark of Others, the Mark of Being, and the Mark 
of Life Span. "Dissatisfaction and enmity" means 
that one bears resentment and hatred when others 
go against one's wish, and one forms attachment 
when they go along with one's wish. 

Therefore, we should be impartial to all people 
in any situation, whether they are good or bad. An 
impartial mind will lead to a pure mind. Attach- 
ment as well as dissatisfaction and enmity are wan- 
dering thoughts. When one is free of all wandering 
thoughts, all discriminations, and all attachments, 
one will attain a pure and impartial mind. When 
the mind is pure and impartial, one will definitely 
be awakened, not deluded. One will then realize 
the goal of "purity, impartiality, and enlighten- 
ment. " 



179 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty-six 

[Those Bodhisattvas] have a mind of great 
compassion and of bringing benefits to all 
beings. They discard all attachments and 
accomplish infinite merits and virtues. 

"Great" refers to a pure and impartial mind — such 
a mind is free of discrimination and attachment. 
Great compassion is compassion from a pure mind 
and an impartial mind. 

This excerpt tells us that the bodhisattvas of the 
Western Pure Land have the ability to travel to all 
the Buddha Lands and to any place in the entire 
Dharma Realm. The sutras teach that the past has 
no beginning and the future has no end. From this, 
we know that space (in Buddhism it is called 
Dharma Realm) is immensely vast. This is the area 
the bodhisattvas cover in their travels — the vast- 
ness of the Dharma Realm. If they have an affinity 
with a place, they will manifest themselves there to 



180 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



benefit the beings. 

The conditions are mature for some beings but 
are not for others. If a being does not have the 
conditions, one should help the being develop the 
conditions. If the conditions of a being are not yet 
mature, one should help them mature. If the condi- 
tions of a being have matured, one should guide 
that being to attain rebirth in the Western Pure 
Land. 

The standard for mature conditions in the Pure 
Land school is different from those in other 
schools. In other schools, a practitioner needs to 
completely eradicate all afflictions and attain great 
awakening. In the Pure Land school, a practitioner 
needs to have true belief, be willing to make the 
vow, and sincerely chant the Buddha-name. Such a 
practitioner is a being whose conditions have ma- 
tured. This cultivation is easier than in other 
schools. 

Throughout the boundless worlds in the ten 
directions, the bodhisattvas of the Land of Ulti- 
mate Bliss (1) seek the Buddha-dharma and (2) 
help all beings. When they seek the Buddha- 



181 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



dharma, they are not attached to the act of seeking. 
When they help beings, they are not attached to 
the act of helping. They discard all attachments 
and teach all beings. This way they are able to at- 
tain infinite merits and virtues. 

In "merits and virtues," "merits" refers to effort, 
and "virtues" refers to result. "Merits" is the cause; 
"virtues" is the result. How does one cultivate mer- 
its? The Buddha taught us these three princi- 
ples—which are the Three Learnings to preserve 
[our merits and virtues] : precepts, meditative con- 
centration, and wisdom. 

One practices according to the precepts, medi- 
tative concentration, and wisdom. For example, if 
one observes the precepts and attains meditative 
concentration, precept observation is "merits" [ef- 
fort], and meditative concentration is "virtues" [re- 
sult] . If one cultivates meditative concentration and 
attains awakening, the cultivation of meditative 
concentration is "merits," and awakening is "virtues." 

If one observes the precepts but does not have 
meditative concentration, then this is not consid- 
ered as "merits and virtues." There is "merits" [ef- 



182 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



fort] but no "virtues" [result]. Here, precept obser- 
vation will turn into good fortune — one will have 
good fortune in the human or heavenly path in the 
next lifetime. 

If one cultivates meditative concentration but 
does not attain awakening, one will have the kar- 
mic result of being reborn in the heavens, in the 
Form Realm or the Formless Realm — one will not 
transcend the Three Realms. This good fortune [of 
being reborn into the heavens] is minuscule. If one 
attains enlightenment and uncovers one's true na- 
ture, one will transcend the Three Realms. 

"Infinite merits and virtues" signifies the at- 
tainment of Buddhahood. Only when one is a 
Buddha will one be replete with "infinite merits 
and virtues." This is our ultimate goal in learning 
Buddhism. 

How do we accomplish infinite merits and vir- 
tues? By discarding all attachments. From this we 
can see that the reason why we cannot succeed in 
our practice is due to our not being able to let go of 
our attachments. Therefore, we should not be at- 
tached to either worldly phenomena or supramun- 



183 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



dane teachings. If we can discard all wandering 
thoughts and attachments, we will attain infinite 
merits and virtues. 

If there is even one thing that we cannot dis- 
card or let go of, we will not have any achievement. 
But to let go is truly hard. Because of this, infinite 
great compassion arose in Amitabha Buddha, and 
he established a special cultivation place in the 
Dharma Realm for learning and practice — for be- 
ings like us who cannot let go to also have 
achievement. This is inconceivable! 

With the cultivation places of all the other 
Buddhas in the ten directions, one must let go of 
both worldly phenomena and supramundane 
teachings before one can be reborn there. But, only 
in the land of Amitabha Buddha, [while letting go 
is ideal,] not letting go is also alright. This way, 
everyone will be truly helped and awakened. 

When we get to the Western Pure Land, 
Amitabha Buddha and the beings of superior 
goodness (in other words, the great bodhisattvas) 
will help us discard all our attachments so that we 
can attain supreme enlightenment. 



184 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty-seven 

They know that all phenomena are empty 

and quiescent. Retribution body and 
afflictions— both remnants are completely 
eradicated. 



"They know that all phenomena are empty and 
quiescent" — this sentence conveys exactly the same 
meaning as "the four basic elements are all empty" 
and "the five aggregates are without self- identity." 
The four basic elements refer to the four qualities 
of a physical substance: earth, water, fire, and air. 

Earth refers to substance. In Buddhism, the 
tiniest substance is called a speck of dust; in sci- 
ence, it is the atom, electron, or particle. Earth sig- 
nifies that substance does exist and can be detected 
by scientific instruments. Water indicates moisture. 
Fire indicates temperature. The scientific terms are 
electropositive and electronegative. Fire is electro- 
positive and water is electronegative. Air indicates 



185 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



motion: it is not still. In addition, it moves at great 
speed. 

The four basic elements are the four fundamen- 
tal features of a substance. All phenomena in the 
universe are made up of this basic substance. The 
Diamond Sutra says: "a composite is not a compos- 
ite. It is called a composite." This basic substance 
makes up all phenomena, from something as large 
as a planet or a galaxy to something as small as a 
speck of dust. 

Where does the basic substance come from? It 
is manifestation of the mind. A commentary of the 
Consciousness-only school says that from igno- 
rance and non-enlightenment the Three Subtle 
Marks arise, and with the external environment as 
conditions the Six Coarse Marks grow. Within the 
Three Subtle Marks are the subjective aspect 19, and 
the objective aspect: the mark of the subjective perceiver 



Yogacara Buddhism speaks of four aspects of the function- 
ing mind, two of which are the subjective aspect (that which 
sees) and the objective aspect (what is seen). — Trans. 



186 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



and the mark of the objective world. 23 

The basic substance is the mark of the objective 
world, which is the objective aspect. The objective 
aspect is generated by the subjective aspect. Exis- 
tence arises from non-existence and returns to non- 
existence— "all phenomena are empty and quies- 
cent." When we understand this, we will know the 
truth that all phenomena are empty. 

Do what we see, hear, and touch presently ex- 
ist? Or do they not exist? From the perspective of 
principles, they do not exist; from the perspective 
of phenomena, they do exist. This existence is 
nominal: it is not real. But the non-existence is real. 
What is real never changes. That which changes is 
not real. Non-existence never changes and is thus 
called true emptlnedd. 

With regards to existence, all phenomena 
change. It is obvious that a person goes through 
birth, aging, illness, and death. Any person can 
perceive these changes. In actuality, there are sub- 
tler changes, such as the metabolism of the cells of 

29 The third subtle mark is the mark of karma from 
ignorance. — Trans. 

187 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



a body. Such changes occur every instant. Plants 
go through arising, abiding, changing, and extinc- 
tion. Minerals or planets go through formation, ex- 
istence, annihilation, and voidness. We realize all 
this. 

Therefore, all phenomena are constantly chang- 
ing. Since they change, they are not real. This is 
why existence is called nominal existence, illusory ex- 
istence, or marvelous existence. Thus this Buddhist 
term: true emptiness and marvelous existence. 

But we should know that existence and non- 
existence in Buddhism are one. Where is true empti- 
nesA It is in marvelous existence. Where is marvelous 
existence? It is in true emptiness. True emptiness 
refers to noumenon, and marvelous existence refers 
to phenomena. This way, we will be able to see the 
mark of the objective world clearly. What is the 
benefit of seeing it clearly? It will help us discard 
all attachments. 

From where do attachments arise? From us not 
understanding the truth and from thinking that we 
can own things. Not only can we not own worldly 
possessions, we cannot even own our body, so is there any point in being attached to anything? 
Naturally we will let go ! When we truly let go we 
will attain eternal life. 

True emptiness refers to the true nature. Why 
is true nature true emptiness? Because there is no 
sign of it: it shows no form and thus cannot be per- 
ceived by the eyes. True nature emits no sound and 
thus cannot be heard by the ears. It cannot be per- 
ceived or imagined. Our Six Sense Organs abso- 
lutely cannot detect anything here. But true nature 
truly exists. It is the noumenon of all phenomena in 
the universe. All phenomena arise from it. 

When one sees the true nature, one is in the 
state of neither arising nor ceasing. One will have 
the freedom to manifest as any form. One will be 
able to manifest in any form one wishes. 

We are now deluded, so we cannot manifest as 
anything no matter how hard we think. After we 
see the true nature, we will be able to manifest as 
anything. Throughout the entire Dharma Realm, 
we will be in control— we will be our own master; 
we will attain great freedom ! 

Therefore, we must know the truth: "All phe- 



189 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



nomena are empty and quiescent." This is stated 
from principles, from noumenon. 

"Retribution body and afflictions— both rem- 
nants are completely eradicated." "Both" refers to 
the retribution body and afflictions. "Remnants" 
refers to habits, and they are the hardest to elimi- 
nate. "Retribution body" signifies birth and 
death — when we transmigrate within the Six 
Paths, we continually get a body and discard it. 

Transmigration is a phenomenon. Why is there 
this phenomenon? Because we have afflictions. 
The phenomenon of transmigration within the Six 
Paths is generated by afflictions. When we end af- 
flictions, there will be no transmigration. For ex- 
ample, arhats — having eradicated the Affliction of 
Views and Thoughts — have transcended the Six 
Paths. 



190 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty-eight 

Their minds are clean like snow mountains. 

Their patience is like the earth: with 
impartiality, it bears everything. Their purity 
is like water: it cleanses all dirt. 

"Their minds are clean like snow mountains." 
"Snow mountains" refers to the Himalaya Moun- 
tains, which are blanketed with snow all year 
round. 

Sakyamuni Buddha was born in today's Nepal, 
south of the Himalaya Mountains. Therefore, when 
the Buddha lectured on the Dharma, he often used 
"snow mountains" as a metaphor for cleanliness 
and purity — a pure mind without any pollution. 

"Earth" stores boundless treasures. Grain that 
grows on the earth nourishes us, and gold, silver, 
and precious minerals that are stored in the earth 
are for our benefit. But we need to cultivate land to 
be able to harvest from it. We also need smelting 



191 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



know-how to extract the underground treasures 
for our benefit. 

This is why Mahayana Buddhism teaches us to 
start our learning with Ksitigarbha Bodhisattva. 
"Earth" is a metaphor for the mind. Our minds 
contain infinite wisdom and capabilities. We need 
to use the teaching of "filial piety and respect for 
teachers" in the Kdltigarbha Sutra to plough and 
plant, and to extract and refine, so that we can ob- 
tain benefits. 

"Their patience is like the earth: with impartial- 
ity, it bears everything." Should we pour perfume 
onto the earth, it will not be delighted. Nor will it 
be disgusted should we pour excrements on it. The 
earth bears everything impartially. This teaches us 
to practice the paramita of patience. 

The mind should be like the earth, which bears 
everything impartially. No matter who or what we 
encounter, our minds should always be impartial. 
Patience is very important in both worldly and su- 
pramundane undertakings. If we do not have pa- 
tience, we will not be able to accomplish anything. 
Accomplishing a great undertaking requires great 



192 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



patience; even a small undertaking requires a little 
patience. Therefore, the Diamond Sutra says: "All 
accomplishments are attributed to patience." 

It is stated in the sutras that it takes three 
asamkhyeya kalpas of cultivation for an ordinary 
being to attain Buddhahood. This is truly an ex- 
tremely long time. How can one do this without 
patience? We Pure Land practitioners know that, 
according to the sutras, when ordinary beings at- 
tain rebirth in the Western Pure Land they bring 
along their karmas and achieve [Buddhahood] in 
one lifetime. This is how precious the Western 
Pure Land is ! 

Of course, there are many factors contributing 
to this speedy achievement. The most wondrous 
factor is perfectly attaining the three non- 
retrogressions. If we practice in other lands, we 
will progress as well as retrogress. And we will ret- 
rogress more than we progress. This is why it will 
take a long time [to attain Buddhahood] . 

When we know this truth, we should muster 
the greatest patience possible for learning the Pure 
Land teachings. We should have true belief and 



193 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



resolutely vow to seek rebirth in the Western Pure 
Land. We must have the determination to go there 
and meet Amitabha Buddha in this lifetime. With 
this determination, we sincerely chant the Buddha- 
name until the end of our lives. 

We will surely attain rebirth there. 

Other than this, "all phenomena are illusory." 
We should get by however we can, not fuss about 
things, and not be attached to things. We should 
regard all phenomena with impartiality and single- 
mindedly seek rebirth in the Western Pure Land. 
We should not seek fame or wealth. We should 
lead as thrifty a life as possible. This way, the re- 
solve to seek rebirth there will be more sincere and 
resolute. All good deeds, and even good thoughts, 
should be dedicated to the adornment of the West- 
ern Pure Land, not to the pursuit of worldly good 
fortune. 

"Their purity is like water: it cleanses all dirt." 
"Purity" describes the mind. "Dirt" refers to afflic- 
tion or pollution. This sentence teaches us to have a 
mind as pure and impartial as water. We make an 
offering of a glass of water to a Buddha's image be- 



194 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



cause water symbolizes a pure mind. This offering 
constantly reminds us that the mind of a Buddha is 
pure and impartial, just like water, and we should 
emulate the Buddhas by completely cleansing away 
our afflictions, wandering thoughts, discrimina- 
tions, and attachments. 



195 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Twenty-nine 

The minds of these Bodhisattvas are upright. 
They are tireless in discussing and seeking 
the Dharma. 



"The minds of these Bodhisattvas are upright." 
"Upright" means sincere. We should treat others 
with a sincere mind and not be afraid of being de- 
ceived. We want to attain rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land in the future. All the beings there have a 
sincere mind. If our minds are not sincere, we will 
not be able to attain rebirth there. 

A sincere mind should be nurtured in everyday 
life. We should interact with people and engage in 
tasks with the utmost sincerity. This is teaching us 
to maintain an upright mind. 

"They are tireless in discussing and seeking the 
Dharma." This sentence talks about cultivating 
oneself and teaching others. "Discussing" benefits 
both oneself and others. This is what is known 



196 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



about teaching: both teacher and student benefit. 
When one teaches another, one never tires. When 
one seeks the Dharma, one is also tireless. 

Whether one seeks the Dharma or teaches oth- 
ers, the biggest obstacle is tiredness. When Confu- 
cius taught a student, he would not continue to 
teach the student if the student did not apply what 
he had learned to three other situations. But when 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas teach, they are tireless. 

I remember one particular time when I saw Mr. 
Li teach. I was deeply moved. Mr. Li was over sev- 
enty years old at that time. Over a period of three 
hours, his students asked him many questions. He 
was unhurried and patient in his answers. This was 
very admirable. From this we know that Buddhas 
and bodhisattvas are tireless in teaching all beings. 

There are many people who get tired in their 
learning, retrogress, and do not continue to make 
diligent and focused progress. Why do they get 
tired? Even though they are learning, they have 
not obtained the true benefits. If they have, how 
can they be tired? People get tired or retrogress 
because their minds are coarse and their goals are 



197 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



shallow. When they achieve a simple goal, they are 
satisfied and do not want to go further. 

During the Tang dynasty, when Precept Master 
Daoxuan of Zhongnan Mountain was learning the 
Vinaya in Four Parte, he listened to the lectures on it 
for more than twenty times. He was thus able to 
become a patriarch. 

People today listen to the lectures on a sutra 
once and do not care to hear it again. How can 
they succeed! When I was in Taichung, I listened 
to Mr. Li Bingnan's lectures on Fourteen Lectured on 
Buddhidm for eleven years. Only when I was thor- 
oughly familiar with it was I able to taste the flavor 
of the Dharma. 

Years ago in Taichung, at the request of eight 
people including myself, Mr. Li generated the mind 
to lecture on the Avatanuaka Sutra. Mr. Li would 
lecture one hour a week, and so it would have 
taken him sixty to seventy years to complete the 
lectures on the Avatanuaka Sutra. He was in his 
seventies or eighties. That meant that he had to live 
to one hundred fifty or one hundred sixty to com- 
plete the lectures. These are good examples for us. 



198 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 

We should be tireless in cultivating ourselves and 
teaching others. 



199 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirty 

They are good, pure, and gentle. They abide 
in quiescent concentration and are wise 
in perception. 



"Good" refers to honesty and simplicity. Good and 
"pure" describe mindset. Good refers to good for- 
tune; pure, to wisdom. When one has both good 
fortune and wisdom, one has true merit. "Gentle" 
describes attitude: gentle, kind, respectful, thrifty, 
and humble. 

This sentence tells us what attitude we should 
have when interacting with people and engaging in 
tasks. It also shows the true benefit of the Buddha's 
teaching. 

"Quiescent concentration" refers to a pure 
mind; externally, behavior is composed. As stated 



200 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



in the sutras: "Naga 30 is constantly in meditative 
concentration. There is not a time when it is not." 
Every movement and every action is composed and 
dignified, just like in meditative concentration. 

"Wise in perception" is a pure mind in function. 
It is also wisdom coming forth — the mind is bright, 
and one is clear about everything in the external 
environment. Therefore, "abide in quiescent con- 
centration and are wise in perception" means the 
mutual cultivation of meditative concentration and 
wisdom. One has meditative concentration and 
wisdom. 

Letting go of all worldly concerns and single- 
mindedly chanting the Buddha- name — this is cul- 
tivating meditative concentration. In addition, this 
is also cultivating good fortune and wisdom. As 
Great Master Ouyi said, single-mindedly chanting 

^ A class of serpent-like beings in Hindu and Buddhist my- 
thology. They are said to live in the underworld and inhabit a 
watery environment. Frequently considered to be benevolent, 
they also believed to act as guardians of hidden Mahayana 
texts. The philosopher Nagarjuna is said to have been given 
many scriptures by them, such as the Prajna-paramita Su- 
tras. — Damien Keown, Oxford Dictionary of Buddbum (Ox- 
ford, Oxford University Press, 2003) 185. 

201 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



the Buddha-name will "bring ample good roots and 
good fortune." "Ample good roots" is wisdom. 
"Ample good fortune" is good fortune. Therefore, 
mindfully chanting "Amituofo" is cultivating both 
good fortune and wisdom. 

Sakyamuni Buddha praised Amitabha 
Buddha's light as "the most exalted of all lights and 
the most supreme of all Buddhas' [lights]." Light 
signifies wisdom. "The most exalted of all lights" 
means the most exalted wisdom. "The most su- 
preme of all Buddhas' [lights]" signifies that of all 
Buddhas, Amitabha Buddha's wisdom and good 
fortune are the greatest. 

Therefore, if Buddha-name chanting practitio- 
ners sincerely chant "Amituofo, " they will receive a 
response from Amitabha Buddha. As it is said, 
"When one accords with Amitabha Buddha in a 
single thought, one is Amitabha Buddha in that 
thought." "When one accords with Amitabha 
Buddha in a single thought" means Amitabha 
Buddha's wisdom and good fortune become one's 
own wisdom and good fortune. 

When one mindfully chants "Amituofo" for a 



202 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



long enough time, one will merge with Amitabha 
Buddha and become one. This is why Buddha- 
name chanting practitioners attain inconceivable 
achievements in a short time. "Abide in quiescent 
concentration and are wise in perception" — these 
are achieved through Buddha-name chanting. 



203 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirty-one 

Their bodies and minds are pure. They have 
no craving or greed. 

"Their bodies and minds are pure." The mind is the 
master. When the mind is pure, the body will be 
pure. But the body can also affect the mind. The 
Buddha taught us that our behavior should accord 
with the precepts and proper codes of behavior. 
The purpose is to help us nurture good habits in 
daily life — so that the mind will naturally be calm. 

"They have no craving or greed." Of the 
Twelve Links of Dependent Origination, craving, 
grcuplng, and becoming 51 are the causes of one's 
transmigration within the Six Paths. When one 
eradicates any one of the three, one will transcend 
the Six Paths. Craving is delusion, grasping is at- 
tachment, and becoming is karma. If one cannot 

^ These three are called Trishna, Upadana, and Bhava in 
Sanskrit. — Trans. 



204 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



eradicate craving or greed, one should eradicate 
grouping. If one cannot eradicate grouping either, 
then one can only try to eradicate becoming, but this 
requires advanced cultivation. 

When Buddhas and bodhisattvas manifest in 
this world, they act the same way as we do. For 
example, Living Buddha Jigong, who was very 
well known to Chinese people, seemed to have 
craving and attachment. So how did he succeed in 
his cultivation? Because he did not have becoming. 
This was a very advanced achievement! We ordi- 
nary people cannot eradicate grasping or becom- 
ing, so we can only try to eradicate craving and 
greed. 

When we have craving, we will have anger. 
When we have greed, we will be filled with greed, 
anger, ignorance, and arrogance. Greed is the root. 
When greed is uprooted, our afflictions will all dis- 
appear and the mind will become pure. When the 
mind is pure, the body will be pure. Ordinary be- 
ings can achieve this. 

No craving or greed; pure are the mind and 
body. With this foundation, and with belief, vow, 



205 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



and the mindful chanting of the Buddha- name to 
seek rebirth in the Western Pure Land, we will 
definitely be reborn there. 



206 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirty-two 

Steadfast and unmoving are their vows. . . . 
They [bodhisattvas] seek the Way in a gentle 
and correct manner. . . . They are pure, firm, 
calm, and joyous. 



"Steadfast and unmoving are their vows." "Stead- 
fast" refers to a calm mind. "Unmoving" means that 
they are set on one direction and one goal. Great 
Master Shandao said that if one seeks understand- 
ing, then one can learn any sutra. But if one wants 
to achieve attainment in cultivation, one can only 
succeed by delving deeply into one method. There- 
fore, cultivation is different from seeking under- 
standing. 

In today's society, we should focus our energy 
on practice. This is the way to success. When the 
mind is focused on one method, one will realize the 
truth and be at peace. 

"They seek the Way in a gentle and correct 



207 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



manner." "The Way" signifies an impartial, upright 
mind. In the sutra title, the words "purity, imparti- 
ality, and enlightenment" convey the meaning of 
"gentle and correct." "Gentle" signifies the Middle 
Way — not too fast and not too slow. "Correct" 
means according definitively with the Buddha's 
teachings. 

For example, we mindfully chant the Buddha- 
name and seek rebirth in the Western Pure Land. 
We have deep belief and we sincerely vow. This is 
"steadfast and unmoving are their vows." In daily 
life, we learn and practice based on the principles 
and methods taught in the sutras. This is "correct." 
Our learning and practice will not go wrong. 

"They are pure, firm, calm, and joyous." When 
we learn and practice according to the principles 
and the methods, we will naturally have a pure and 
calm mind, and be filled with Dharma bliss. We 
will have a happy and perfect life. These are the 
wondrous benefits that we will get now. 



208 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirty-three 

People in the world strive for things of little 
urgency. Amidst extreme evils and severe 
sufferings, they diligently work . . . dictated 
by their minds. . . . Whether they have or do 
not have, they worry. 



"People in the world strive for things of little ur- 
gency." "People in the world" refers to the beings 
in the Six Paths. "Of little urgency" means of no 
importance. The beings in the Six Paths all busy 
themselves with unimportant things and forget the 
important things such as (1) knowing the truth of 
life and the universe, (2) understanding the trans- 
migration within the Six Paths, and (3) transcend- 
ing the Six Paths. 

"Extreme evils and severe sufferings" are kar- 
mic results. "Extreme" means severe. "Severe evils" 
refers to the Ten Evil Karmas: the physical karmas 
of killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct; the ver- 



209 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



bal karmas of false speech, divisive speech, harsh 
speech, and enticing speech; and the mental kar- 
mas of greed, anger, and ignorance. As the Ten Evil 
Karmas increase continually, they are called "ex- 
treme evils." When one commits such extreme 
evils, how can one not suffer retribution! Great 
suffering is transmigration within the Six Paths; 
small suffering is the suffering in one's present life, 
from birth to death. 

"They diligently work . . . dictated by their 
minds." "Mind" refers to greed, anger, ignorance, 
deluded mind, and wandering thoughts. In this 
kind of environment, people work hard and busy 
themselves every day simply out of "greed, anger, 
ignorance," and for "fame, prestige, gain, wealth," 
the Five Desires, and the Six Dusts. 

"Whether they have or not, they worry." When 
one obtains something, one is afraid of losing it. 
When one does not have something, one craves it. 
So one worries both ways: when one has some- 
thing and when one does not. This is the true pic- 
ture of society and the world presently. 



210 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirty- four 

Parents and children, siblings, spouses, and 
relatives should respect and love each other, 
and should not be hateful or jealous of one 
another. They should share what they have 
with those who do not. They should not be 
greedy or stingy. Their speech and facial 
expression should always be gentle. They 
should not be defiant or unkind to one 
another. 



"Relatives" refers to people of the same clan. Peo- 
ple are together because of karmic links. Through- 
out our lives, the occasional meeting of someone is 
also due to a karmic link. More so, members of the 
same family — their link is even stronger. 

Four kinds of karmic links exist between chil- 
dren and parents. The first is to repay kindness. In 
past lifetimes, they had a good and happy relation- 
ship with one another. The children come to repay 



211 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



kindness, so they are very filial. 

The second is to exact revenge. The children 
are karmic debtors from past lifetimes. They are 
usually wastrels. When they grow up, they will 
cause the family's ruin. 

The third is to collect debt. It all depends on 
how much the parents had owed the children. If 
the parents did not owe much [previously], the 
children will die young. If the parents had owed 
the children a lot, the parents will spend a lot of 
money on the children's education and take very 
good care of them, and the children will suddenly 
die when they are adults. 

The fourth is to repay debt. The children owed 
the parents in past lifetimes. When the amount is a 
lot, the children will look after their parents very 
attentively. 

If the children's debt is little, they will take care 
of their parents just enough to ensure that their 
parents lack nothing. But there is no respect for 
their parents — the children only take care of their 
physical needs. 

When these four kinds of karmic links exist be- 



212 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tween people, they will become family. People will 
become relatives or friends when the karmic link is 
weaker. When the link is stronger, people will be- 
come family. 

If there is a bad karmic link with someone, any 
debt must be repaid. As is said "One who owes life 
will repay with a life. One who owes money will 
repay with money." But education can help make 
amends. Teaching people will help them under- 
stand the truth, and any enmity can be resolved 
even if it was incurred in past lifetimes. 

Education will help us transform bad karmic 
links into good ones and transform worldly-love 
affinity into Dharma affinity. This is most wonder- 
ful. 

"Should respect and love each other" is the way 
to be a human being. Confucianism teaches the 
Five Cardinal Human Relationships and the Ten 
Obligations. Every person has ten different roles 
and should fulfill the obligation of each role. "Par- 
ents should love their children, and children should 
be filial to their parents; elder siblings should care 
for younger siblings, and younger siblings should 



213 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



respect elder siblings." In a family, if one's role is 
that of a son, one should fulfill filial piety. As a fa- 
ther, one should be kind and loving. Knowing hu- 
man relationships and understanding one's respon- 
sibilities — this is what education teaches us. 

Education teaches one how to interact with 
others and lets one know one's role in relation to 
others. Hence, the efficacies of education let us 
maintain harmonious and prosperous families, a 
stable society, a flourishing country, and a peaceful 
world. But today, education does not have these 
efficacies any more. The goal of education today is 
the exact opposite of that in the past. 

"Should not be hateful or jealous of one an- 
other." "Hateful" refers to a resentful heart, a jeal- 
ous heart. We should expand our respect and love 
beyond the scope of our family and encompass so- 
ciety and all beings. This way, society will be har- 
monious and the world will be at peace. Then, we 
will truly be able to live peacefully and happily. 

One cannot live alone and away from society. 
Therefore, in everything, one must consider the 
well-being of society. One must not harbor hatred 



214 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



or jealousy. When one encounters an adverse con- 
dition or situation, one should contemplate it over 
and over and find the root cause. One's mind will 
naturally be calm and afflictions will not arise. 

"They should share what they have with those 
who do not." When we have more things than we 
need, we should voluntarily help those in need. In 
our daily life, we should take care of one another. 
Each being's cultivation is different, thus the good 
fortune that each being has is different. Those who 
have great good fortune should take care of those 
who have little good fortune. This way, everyone 
will live in peace with one another. 

If the rich are heartless — thinking of their own 
enjoyment and not caring about the suffering of 
others — society will be in turmoil. If the rich can 
take care of the poor, the poor would then be able 
to manage their lives. They will appreciate the 
kindness that the rich have shown them. Society 
will be peaceful and everyone can have a happy 
life. 

If society is in turmoil, no matter how great 
one's good fortune or wealth is, one will still have a 



215 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



miserable life. 

We start with helping our family members and 
relatives, then gradually extend our help to all be- 
ings. Today there are many young, virtuous people 
who are enthusiastic about learning. We should 
help them, so as to nurture them to become excep- 
tional people for society, country, and the world — 
to bring benefit to all beings. The merit will be in- 
comparably wondrous. When our children and 
relatives grow up, they will naturally have good 
fortune. 

We should look far ahead. 

"Should not be greedy or stingy." "Stingy" 
means that we are unwilling to help others with 
what we have. When we are not greedy or stingy, 
we will have a broad mind and great good fortune. 

"Their speech and facial expression should al- 
ways be gentle." This is saying that one should 
speak in a gentle way and always wear a smile. 

The Buddha's teachings pay great attention to 
this. This is why a Buddhist monastery or temple 
has an image of Maitreya Bodhisattva. This bodhi- 
sattva represents "speech and facial expression 



216 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



should always be gentle." 

"They should not be defiant or unkind to one 
another." "Defiant or unkind" signifies that there 
are differences in opinion. When there are differ- 
ences in opinion, there will be disputes. Consider 
the countries, ethnic groups, and political parties 
that have split up. Why did they split up? Because 
they had disagreements and could not reach a con- 
sensus. None would yield to the other. 

Let us look again at the political leaders in an- 
cient times, leaders who led people to a common 
understanding. How did they do this? 

In China, since the time of Emperor Wu of the 
Han dynasty, Confucianism was used to establish a 
common understanding. Later, Emperor Ming of 
the Han dynasty added Buddhism and Taoism. In 
other words, the Chinese were taught the Three 
Teachings. 32 Doing it this way was accepted by 
everyone. This educational method was used until 
the Qing dynasty. The method used by the emper- 
ors in the past was truly brilliant! 



Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism. — Trans. 

217 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Today, everyone follows his or her own views. 
Those who agree are few, and those who disagree 
are many. Therefore, it is easy to split up. 

This excerpt teaches us (1) how members of a 
family and their relatives should get along with one 
another and (2) how a family can become happy 
and harmonious. This is the foundation for our 
happiness throughout our lives. 

If every person follows the Buddha's teaching, 
he or she will behave properly and will not over- 
step the boundaries, even when there are differ- 
ences in opinions or feelings of unfairness. 



218 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirty-five 

In worldly matters, people alternate harming 
one another. Retribution may not occur right 
away. One should see through to this reality 
as soon as possible. 

The people in this world do not understand this 
truth and they take revenge over and over, back 
and forth. They have a strong desire for vengeance. 
Revenge may not happen right away, but we 
should know that when an enmity is created, 
sooner or later revenge will come. 

Therefore, we should see through [retribution] 
and let go [of enmity]. We should completely 
change from within. 

This excerpt alerts us to guard against disas- 
ters — not just natural disasters but, more impor- 
tantly, man-made ones. We may not be experienc- 
ing a disaster now but we should be far-sighted and 
look into the future. This way, we will know how 



219 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



to deal with matters at this present moment. There 
is a Chinese saying: "Those who fail to see ahead 
will soon find trouble right before them. " 

Besides, everything in this world changes all 
the time! In the past, no matter how things 
changed, the changes could be predicted somewhat 
because there were moral standards. No matter 
which dynasty it was, things did not deviate much 
from the standards. 

Today, the standards have been discarded. The 
teachings of the ancient sages and the teachings of 
Confucius and Mencius have been discarded. Even 
the Buddha's teachings are unwanted. Therefore, 
people today are at a loss as to what to do. This is 
very frightening! 



220 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirty-six 

All of you should consider carefully. Stay far 
away from all evils. Choose what is virtuous 
to diligently practice. Love, desire, prestige, 
and splendor cannot be had forever. . . . 
There is no happiness at all. 



"All of you should consider carefully." We should 
seriously contemplate everything. Understanding 
the truth, we will be diligent in our cultivation. 

Simply put, "stay far away from all evils" refers 
to [staying away from] all those things that are 
harmful to others and that are beneficial solely to 
oneself. 

For ourselves, "choose what is virtuous" refers 
to having belief and vow, mindfully chanting the 
Buddha-name, and seeking rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land. From all the sutras that Sakyamuni 



221 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Buddha taught in the forty-nine years, 33 we choose 
only the three Pure Land sutras. Putting aside all 
others, in this lifetime we learn and practice ac- 
cording to the teachings in the three Pure Land 
sutras. This way, we will achieve our goal. 

In daily life, we must do things that benefit so- 
ciety. When we do our best and accord with condi- 
tions, the merit accrued will be perfect and com- 
plete. In addition, we should be able to tell good 
from bad and right from wrong, and should make 
the right choices. 

"Diligently practice" means that we should put 
in our best efforts to do things diligently. [In doing 
so,] both ourselves and others will benefit. 

"Love, desire, prestige, and splendor" refers to 
fame, prestige, gain, wealth, the Five Desires, and 
the Six Dusts. The Five Desires are wealth, sex, 
fame, food, and sleep. 

Love, desire, prestige, and splendor "cannot be 
had forever" because they are transient, like fleet- 
ing clouds. At the end of one's life, if one is still at- 



1 The Buddha taught for forty-nine years after he attained 
enlightenment. — Trans. 

222 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tached to this world, this will obstruct one from 
attaining rebirth in the Western Pure Land. There- 
fore, one must give up fame, prestige, gain, wealth, 
the Five Desires, and the Six Dusts, and stay far 
away from all evils. 

When we truly understand the truth, we will be 
highly cautious in all situations and remain con- 
stantly vigilant. 



223 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirty-seven 

You should uproot all attachments and 
desires, and put an end to all sources of evil. 
Then you will be able to travel freely among 
the Three Realms without any obstruction. 



"You should uproot all attachments and desires." 
"Attachments and desires" are karmic obstacles. 
One may be diligent in learning Buddhism but if 
one does not eliminate even a small amount of 
karmic obstacles, at the end of one's life, one's ob- 
stacles will obstruct one from attaining rebirth in 
the Western Pure Land. Therefore, if one truly 
wants to succeed in cultivation, one should "uproot 
all attachments and desires." If one's attachment to 
wealth, sex, fame, food, and sleep is reduced, the 
karmic obstacles will also decrease. 

"Put an end to all sources of evil." The sources 
of all evils are greed, anger, ignorance, arrogance, 
doubt, and wrong views. These six are the primary 



224 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



afflictions. 

How do we "uproot all attachments and de- 
sires, and put an end to all sources of evil"? By 
mindfully chanting "Amituofo," having deep belief 
and a sincere vow, and constantly thinking of at- 
taining rebirth in the Western Pure Land. In all 
these, we must not be lax. Attachments, desires, 
and sources of evil will naturally diminish and will 
gradually stop arising. 

Although we cannot completely eradicate them, 
as long as they do not arise and our Buddha-name 
chanting practice is effective, we will be able to at- 
tain rebirth in the Western Pure Land, carrying 
along our residual karmas. 

The Diamond Sutra says: "How does one subdue 
one's mind?" The mind here refers to wandering 
and distracting thoughts. We mindfully chant the 
Buddha-name to subdue and control our wander- 
ing and distracting thoughts. This method is ex- 
tremely amazing! 

"Then you will be able to travel freely among 
the Three Realms without any obstruction." This is 
saying that the bodhisattvas appear in the Six 



225 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Paths to universally help all beings without being 
obstructed. We should learn this ability. When we 
come into contact with people to help them, our 
minds should be on Amituofo. 

When we achieve in Buddha-name chanting 
practice and no wandering thoughts, discrimina- 
tions, or attachments arise, we will be able to 
"travel freely among the Three Realms." When we 
come into contact with people, we will not be hin- 
dered or affected by them. In the Six Paths, we use 
the profound and supreme Pure Land method to 
help all beings — urging them to learn and practice 
together so that they can attain rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land and, without retrogression, 
attain Buddhahood. 



226 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Thirty-eight 

Words and behavior should be faithful and 
trustworthy. Within and without 
should match. 



This is the basic attitude we need when we start 
our practice. The ancient people talked about end- 
ing wrongdoing and practicing virtuous conduct. 
Where does one start? One starts with no lying. 
Confucius said, "If a person cannot be trusted, 
there is no standing 54 for that person." If a person 
is not trustworthy, there is no place in society for 
that person. In ancient society in China, "trustwor- 
thiness" was considered of foremost importance. It 
is so today as well. One must be dutiful and trust- 
worthy. Our hearts and behavior should be in ac- 
cordance. 



54 "No standing" means the person is not respected in society 
and he will not be able to establish himself. — Trans. 

227 



essence of the infinite life sutra 
Excerpt Thirty-nine 

Having received the Buddha's clear 
teachings, we need to be focused and diligent 
in our learning, and practice according to the 
teachings. There is no doubt at all. 

When we receive the Buddha's clear teachings, we 
need to aspire to learn and practice with concentra- 
tion and diligence. We should practice according to 
the teachings without any doubt or regret. If we 
learn and practice this way, we will succeed. 



228 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty 

[All of you] can rectify your minds, correct 
your thoughts, and refrain from committing 
evil deeds in this world. This is quite 
a great merit. 



"Rectify your minds, correct your thoughts" refers 
to generating the bodhi mind. Simply put, rectify- 
ing one's mind means not thinking, not seeing, and 
not hearing anything that is not reasonable or that 
does not accord with the Buddha's teaching. This is 
cultivating an upright and sincere mind. 

"Evil deeds" refers to anything that does not 
benefit all beings. 

Presently, the world is an evil world of the Five 
Corruptions. 35 In particular, the tools used to 
spread news and views are overwhelming. Those 



1 The corruption of the age, the corruption of views, the cor- 
ruption of afflictions, the corruption of sentient beings, and 
the corruption of life. — Trans. 



229 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



who commit evil deeds are many and those who 
cultivate virtuous deeds are few. 

Those who know and accept the Buddha's 
teaching should rectify their minds, correct their 
thoughts, and refrain from committing evil deeds in 
this chaotic world. If one "refrains from commit- 
ting evil deeds," and cultivates the Ten Virtuous 
Karmas, this is great merit. One is accumulating 
merits and virtues. 



230 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty-one 

Buddha . . . teach all beings to . . . discard the 
Five Evils, leave the Five Sufferings, stay 
away from the Five Burnings, subdue and 
transform their thoughts, and observe the 
Five Goodnesses so as to obtain the good 
fortune from this. 36 



The Buddha taught all beings to end wrongdoings 
and practice goodness so that they can receive true 
good fortune. In "discard the Five Evils," the "Five 
Evils" are killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, 
and taking intoxicants. These are causes. 

The first evil is killing, which will bring about 
the retributions of illness and a short life span. No 
killing and a vegetarian diet will bring about the re- 
wards of good health and a long life. 

36 This paragraph in the sutra begins with "Now I become a 
Buddha here to teach and transform all beings to discard the 
Five Evils, leave the Five Sufferings . . ." — Trans. 



231 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The second evil is stealing. Its retribution is pov- 
erty. If we want to be wealthy and keep our wealth 
forever and not lose it, we need to know how to cul- 
tivate the cause. Those who constantly think of 
stealing from others will not keep their wealth for 
long. Those who are happy to give will most cer- 
tainly obtain great wealth. 

The third evil is sexual misconduct. Everyone 
wants to have a prosperous and happy family. To 
achieve this, one must definitely not commit sexual 
misconduct. 

The fourth evil is lying. In the world at large, 
when one does not lie and keeps one's word, one will 
win the trust, respect, and support of others. One's 
career will be smooth. 

The fifth evil is taking intoxicants, which will 
confuse one's mind. When one is intoxicated, one 
cannot control one's speech or behavior and thus 
will very often commit offenses that result in grave 
mistakes. 

The Buddha taught us to end these Five Evils 
and cultivate the Five Goodnesses, which are the 
Five Precepts of no killing, no stealing, no sexual 



232 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



misconduct, no lying, and no taking intoxicants. 
These five precepts should be adhered to from the 
time we begin to generate the mind to learn Bud- 
dhism until the time we attain the level of bodhi- 
sattva. When we seek rebirth into the Pure Land by 
Buddha-name chanting, if we cannot fulfill these 
five precepts, then no matter how many times we 
chant the Buddha-name we will not be able to attain 
rebirth. 

The Western Pure Land is a place where the be- 
ings of superior goodness gather. If we cannot end 
the Five Evils and cultivate the Five Goodnesses, we 
will be incompatible with the Pure Land. We must 
accord with virtuousness so as to have Amitabha 
Buddha come to escort us to his land. 

In "leave the Five Sufferings, stay away from the 
Five Burnings," "Five Sufferings" are flower retribu- 
tion^ 7 and "Five Burnings" are fruit retributions. 38 
When there are causes, there will surely be effects. 
Committing the [above] five evil causes will bring 
about the retributions of suffering. "Sufferings" re- 

^ Retributions received in the present lifetime. — Trans. 
38 Retributions to be received in future lifetimes. — Trans. 

233 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



fers to the sufferings in life. "Burnings" refers to the 
future sufferings in the Three Evil Paths. 

From this we can see that when one commits evil 
karmas, one will suffer not only now but also in the 
future, where the retributions will be even more ter- 
rible. 

"Thoughts" in "subdue and transform thoughts" 
refers to wandering thoughts, greed, anger, igno- 
rance, and arrogance. "Transform" means trans- 
forming afflictions into Bodhi and transforming kill- 
ing into compassion. This is the goal of the Buddha 
in teaching people. 

How does one subdue and transform one's 
thoughts? When an evil thought arises, one should 
instantly have the wisdom to be aware of it and stop 
the wandering thought. For many kalpas, for which 
there is no beginning, ordinary beings have been 
immersed in affliction and habits, so they naturally 
have many wandering thoughts. But as it is said, 
"Do not fear a thought arising; fear realizing it too 
late." When an evil thought arises, one should im- 
mediately detect it and transform it into "Amituofo." 
This is cultivation. In the Zen school, this is the 



234 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



practice of enlightening illumination. Here is where we 
practice: transforming an evil thought into a virtu- 
ous thought, transforming an evil thought into 
"Amituofo." The thought of "Amituofo" is the most 
virtuous. There is no thought more virtuous than 
this. 

"Observe the Five Goodnesses so as to obtain 
the good fortune from this." The Five Goodnesses 
are the Five Precepts. We should abide by the Five 
Precepts. In addition to not killing, we should main- 
tain a vegetarian diet because it is healthy. 

There are many strange illnesses nowadays. 
How do they come about? Medical and scientific 
studies have come up with some theories that seem 
correct but are actually wrong. The true cause is eat- 
ing meat. A proverb says, "Illness enters through the 
mouth; trouble exits from it." Meat is undoubtedly 
poisonous. Great Master Yinguang once told a 
story. A woman breastfed her children. The first one 
died, so did the second one. Subsequently, the milk 
was sent to a lab for testing. It was found that she 
had fed the children when she was angry. Her anger 



235 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



generated a poisonous substance that made the milk 
poisonous. She thus poisoned her own children. 

From this we can deduce that when any living 
being is being killed, it is not everyday anger that 
the being feels but something more intense — hatred. 
Therefore, all meat is poisonous and eating meat is 
the same as taking poison. One may not get ill im- 
mediately, but over a long time this will bring about 
strange illnesses. A vegetarian diet will surely bring 
about good health and longevity. 

"No killing" will bring about longevity. "No 
stealing" will bring about great wealth. "No sexual 
misconduct" will bring about a dignified appearance. 
"No lying" will bring about people's respect. "No 
intoxicants" is a wise thing as one will maintain a 
clear head. 

Cultivating the Five Goodnesses will naturally 
bring about good fortune, longevity, good health, 
and wealth. Everything will go well in one's family 
and in one's career. This is what one will get now. 
Future rewards will be even more wondrous. 



236 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty-two 

All kinds of beings in this world want to do 
evil. The strong overpower the weak, with 
both of them overwhelming and killing one 

another in turn. They cruelly harm and 
slaughter, and alternately devour one other. 
They do not know to do good deeds and will 
thus suffer misfortunes and punishments 
later. . . . [Karmic foes will] in turn take 
revenge on one another. . . . The suffering is 
beyond description. 



This excerpt describes the saying "the weak are the 
prey of the strong." Is this statement true? No. 
What is true is that reprisal breeds reprisal. It 
would seem that the weak are to be eaten or domi- 
nated by the strong, but it is not so. The Buddha, 
who had perfectly realized the five kinds of eyes, 39 

39 rpj^g £ we kJ nc l s 0 f e y es are human eye, heavenly eye, wis- 
dom eye, Dharma eye, and Buddha eye. — Trans. 



237 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



clearly saw the truth of transmigration within the 
Six Paths. He said that the beings in the Six Paths 
alternately take revenge on one another, lifetime 
after lifetime. 

It is said, "A human dies and is reborn a sheep; 
a sheep dies and is reborn a human." In this life 
you are the human and you are stronger than the 
sheep; you kill and eat it. In the next life, the sheep 
becomes the human and you become the sheep; he 
will kill and eat you. Each one, in turn, pays back. 
This is "in turn take revenge on one another. " Such 
agony! 

The weak being the prey of the strong is an ab- 
normal phenomenon. It is a malicious relation- 
ship—one of continual reprisals. In addition, when 
one takes revenge, one will not do it in the exact 
amount — one will overdo it a little. Therefore, the 
enmity will continue lifetime after lifetime without 
end and will never be resolved. The retributions 
will become more and more terrible. 

The first part of The Complete Workd of Zhou 
Aiuhi is Lord Superior Wen Chang Tract of the Quiet 
Way. In the first section, Lord Superior Wen 



238 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Chang talked about seventeen of his lifetimes of 
karmic causes and effects. The retributions were 
terrible — truly horrifying. It is worthy of our vigi- 
lance. 

We understand the truth, so we should feel em- 
pathy for all beings— we should love them, not 
harm them. What is the cause of wars in this 
world? The Buddha told us that it is killing. There- 
fore, if wars are to end forever, beings should not 
eat meat. 

Years ago when I was lecturing in Taipei, there 
was an elderly lay practitioner, a Mr. Wu from 
Ningbo. He used to do business in Shanghai and 
started to learn Buddhism in his old age. He told 
me a true story that happened in Shanghai. 

A friend of his, who was also a businessman, 
worked for a German before World War II. This 
friend was very honest, trustworthy, and hard- 
working. Therefore, the German businessman was 
very fond of him. 

When the war broke out, the German busi- 
nessman returned to his country and entrusted the 
company to Mr. Wu's friend, who ran it well. After 



239 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



the war ended, the German did not come back. It 
was said that he had died. Mr. Wu's friend ended 
up owning the company. Of course, he did not take 
it by force. It naturally became his because the 
owner died. 

Mr. Wu's friend had a child. When the child 
was eleven or twelve, he dropped ten dollars (at 
that time, ten dollars was a lot of money) on the 
ground. An acquaintance of his father picked up 
the money and said, "Call me 'Uncle' and I'll give 
you back the ten dollars." The child retorted, "You 
call me 'Uncle' and I'll give you ten dollars." 

That year, the father, Mr. Wu's friend, was fifty 
years old. At his birthday party, he suddenly saw 
that his child looked like his late German employer 
(the father alone saw this) . Having started learning 
Buddhism, the father realized that his late em- 
ployer probably was reborn in his family and be- 
came his son. There and then, he announced the 
transfer of all his property to his son. This was a 
very smart thing to do. 

This story illustrates that a child is born into a 
family to collect debt, repay debt, repay kindness, 



240 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



or exact revenge. This is definitely true. The 
Buddha talks about the four kinds of karmic links 
that exist between parents and children. Those 
who come to repay kindness are filial children. 
Those who come to exact revenge hold grudges 
from past lifetimes and will cause families to break 
up and family members to die. Some come to col- 
lect debt. The son of Mr. Wu's friend is a good ex- 
ample. Some come to repay debt. These are the 
causes for those who are in the same family. 

When a child is born into one's family one 
needs to know to change— to transform bad rela- 
tionships into Dharma relationships. 

"They do not know to do good deeds and will 
thus suffer misfortunes and punishments later." 
"Misfortunes and punishments" are the Five Suf- 
ferings and the Five Burnings. People in general 
know only to kill animals to satisfy their desire for 
food — they do not know the disastrous conse- 
quences of such actions. 

Before Venerable Guanghua became a monk, 
he handled military supplies in the military. At that 
time, he was eating one chicken a day. That's three 



241 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



hundred and sixty chickens a year — a thousand 
chickens after three years ! 

After he became a monk, he was diligent in cul- 
tivation and strictly abided by the precepts. He was 
well versed in the precepts and also wrote books. 
One day when he was taking a shower, he sud- 
denly saw that the bathroom was full of chickens, 
and they were all trying to jump on him. When he 
tried to dodge them, he fell down, breaking his leg. 
He told me that as a result of learning Buddhism 
and observing the precepts, this was a light retribu- 
tion for the grave offenses he had committed. From 
this we see how horrifying retributions can be. 
Had he not learned Buddhism, his retribution 
would have been even more terrible. 

Therefore, we should make a vow that when 
we attain rebirth in the Western Pure Land and 
attain Buddhahood, we will first help those beings 
we have killed. "When I attain Buddhahood, you 
will be the first ones I help. Please do not cause 
trouble or obstruct me. If you obstruct me, I will 
not be able to succeed in cultivation, and you will 
continue to suffer in the Six Paths." 



242 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The Dedication of Merit says "Repay the Four 
Kinds of Kindness above, and relieve the suffering 
of those in the Three Paths below." In the Three 
Paths, the first ones to be helped are those who 
hold grudges against us. 

When we encounter animals, we should mind- 
fully chant the Buddha- name and dedicate the 
merit to them. It is quite usual to chant "Amituofo." 
It is even better if we chant the Three Refuges. 
"Return and rely upon the Buddha so as not to be 
reborn into the hells. Return and rely upon the 
Dharma so as not to be reborn as a hungry ghost. 
Return and rely upon the Sangha so as not to be 
reborn as an animal." We chant this to the beings 
in the Three Evil Paths. When we encounter ani- 
mals, we can chant the Buddha-name and dedicate 
the merit to them, as well as chant the Three Ref- 
uges. 



243 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty-three 

People in this world do not follow laws and 
rules. They are extravagant, indulge 
excessively in desires, and are 
arrogant — they willfully do whatever they 
want. Those who hold high positions are 
corrupted; they are not upright in their 
duties. They falsely incriminate others and 
harm loyal and upright people. What they 
think is contrary to what they say; they are 
scheming and deceitful. They will try to 
deceive all — regardless of whether others 
have high or low positions, regardless of 
whether they are related or not. They get 
angry and are ignorant — they want to gain 
the riches of others. They desire more, and 
compete for advantage and profit. Grudges 
form and turn into enmities, causing families 
to be ruined and members to separate or die. 

They do not care about before and after. 
Some rich people are stingy and unwilling to 



244 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



give. Imprisoned by their desires, their greed 
runs deep. Their minds labor and their bodies 
suffer. They continue like this until the very 
end, yet nothing will accompany them. What 

will follow them into their next life will be 
their good karmas, bad karmas, good fortune, 
and misfortune. They may go to happy places 
or to extremely miserable places. When 
seeing the virtuousness of others, they 
become hateful and slanderous, instead of 
having respect and admiration. They 
constantly harbor the intent to steal, hoping 
to appropriate the wealth of others for their 
own. After they use it up, they try to take 
more again. Spiritual beings of heaven and 
earth will record their deeds and eventually 
they will fall into the evil paths. 

"People in this world do not follow laws and rules." 
"Rules" are regulations, etiquette, customs, and 
moral values. When people do not obey laws or 



245 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



follow etiquette, society will be in chaos. The fol- 
lowing describes the chaotic phenomena of society. 

"They are extravagant, indulge excessively in 
desires, and are arrogant — they willfully do what- 
ever they want." "Willfully doing whatever they 
want" means that they do whatever they like with- 
out restraint. 

"Those who hold high positions are corrupted; 
they are not upright in their duties." "Those who 
hold high positions" refers to people who have 
leadership roles in society. "Corrupted" means not 
understanding the principles. "Not upright" refers 
to improper thoughts and behavior — for selfish 
gains, the public is harmed. This refers to the gov- 
ernment officials who take bribes and abuse the 
law. Their intentions are not upright. They do not 
work for the benefit of the people. Instead, they 
benefit themselves by thinking of all kinds of ways 
to cheat people of their hard work and possessions. 
Such stealing is very grave. 

The following are examples. 

"They falsely incriminate others and harm loyal 
and upright people." This is to forcibly take the 



246 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



power, position, or wealth of others. This is having 
the mind of stealing. 

"What they think is contrary to what they say; 
they are scheming and deceitful." This is saying 
that what these people say and do are different. 
They scheme to defraud others. Things like this 
have happened throughout history and around the 
world. No matter how wise and able a leader is, it 
is unavoidable for him or her to wrong a few inno- 
cent people or to make mistakes that are bad for 
citizens. Throughout history, in this world, we 
cannot find a person who is perfect, one who has 
never made a mistake in his or her lifetime. 

"They will try to deceive all — regardless of high 
or low position, regardless of whether they are re- 
lated or not." "High" refers to one's elders. "Low" 
refers to one's juniors. "Related or not" refers to 
relatives and non-relatives. To benefit themselves, 
they deceive all: elders, juniors, family, and outsid- 
ers. Families are in discord — with parents, chil- 
dren, siblings, relatives, and friends all trying to 
deceive one another. 



247 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"They get angry and are ignorant — they want 
to gain the riches of others. They desire more, and 
compete for advantage and profit." This is brought 
about by greed for wealth and benefit. Always 
wanting to get more for ourselves and not wanting 
to yield, we quarrel with others and others with us, 
and we become foes. 

"Grudges form and turn into enmity, causing 
families to be ruined and members to separate or 
die. They do not care about before and after." "Be- 
fore" refers to cause and "after" refers to retribu- 
tion. People do not know about cause and effect, 
which is why they are not afraid to do as they 
please. When retributions appear, it is too late for 
regret. The result is their families are destroyed 
and they lose their own lives. 

"Some rich people are stingy and unwilling to 
give." This is describing the rich and prestigious 
people who are greedy and stingy, and who are 
unwilling to help others. 

People in this world do not understand the 
truth of life and the universe. They are ignorant 
and selfish. The Buddha told us the truth of life 



248 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



and the universe — the entire Dharma Realm is one 
entity, and the true nature of Buddhas and bodhi- 
sattvas and that of all beings are one. From this, we 
realize that we and all the other beings in the entire 
Dharma Realm are closely knit — when we love 
ourselves, we will love all beings; when we help 
others, we are helping ourselves. 

Buddhist practitioners must broaden their 
minds and care about all beings. The broader the 
mind, the greater the good fortune. In this world 
and beyond, the Buddha's good fortune is the 
greatest good fortune because his mind "embraces 
the expanse of space and encompasses the vastness 
of the universe." 

Wealth is good fortune, and it will be used up 
some day. It is stated in the sutras that one's wealth 
belongs to five families. The first is water, which 
can flood one's properties. The second is fire, 
which can burn one's properties. The third is the 
government. In the past, the government would 
confiscate all the properties of a criminal. The 
fourth is robbers and thieves. The fifth is spend- 
thrift children, who are hard to guard against. 

How does one protect one's wealth? By giving. 
One should try to do more charitable acts that 
benefit society and all beings. 

During the Spring and Autumn period in 
China, Mr. Fan Li was a senior official of King 
Gou Jian of the Yue state. After the Yue state was 
conquered by the Wu state, he helped Gou Jian 
restore the Yue state. When he completed his mis- 
sion, he changed his name and started to do busi- 
ness. Within a few years, he amassed a great for- 
tune. After he became wealthy, he gave away all his 
wealth and again started a small business. Within a 
few years, he amassed another great fortune. He 
then gave away all his wealth a second time. In his 
lifetime, he amassed great wealth three times and 
gave everything away three times. He was truly 
wise and able. What he did was very correct. 

When we have enough food and clothing, we 
should take care of the poor and work for the 
benefit of society and the local community. We 
must know to practice virtuous conduct, cultivate 
good fortune, and accumulate merit. The more 
wealth we give away, the more we will receive. 



250 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



When we give, we will gain. When we do not give, 
we will not gain. 

"Imprisoned by their desires, their greed runs 
deep. Their minds labor and their bodies suffer." 
When one has a lot of money, one worries about 
gains and losses. One will not be at ease. There- 
fore, one suffers physically and mentally. 

"They continue like this until the very end, yet 
nothing will accompany them." An ancient eminent 
master said, "[When we die,] we cannot take any- 
thing with us; only karmas will accompany us." 
Fame and honor, wealth and rank, and money and 
possessions— we cannot take these with us. All the 
good karmas and bad karmas created in our life- 
time will stay with us. Those who are truly awak- 
ened know that they should cultivate what they can 
take with them. What they cannot take along, they 
should just ignore and waste no energy on. 

"What will follow them into their next life will 
be their good karmas, bad karmas, good fortune, 
and misfortune." Good karmas will bring about 
good fortune. Bad karmas will bring about misfor- 
tune. 



251 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"They may go to happy places or go into ex- 
tremely miserable places." "Happy places" refers to 
the human and heavenly paths. "Extremely miser- 
able places" refers to the Three Evil Paths (of hells, 
hungry ghosts, and animals). It is our own good 
and bad karmas that dictate and pull us into the 
path that we are reborn in. This is retribution, not 
the work of Lord Yama, God, Buddhas, or bodhi- 
sattvas. 

"When seeing the virtuousness of others, they 
become hateful and slanderous, instead of wanting 
to emulate them." Such thinking and behavior is 
not virtuous. Jealousy and hatred are indeed 
thoughts of stealing. Why? Because one does not 
like to see others doing better. This mindset is not 
normal. Wishing that others be worse off or be- 
coming displeased, critical or slanderous when see- 
ing virtuous people or good deeds being done — 
these are all thoughts of stealing. 

A virtuous person delights upon seeing other 
virtuous people or good deeds and will whole- 
heartedly assist these people and help them accom- 
plish their good deeds. A virtuous person sets a 



252 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



good example for whatever community he is in, 
and his good deeds will definitely benefit the gen- 
eral public. 

When we help others achieve their goals, we 
will succeed in our cultivation of virtues. When we 
obstruct others, we are committing tremendously 
grave offenses. 

"They constantly harbor the intent to steal, 
hoping to appropriate the wealth of others for their 
own. After they use it up, they try to take more 
again." These people use various illegal means to 
take the gains of others and use them for their own 
enjoyment. When they use up the ill-gotten gains, 
they will again think of other ways to get more. 
This is stealing — having both the intent and the 
action. 

"Spiritual beings of heaven and earth will re- 
cord their deeds and eventually they will fall into 
the evil paths." "Spiritual beings" refers to heav- 
enly and earthly spirits. When one gives rise to an 
evil mind and commits evil deeds, one may fool 
others but not the spiritual beings. They keep a re- 



253 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



cord of what one does. This is the first sense of this 
sentence. 

"Spiritual beings" also refers to one's con- 
sciousness, which the Chinese call conscience. 
Others may not know the evil deeds that one com- 
mits, but one clearly knows it in one's heart. The 
seeds of these deeds will be embedded in the Alaya 
Consciousness and will not vanish. When the con- 
ditions mature, one will suffer retributions. This is 
the second sense of the sentence. 

Our every thought and every action are re- 
corded, like the data in a computer. Our Alaya 
Consciousness records all our good and evil 
thoughts and actions, similar to what a computer 
does. This is our database, containing not only data 
in this lifetime but also data from all past lifetimes. 
Spiritual beings and people who have the ability 
can read our data. 

Therefore, we should be cautious with our 
thoughts. We should not allow any evil thought to 
arise. Every thought should be of benefiting all be- 
ings and not be of harming them. This way, we will 
truly succeed in attaining great virtue. 



254 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"Eventually they will fall into the evil paths." 
This talks about retribution. Ultimately, these peo- 
ple will fall into the evil paths. 

If the Buddha does not tell us these truths, 
there is no one else who can clearly explain them to 
us. This is how the Buddha helps and protects us: 
he teaches us to be constantly alert to our thoughts, 
words, and actions, so that we will not have any 
evil thought or commit any evil deed. This is leav- 
ing suffering behind and attaining happiness. 



255 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty-four 

People in this world are born from 
interrelated karmic causes. How long can one 
live? Unvirtuous people are not proper in 
their behavior and thoughts. They usually 
harbor evil intentions and their minds are 
constantly preoccupied with immoral lust. 

Restlessness fills their minds, and their 
exterior persona reveals wantonness. They 
waste away their family fortune. What they 
do is unlawful. Things that they should seek, 
they are unwilling to. 

"People in this world are born from interrelated 
karmic causes." Society is the phenomenon of liv- 
ing beings existing together. No one can live inde- 
pendently. People have to rely on one another. 
Therefore, when one thinks about oneself, one 
must also think about others. 



256 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"How long can one live?" A human life span is 
short. Life is fragile. In this world, ten years can 
pass without a person attaining anything. Truly, 
this is like a dream. The ancient Chinese said, 
"Since ancient times, few live to the age of sev- 
enty." Now, although medicine has advanced and 
life spans seem to have lengthened, in Africa and 
many other places where the living environment is 
very bad, people die of hunger and babies lose their 
lives every day. If we take this into account, the 
average life expectancy is less than seventy years. 

People have shared karma and individual 
karma. Some people cultivate good fortune, so they 
have a longer life span. But even if they live to one 
hundred, this is still a short time. Therefore, seeing 
through this and letting go will definitely be benefi- 
cial for us. 

"Unvirtuous people are not proper in their be- 
havior and thoughts. They usually harbor evil in- 
tentions and their minds are constantly preoccu- 
pied with immoral lust. Restlessness fills their 
minds, and their exterior persona reveals wanton- 
ness. They waste away their family fortune." This 



257 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



part of the excerpt talks about those whose afflic- 
tions, karmic obstacles, and bad habits are very 
severe. These people's thoughts and behavior are 
not proper. They usually harbor evil intentions, 
and the thoughts of lust never cease. Therefore, 
their desires burn inside them like a fierce fire and 
this shows in their appearance — "their exterior 
persona reveals wantonness." The immediate retri- 
bution is "wasting away their family fortune." Such 
people are called spendthrift children or prodigal 
children. 

"What they do is unlawful." This refers to ruin- 
ing other people's reputations and moral integrity. 
In ancient times, this was very serious. Today, peo- 
ple attach little importance to this, nevertheless it is 
an obstacle to one's cultivation, personal happiness, 
and a safe society. If one truly believes in cause, 
condition, and retribution, one will naturally un- 
derstand. 

"Things that they should seek, they are unwill- 
ing to." The Buddha said this with deep feeling. 
Instead of seeking and doing what we should, we 
are unwilling to do so. What should we be seeking? 



258 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Transcending the cycle of birth and death. This is 
what we should seek. It is a great suffering to be in 
the cycle of birth and death. The Buddha showed 
us a path to transcend the cycle. If we believe him 
and follow this path, our wish will be fulfilled. 

This excerpt talks about the evil of sexual mis- 
conduct. The gravest offense of all is killing; the 
greatest obstacle to one's cultivation is sexual de- 
sire. These are two great obstacles. If in one's culti- 
vation one wishes to transcend this world, one will 
not be able to transcend the Three Realms without 
eradicating sexual desire. 

Although the Pure Land method allows one to 
bring one's residual karmas into the Western Pure 
Land, one must suppress one's sexual desire, anger, 
and ignorance. This way, one will be sure of attain- 
ing rebirth there. If one cannot suppress them, then 
no matter how much one chants the Buddha-name, 
it is as an ancient Chinese said: "Even if one chants 
until one's throat is hoarse, one's chanting is still 
futile." One will only form a good affinity with 
Amitabha Buddha, but one will not succeed in at- 
taining rebirth in the Pure Land in this lifetime. 



259 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty-five 

People in this world do not think of 
practicing goodness. They use divisive 
speech, harsh speech, false speech, and 
enticing speech. They detest and are jealous 
of virtuous people. They discredit the worthy 

and the wise. They are not filial to their 
parents, and they are not respectful to their 
teachers and elders. They are not trustworthy 
to their friends, and it is difficult for them to 
be sincere and honest. They are conceited 
and claim that they have attained the Way. 

They are wild and bully others. They 
encroach on the rights of others. They want 
others to fear and respect them, while they 
themselves feel neither fear nor shame. These 
people are stubborn and hard to transform. 

They constantly harbor arrogance and 
haughtiness. They rely on the protection of 
the good fortune from past lifetimes. They 
commit evil deeds in this lifetime and use up 



260 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



their good fortune. At the end of their lives, 
all their evil deeds will come back to 
overwhelm them. 



This excerpt talks about the evils of false speech. 
False speech is dishonesty. If one is not honest, one 
will absolutely not succeed in one's cultivation. 
Why? Because cultivation requires a sincere mind. 
When one is not sincere in one's words, one's mind 
is false. How can one with a false mind succeed in 
cultivation? Even in this world, a person who is 
not trustworthy cannot have a place in society. One 
can deceive others for a short time but not forever. 

"Divisive speech" is the sowing of discord. 
"Harsh speech" is speaking harshly and hurting 
others. "False speech" is telling lies to deceive peo- 
ple. "Enticing speech" is sweet words meant to de- 
ceive others. For example, songs, dance, movies, 
and dramas today lead people to have evil 
thoughts. All these are "enticing speech." 

The arts in ancient China were all based on the 
standard of "no evil thoughts." For example, plays 



261 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



and novels taught people to understand the law of 
cause and effect — good deeds will bring about 
good retributions; bad deeds will bring about bad 
retributions. They promoted loyalty, filial piety, 
moral integrity, and justice. This is one way of 
teaching the general public. 

Those who engage in entertainment and art 
should guide society in a positive direction, by 
teaching that which is virtuous or good. This way, 
they will have boundless good fortune. Otherwise, 
they will create evil karmas. 

"They detest and are jealous of virtuous peo- 
ple." When they see virtuous people or good deeds 
being done, jealousy and anger arise in them. 

They "discredit the worthy and the wise." A 
worthy person is a person of virtue. A person of 
virtue and wisdom can influence the people in an 
area, improve the social customs, and set a good 
example for the local people. His or her merit will 
be very great. If one is jealous of or dislikes this 
person and obstructs this person from doing his or 
her good deeds — sabotaging this person instead of 
helping or rejoicing at the good deeds — then the 



262 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



offense is grave, as it has affected all the people in 
the area. 

"They are not filial to their parents, and they 
are not respectful to their teachers and elders." 
This shows extreme arrogance! This applies not 
only to the general public but also to Buddhist 
practitioners. The Visualization Sutra teaches us the 
Three Conditions. The first includes being filial and 
providing and caring for parents, being respectful 
to and serving teachers, being compassionate and 
not killing, and cultivating the Ten Virtuous Kar- 
mas. 

Filial piety and respect for one's teachers are 
the absolute foundations. If one is not filial to one's 
parents or does not respect one's teachers, then 
there is no need to talk about other things. To show 
gratitude for the love and care given by one's par- 
ents, one should be respectful and filial to them. 
Both mundane and supramundane teachings are 
based on filial piety. Buddhism — a teaching where 
the teacher as well as the teachings are highly re- 
vered — is founded on filial piety. If the public ig- 
nores filial piety, then there is no foundation for 



263 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Buddhism. Like building a house, if there is no 
foundation, how can the house stand firm? 

"They are not trustworthy to their friends, and 
it is difficult for them to be sincere and honest." 
Due to the guidance of our teachers, we have wis- 
dom and skills. This is a great kindness to us. If 
one thinks nothing of the kindness of one's parents 
and teachers, how can one be a friend? 

In present society, it is indeed as described 
here. The relationships between people and be- 
tween countries are based entirely on gains or 
losses, not on moral obligations and justice. 

"They are conceited." Because they are arro- 
gant, they look down on their parents and teachers, 
thinking that their parents and teachers cannot 
compare with them and are not as capable as they. 
Therefore, they are arrogant to their elders. 

They "claim that they have attained the Way." 
If one claims that one has attained the Way but has 
not done so, it is a great lie. This lie deceives people 
and damages Buddhism, and the retribution is fal- 
ling into the Avici hell. 



264 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"They are wild and bully others. They encroach 
on the rights of others." This is tyrannizing others. 

"They want others to fear and respect them, 
while they themselves feel neither fear nor shame." 
Shame — being pricked by one's conscience and 
caring about public opinion — is a good mental 
quality. "Feeling neither fear nor shame" means 
that one has no conscience and does not care about 
criticism from the public, ignoring it completely. 
This is why one dares to act unlawfully — one is full 
of oneself. 

"These people are stubborn and hard to trans- 
form." It is hard to change and reform these peo- 
ple. 

"They constantly harbor arrogance and haugh- 
tiness." They are proud and arrogant. 

"They rely on the protection of the good for- 
tune from past lifetimes." Why does a bad person 
who rides roughshod over others enjoy high status, 
wealth, and power in society while not suffering 
any punishment? Because the good fortune he or 
she cultivated in past lifetimes is abundant — the 
conditions for the evil deeds done in this lifetime 



265 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



have not yet matured, so the retributions have not 
materialized. 

It is stated in the sutras: "If you want to know 
the causes planted in past lifetimes, look at what 
you are experiencing in this lifetime. If you want to 
know your karmic effects in future lifetimes, look 
at what you are doing in this lifetime." What we do 
in this lifetime will bring about retributions in fu- 
ture lifetimes. A good cause will bring about a good 
retribution. A bad cause will bring about a bad ret- 
ribution. If a retribution has not happened, it is be- 
cause the time has not yet come. 

"They commit evil deeds in this lifetime and use 
up their good fortune." One cultivated great good 
fortune in past lifetimes and could have enjoyed it 
for one hundred years. But because one commits 
evil deeds, one's good fortune is used up in fifty 
years. This is the diminishing of good fortune. This 
is definitely not the gods and deities controlling this 
to punish one. It is due to one's karmic forces. The 
karmic force of the evil deeds gets stronger and the 
karmic force of the virtuous deeds gradually be- 
comes weaker. As the good karmas cannot coun- 



266 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



teract the evil karmas, the karmic force of the evil 
karmas will become stronger and stronger. Retri- 
butions from the stronger karma will be meted out 
first, pulling one to suffer them. This is the princi- 
ple. 

"At the end of their lives, all their evil deeds 
will come back to overwhelm them." At the end of 
one's life, the evil karmas will manifest, and one 
will have to suffer retributions. "All their evil 
deeds" refers to the evil paths. The karmic foes and 
creditors from this and past lifetimes will come to 
take one's life if one owes them life or to collect 
debt if one owes them money. This is why Buddha- 
name chanting practitioners should dedicate merits 
from their learning, practicing, and giving — "re- 
paying the Four Kinds of Kindness above, and re- 
lieving the suffering of those in the Three Paths 
below. 

"Repaying the Four Kinds of Kindness above" 
means that the merits are dedicated to those who 
have shown us kindness. "Relieving the suffering 
of those in the Three Paths below" means that the 
merits are dedicated to the karmic foes and credi- 



267 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tors from numerous kalpas. Throughout my entire 
life, I have been repaying debts with my cultiva- 
tion. We make offerings to those who have shown 
us kindness, and we repay debts to our karmic 
creditors. This way, we will eliminate many obsta- 
cles to our cultivation. This is the truth. When we 
truly understand, we will courageously and dili- 
gently learn and practice. 

We should generate the bodhi mind, single- 
mindedly chant "Amituofo," and seek rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land. This is an assured path. As an 
ancient eminent master said, "If ten thousand peo- 
ple practice [the Pure Land method], all ten thou- 
sand will attain rebirth." So, we will surely suc- 
ceed. Only when we attain rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land will we be able to truly repay those who 
have shown us kindness in past lifetimes and help 
those we have enmities with attain Buddhahood. 

Therefore, only when we attain rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land can we resolve enmities with 
all beings. 



268 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty-six 

People in this world are indecisive and 
indolent. They are unwilling to do good 
deeds, be disciplined in their behavior, or 
cultivate [proper] karmas. They disobey their 

parents and rebel against their teachings. 
They are like foes to their parents, who may 
as well not have them as children. They are 
ungrateful, go against ethics, and do not 
repay kindness shown to them. They are 
dissolute, fool around, and indulge 
excessively in alcohol and good food. They 
are rash, overbearing, and contradictory, 
ignorant of the ways of the world. They have 
no sense of righteousness or propriety, and 
cannot take advice or guidance. 

"People in this world are indecisive and indolent." 
"Indecisive" means that the mind does not have a 
stand and has no direction. "Indolent" means lazi- 



269 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ness and the seeking of momentary comfort and 
pleasure. 

If one wants to accomplish an undertaking, 
whether mundane or supramundane, the first re- 
quirement is to have an aspiration. This serves as 
the direction and goal for one's lifelong effort. 
Some people seek fame and become famous. Some 
people seek gains and they acquire them. Why? 
Because they concentrate on one goal. It is the 
same with cultivation. There are many Buddhist 
schools and methods but one can delve deeply into 
only one. 

Great Master Shandao said that if one wants to 
seek understanding, one can use teachings from 
various schools as reference, but for cultivation, 
one must choose only one Dharma door. One can 
know various paths but can walk only one. One 
cannot walk two paths at the same time. Therefore, 
to reach one's goal there must be only one method 
of cultivation. This is the principle. 

All Buddhas urge people to mindfully chant the 
Buddha-name and seek rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land. Why? Although there are many Bud- 



270 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



dhist schools and Dharma doors, they are all dif- 
ferent in degree of difficulty. For example, the goal 
of Zen meditation is to enlighten the mind and see 
the true nature. But it is hard to see the true na- 
ture. Why can't one see the true nature? Because 
there are obstacles. What obstacles? Affliction of 
Views and Thoughts, Affliction of Dust and Sand, 
and Affliction of Ignorance. One must completely 
eradicate Affliction of Views and Thoughts as well 
as Affliction of Dust and Sand, and eliminate at 
least a part of ignorance before one can enlighten 
the mind and see the true nature. 

When one mindfully chants the Buddha-name 
and seeks rebirth in the Western Pure Land, one 
will carry along one's residual karmas. It does not 
matter if one has not eliminated a part of Affliction 
of Views and Thoughts. This is why the Pure Land 
method is wondrous and why all Buddhas extol it 
greatly. 

But being indecisive and indolent is a grave ob- 
stacle, regardless of which Dharma door one learns 
and practices. Even when one chants the Buddha- 



271 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



name, one will not be able to attain rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land. 

"They are unwilling to do good deeds." Being 
able to practice virtuous conduct is good fortune. 
People in this world all seek wealth, wisdom, good 
health, and longevity. Can they get them? "In Bud- 
dhism, every wish can be fulfilled." If one knows 
the right principle and method and seeks accord- 
ingly, one's every wish will be fulfilled. 

Wealth is a karmic result. Where there is a re- 
sult, there must have been a cause. When one cul- 
tivates a cause, one will surely get the result. The 
cause of having wealth is giving. The more one 
gives, the more one will get. When one gives, one is 
planting a cause. When one gives naturally, one 
will get the result quickly, and in abundance. 

Wisdom is a karmic result. Its cause is the giv- 
ing of teachings. When one willingly and gladly 
teaches what one knows, whether worldly knowl- 
edge or Buddhism, and does not hold back any- 
thing, one will have more and more wisdom. 

Good health and longevity are karmic results. 
The causes are the giving of fearlessness. When 



272 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



others have fear or difficulty, we help them or pro- 
tect them so that they feel secure and are free of all 
fears. These actions are the giving of fearlessness. 
The most thorough and ultimate giving of fearless- 
ness is nothing other than having a vegetarian diet. 
One does not eat the flesh of any being. One 
should not upset or harm any being. The karmic 
results are good health and longevity. 

They are unwilling to "be disciplined in their 
behavior, or cultivate [proper] karmas." "Be disci- 
plined in their behavior" means cultivating one's 
body and mind. "Cultivate [proper] karmas" means 
cultivating one's wholesome karmas. 

"They disobey their parents and rebel against 
their teachings. They are like foes to their parents, 
who may as well not have them as children." The 
children defy their parents. They are like enemies 
to their parents, who feel that they would rather 
not have them as children. Such is the disappoint- 
ment the parents have with their children. 

"They are ungrateful, go against ethics, and do 
not repay kindness shown to them. They are disso- 
lute, fool around, and indulge excessively in alco- 



273 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



hoi and good food." The children fail to show 
gratitude to their parents for their kindness in rais- 
ing them. They do not provide for their parents. In 
addition, they "indulge excessively in alcohol and 
good food." This means that they are particular 
about their food. Being dissolute means that they 
do whatever they like. Fooling around means that 
they hate to do proper work; they like to eat and 
loaf about. 

"They are rash, overbearing, and contradictory, 
ignorant of the ways of the world." "Contradictory" 
means that they lose their temper and have con- 
flicts with others. They do not know the ways of 
the world. They are obstinate, boorish, domineer- 
ing, and unreasonable. 

"They have no sense of righteousness or pro- 
priety, and cannot take advice or guidance." They 
do not want to hear advice or accept good sugges- 
tions. 



274 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty-seven 

Between heaven and earth, the Five Paths 
are separate and distinct. Good retribution, 
bad retribution, good fortune, and misfortune 

intermingle continually with one another. 
One has to bear them alone. No one else can 
take one's place. 

"Between heaven and earth, the Five Paths are 
separate and distinct." "Between heaven and earth" 
refers to the universe. In the universe, there are 
infinite planets where human beings and advanced 
living beings live. The entire Dharma Realm is a 
place of our activity. 

"The Five Paths" refers to the Six Paths. Asu- 
ras are found in four paths— the heavenly path, the 
human path, the animal path, and the path of hun- 
gry ghosts — but not in the hells path. So, these 
paths are called the Five Paths as the asura path is 
not counted as an additional path. When we talk 



275 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



about the Six Paths, we are referring to these 
paths: heavenly, human, asura (this refers specifi- 
cally to the heavenly asuras), animal, hungry 
ghosts, and hells. The Surangama Sutra talks about 
the Seven Paths, which are the Six Paths plus the 
path of immortals. 

The heavenly path, the human path, the animal 
path, the path of hungry ghosts, and the hell path 
are the Five Paths that are separate and distinct. 

"Good retribution, bad retribution." This talks 
about the origin and the phenomena of the Five 
Paths. A virtuous mind and conduct will bring 
about rebirth into the heavenly or the human path. 
These are the good paths. An evil mind and con- 
duct will bring about rebirth into the Three Evil 
Paths. Although people are in the human path, 
they are all different: there are those who are rich 
and those who are poor, those of high position and 
those of low position. This is because people have 
different individual karmas. 

People born in the human path have the same 
shared karma. But in past lifetimes, they cultivated 
different goodness and good fortune. Those who 



276 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



cultivated great good fortune enjoy a good life in 
this lifetime. Those who cultivated little good for- 
tune suffer many hardships and difficulties. 

Causes and their resultant effects are very 
complex. Transmigration in the Six Paths is en- 
tirely the result of one's good and bad deeds. If 
one's physical, verbal, and mental karmas are vir- 
tuous, one will be reborn in the Three Good Paths. 
If the three karmas are bad, one will fall into the 
Three Evil Paths. 

"Good fortune, and misfortune intermingle con- 
tinually with each other." There is good fortune in 
misfortune and misfortune in good fortune. Only a 
person with wisdom can clearly see this and 
adeptly make use of this. 

An example of good fortune in misfortune is 
one who lives in poverty and is not sure when the 
next meal will be. As a result, this person feels that 
life is filled with suffering and wants to get out of 
this world — he or she lets go of all worldly con- 
cerns, sincerely chants the Buddha-name, attains 
rebirth in the Western Pure Land, and eventually 



277 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



attains Buddhahood. Thus, this person has good 
fortune. 

[The Buddha said:] "Discipline oneself with a 
hard life." As a result, one will have no attachment 
to this world and will be even more earnest in seek- 
ing rebirth in the Western Pure Land and meeting 
Amitabha Buddha. Oftentimes, one obtains good 
fortune because of misfortune. 

One who enjoys wealth and prestige in this 
world may chant the Buddha-name but this per- 
son's every thought is still attached to the Saha 
world — thus causing the opportunity of attaining 
Buddhahood in this lifetime to slip by. 

"One has to bear them alone. No one else can 
take one's place." No one can do these matters for 
us. Everyone must cultivate for themselves. We 
must understand this and practice diligently. 



278 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty-eight 

If in that environment, one can 
single-mindedly suppress one's thoughts, 
correct one's behavior and mind, have one's 
deeds match one's words, have one's actions 

be of the utmost sincerity, do only good 
deeds, and commit no evils, then one will be 
liberated and obtain virtues and good fortune 
from these. 

"If in that environment, one can single-mindedly 
suppress one's thoughts." "In that environment" 
refers to today's evil world of the Five Corruptions, 
which is full of complications and vileness. The 
most important thing is to "single-mindedly sup- 
press one's thoughts." All the evil thoughts must be 
subdued. This is where we start concentrating our 
efforts in our cultivation. What should we do when 
an evil thought arises? 



279 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The wondrous thing about the Pure Land 
method is the inconceivability of the merit of the 
Buddha-name. When an evil thought arises, we 
chant "Amituofo" to transform the evil thought into 
a thought of Buddha. We can also think about the 
wondrous merits of Amitabha Buddha or the vari- 
ous deeds of Amitabha Buddha, such as how he 
cultivated at the causal stage to establish the West- 
ern Pure Land to help all beings in the ten direc- 
tions leave suffering forever behind and perfectly 
attain Buddhahood. 

If we study the sutras well and concentrate on 
thinking about the magnificent direct and circum- 
stantial rewards in the Western Pure Land, all 
wandering thoughts will cease. When we truly seek 
rebirth in the Western Pure Land and truly achieve 
in cultivation— when we are in this state — our 
every thought will be of Amitabha Buddha and the 
Western Pure Land. We will undoubtedly attain 
rebirth there. This is the best way to "single- 
mindedly suppress one's thoughts." 

One should "correct one's behavior and mind." 
"Correct" means being upright, and following eti- 



280 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



quette and laws. We need to follow all the teach- 
ings of the Buddha and practice accordingly. "Cor- 
rect one's mind" means that at all times, in all 
places, and in all situations, our every thought 
never deviates from "Namo Amituofo." This is hav- 
ing proper thought. 

If we do not have proper thoughts, we have evil 
thoughts. When there is improperness, there is evil. 
When there is neither proper nor improper 
thought, we fall into undefinable delusion. Delusion is 
ignorance. The retribution is rebirth in the animal 
path. We will not be able to transcend the Three 
Evil Paths. Therefore, it is very important to cor- 
rect one's behavior and mind. 

One should "have one's deeds match one's 
words." One should not say one thing and mean 
another. 

"Have one's actions be of the utmost sincerity." 
One should be sincere when interacting with be- 
ings, engaging in tasks, and handling objects. One 
should not be afraid of being deceived or being 
taken advantage of. If one is not willing to be taken 
advantage of or to be deceived now, one will con- 



281 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tinue to transmigrate endlessly in the Six Paths, life 
after life, to repay or collect debts. 

One should only use the true mind. One should 
have the same regard towards all beings, situations, 
and objects as one has towards the Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. This way, one is truly generating the 
bodhi mind. The bodhi mind is a sincere mind. 
Whether chanting the Buddha-name or contem- 
plating the magnificent direct and circumstantial 
rewards and merits of Amitabha Buddha, one 
should maintain a sincere mind. Even in daily life, 
one should also use a sincere mind. This is "gener- 
ating the bodhi mind and single-mindedly focusing 
on chanting. " 

"Do only good deeds, and commit no evils." 
Learning Buddhism is learning to be awakened 
and wise, and not to do foolish things. When we 
see others make mistakes, we should try to skill- 
fully and expediently remind them, alert them, or 
advise them. When we do good deeds, we must do 
so earnestly and not fear that others will laugh at 
us or obstruct us. Good deeds are beneficial to so- 
ciety. 



282 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



As to "commit no evils," not only do we not do 
any evil deed, we should not even give rise to any 
evil thought. 

"One will be liberated and obtain virtues and 
good fortune from these." Who liberates whom? 
One liberates oneself. It is truly as stated: "The 
Buddha did not liberate the beings." The Buddha 
only explained the truth to us. When we under- 
stand, we have to walk the path ourselves. 



283 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Forty-nine 

Trivial matters can develop into matters of 
great angst and extreme severity. This is all 
due to a desire for wealth, lust, and an 
unwillingness to give. Each one thinks of 
nothing but one's own enjoyment and 
disregards what is right or wrong. Compelled 
by ignorant desires, people want to benefit 
themselves and compete for gains. During 
the time of enjoying rank and riches, they 
cannot endure insults and do not cultivate 
virtuous deeds. Power and influence will not 
last long and will soon disappear. The law of 
nature will prevail and will eventually set 
things right. 



"Trivial matters can develop into matters of great 
angst and extreme severity." This sentence is a 
general statement. "Trivial matters" refers to minor 
delusions. These will gradually become great evils 



284 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



if we do not awaken in time. Hatred very often 
starts as a very tiny trivial grudge. In "great angst 
and extreme severity," "angst" refers to tribulation 
and "severity" refers to harsh vengeance. 

We should see through this and not take things 
to heart. If in our interaction with others we suffer 
minor unjustified treatment, we should not take it 
too seriously, get attached to it, or mind it. We 
should absolutely not harbor any thought of 
vengeance. 

"This is all due to a desire for wealth, lust, and 
an unwillingness to give." This points out the root 
cause of the predicament of the beings in the Six 
Paths. In many of our past lifetimes, we learned 
Buddhism, chanted the Buddha-name, and made 
offerings to and served infinite Buddhas. Why have 
we not been able to attain rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land? Because we cannot let go! After 
infinite kalpas of cultivation, we are unable to suc- 
ceed, done in by wealth and lust. If we still cannot 
completely let go of them in this lifetime, we will 
continue to stay in the cycle of birth and death. 



285 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"Each one thinks of nothing but one's own en- 
joyment." One craves wealth. One is lustful. One 
does not practice giving. One fusses over one's en- 
joyment. 

One "disregards what is right or wrong." One 
cannot tell proper from improper, right from 
wrong, and good from bad. 

"People want to benefit themselves and com- 
pete for gains." They are selfish. They scramble for 
fame and gain. 

"The time of enjoying rank and riches" cannot 
last forever. Moreover, when one depletes one's 
wealth and prestige, evil karmas will come forth. 

"They cannot endure insults." If the rich and 
prestigious are moderate in their enjoyments and 
are frugal, their endurance will enable them to 
maintain their wealth. If they live thriftily and 
practice giving, their good fortune will last for a 
long time. Cultivating good fortune and accumulat- 
ing merits while enjoying one's wealth — this is the 
right thing to do. If they cannot restrain themselves 
and quickly deplete their wealth, their good for- 
tune will soon be used up. 



286 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



They "do not cultivate virtuous deeds." When 
people are in an environment where they are enjoy- 
ing a good life, it is very easy for them to be de- 
luded and thereby lose their true nature. They can- 
not restrain themselves and are unwilling to do 
good deeds. They commit offenses. 

"Power and influence will not last long." The 
time during which they can dominate others is very 
short. It "will soon disappear." 

"The law of nature will prevail and will eventu- 
ally set things right." "The law of nature" refers to 
principles of morality. "Will eventually set things 
right" refers to the ways of the world. "Set things 
right" is commonly known as feeling the prick of 
conscience. In Buddhism, this is called conscious- 
ness. 

Those who often do good deeds have minds 
and behavior that are virtuous. Those who often 
commit evil deeds have minds and behavior that 
are evil. Good deeds will bring about good retribu- 
tions; bad deeds will bring about bad retributions. 
Retributions will occur naturally. They are not con- 



287 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 

trolled by spirits, deities, God, Buddhas, or bo 
sattvas. Karmic results take place naturally. 



288 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty 

Honor the sages and respect the virtuous. 
Have compassion and loving-kindness. 



"Honor the sages and respect the virtuous." We 
should honor, admire, and emulate the sages of this 
world and beyond. We need to respect the people 
of virtue and good deeds in this world. We need to 
do our best to help others accomplish good deeds. 
"Respect" refers to innate virtues coming forth. 
This is true virtuous behavior. 

The Avatanuaka Sutra teaches us to rejoice at 
the meritorious deeds of others. The effect is to end 
our afflictions of jealousy, anger, and hatred from 
infinite kalpas. If we become jealous when we see a 
virtuous person or when we see a good deed, we 
are committing an offense. The Buddha taught us 
to be happy when we encounter good people and 
good acts. In addition, we should do our best to 
help a person accomplish his virtuous actions. 



289 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Helping others achieve goodness is the same as 
achieving our own goodness. Self and others are 
not two. When we rejoice at those who cultivate 
virtues and goodness, we will have the same kar- 
mic results. 

"Have compassion and loving-kindness." There 
are different types of compassion. In this world, 
people's compassion is based on love and is emo- 
tional. To those they like, they show compassion. 
To those they dislike, they do not show compas- 
sion. This kind of compassion is called love-affinity 
compaddion. It is based on worldly love. 

The compassion of bodhisattvas is called 
dbarma-affinity compaddion. The bodhisattvas know 
that all dharmas are equal. The compassion that 
one has for sentient beings should be the same that 
one has for oneself. This compassion is based on a 
profound and true principle. 

The compassion of Buddhas is called great com- 
paddion. It arises entirely from a pure mind, an im- 
partial mind, and a mind that knows everything is 
one entity. This is true compassion and loving- 
kindness. 



290 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



We must broaden our minds: everything in the 
entire Dharma Realm is ourselves. 

We should nurture a mind of compassion and 
loving-kindness. This is the source of true happi- 
ness. If we want happiness, the root is compassion 
and loving-kindness. We should put ourselves in 
the position of others. When we think of ourselves, 
we should also think of others and of all the beings 
in the universe. 



291 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty-one 

Rectify your mind. Rectify your behavior. 

Rectify your ears, eyes, mouth, and nose. 
Behavior and mind should be pure and clean, 

and accord with virtuousness. Do not let 
your leisure pursuits or desires take control. 

Do not commit any evil deed. Speech and 
facial expressions should be gentle. 
Cultivation should be focused. Body and eye 

movements should be calm and composed. 

Doing things in haste will result in failure 
and regret. 



This excerpt teaches us how to correct our wrong 
actions in daily life. There are many kinds of ac- 
tions. Generally, they are grouped into three cate- 
gories: physical, verbal, and mental. This passage 
teaches us that through body, speech, and mind, 
we correct our thoughts and behaviors. 



292 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



"Rectify your mind." "Your" shows that in the 
matter of cultivation, no one can do it for us— we 
need to make the effort to restrain ourselves in or- 
der to have any result. 

"Mind" refers to mental karma, thoughts, and 
thinking. They are the sources of all evils. The 
Buddha taught us to cultivate from the root. The 
root is the mind. "Rectify" means to correct. When 
the mind is not proper, we should immediately cor- 
rect it — be honorable and open. This is how we 
begin learning Buddhism. 

From the aspect of phenomena, a true Buddhist 
practitioner should have a mind of the utmost vir- 
tuousness. There is nothing that this person does in 
this lifetime which he or she cannot tell others. 
Sima Guang 40 in ancient China is a very good ex- 
ample. He was honest from childhood. Throughout 
his life, he did not do anything that he could not 
tell others. This was because his mind was proper, 
honorable, and open. He had nothing to hide. 



40 1019-1086. A scholar, historian, and politician of the Song 
dynasty. — Trans. 

293 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



But "rectify your mind" that the Buddha 
teaches here refers to a higher level state of mind. 
It refers to a pure mind. Evil pollutes the mind, but 
so does good. Both evil and good pollute the mind. 
Therefore, the good karmas lead to rebirth in the 
Three Good Paths and the evil karmas lead to re- 
birth in the Three Evil Paths. In other words, one 
cannot transcend the Six Paths. Only with a pure 
mind will one be able to transcend the Three 
Realms [Desire Realm, Form Realm, and Formless 
Realm. This also refers to the Six Paths.] With a 
pure mind in control, one's thoughts, words and 
deeds will all be pure. When the mind is proper, 
the six sense organs will naturally be proper. 

"Rectify your behavior. Rectify your ears, eyes, 
mouth, and nose." This talks about bodily behavior, 
about someone's demeanor. The mind of a begin- 
ning practitioner is easily affected by the external 
environment. This is why the Buddha taught be- 
ginners to start with observing the precepts and 
etiquette, and to gradually nurture a pure, sincere 
mind. When the mind is truly pure, the ears, eyes, 



294 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



mouth, and tongue, and body will naturally be set 
right. 

"Behavior and mind should be pure and clean, 
and accord with virtuousness." "Pure" describes 
the mind. "Clean" describes the body. The mind 
should be pure and the body should be clean. This 
is the key guiding principle. This sentence tells us 
the standard for cultivating one's moral character. 
It teaches us to constantly examine ourselves when 
a thought arises and to ensure that the body and 
mind are clean and pure. 

What kind of mind is a pure mind? When a 
mind has no wandering thoughts, it is pure. The 
standard for cultivating one's moral character is 
purity, which means no filth or pollution. 

"Virtuousness" here is not the good in good and 
bad. In our original nature, there is neither good 
nor bad. In a pure mind, there is also neither good 
nor bad. This is true virtuousness. 

Confucianism says "Attain utmost virtuousness. 
Utmost virtuousness is the original nature. When 
the body and mind move away from relativity, one 



295 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



will attain great freedom — true purity and upright- 
ness. 

"Do not let your leisure pursuits or desires take 
control." If we cannot let go of our outside interests 
and greed, no matter how well we clean the body 
we are not considered pure. 

"Do not commit any evil deed." Simply put, evil 
deeds are the Ten Evil Karmas: the physical kar- 
mas of killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct; the 
verbal karmas of harsh speech, divisive speech, 
false speech, and enticing speech; and the mental 
karmas of greed, anger, and ignorance. Not com- 
mitting evil deeds, cultivating the Ten Virtuous 
Karmas, and observing the Five Precepts — these 
accord with the Ten Virtuous Karmas. 

"Speech and facial expressions should be gen- 
tle." When we interact with others, our facial ex- 
pressions and words should have a sense of con- 
viviality. Analects says: "In practicing etiquette, 
harmony is paramount." A Chinese proverb says, 
"When there is harmony in a family, all undertak- 
ings will be successful." When there is harmony in 
a family, the family will definitely prosper. When 



296 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



there is harmony in a cultivation center, the proper 
teachings will be in this world. When there is har- 
mony between the government and populace of a 
nation, the country will prosper. When all the peo- 
ple in the world get along harmoniously, the world 
will be at peace, in Great Harmony. Harmony is 
very important! Where do we start? We start with 
ourselves. Our speech should be gentle, so should 
our facial expressions. 

"Cultivation should be focused." This is par- 
ticularly important. If we want to have any success, 
whether in worldly pursuits or in Buddhism, we 
should stay focused. When we learn many different 
things, our energy, strength, and time will be dis- 
persed. This is why the six major guidelines of 
bodhisattvas' practice tell us to be diligent [that is, 
making focused and diligent progress.] "Focused 
and diligent" means unadulterated. "Progress" 
means moving forward. Only when the learning is 
focused and unadulterated will we succeed. 

"Body and eye movements should be calm and 
composed." This is talking about one's demeanor. 
"Calm" refers to one's mind; one's mind should be 



297 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



serene. "Composed" means steady. It also means 
being unhurried and not rash. We should learn 
this. 

"Doing things in haste will result in failure and 
regret." People today are in a hurry and are impa- 
tient. In the past, one would feel regret when one 
did not succeed in one's studies, career, or cultiva- 
tion. People today do not have regrets. They think 
that they have no faults. With no faults, they natu- 
rally will have no regrets. 

We should calmly think about the Buddha's 
teaching. From morning till night, from the first 
day till the last day of the year, is there a day we do 
not make mistakes? We are just not aware of them. 
Being aware of our mistakes and faults is awaken- 
ing. Correcting our mistakes and faults is cultiva- 
tion. 



298 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty-two 

Extensively plant roots of virtue. Do not 
violate the precepts of the Way. Practice 
patience and diligence. Be compassionate and 
single-minded. 



"Extensively plant roots of virtue." "Plant" means 
to plant and nurture. As to "roots of virtue," for 
Mahayana bodhisattvas, the basis of all virtues is 
the Six Paramitas. For Theravada practitioners, it 
is the Three Learnings of precepts, meditative con- 
centration, and wisdom. For Pure Land practitio- 
ners, mindfully chanting the Buddha-name accords 
with Buddha — one uses the Buddha-name to 
awaken oneself and to make one's mind, vows, un- 
derstanding, and practice the same as those of 
Amitabha Buddha. The merit of the Buddha-name 
is completely revealed. It is the root of all virtues. 

One can sincerely chant the Buddha-name even 
if one is not familiar with the teachings or the prin- 



299 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ciples. Because one chants the Buddha-name, no 
wandering thoughts and attachments arise. One's 
mind is pure and clear. This also accords with the 
meaning of "roots of virtue." 

Simply put, everything in this world and be- 
yond is invariably about conditions. Conditions 
may be favorable or adverse. How do conditions 
come about? They are created by us, initiated by 
us. Buddhas and bodhisattvas constantly teach us 
to have a good heart, say kind words, and do good 
deeds. This is planting and nurturing roots of vir- 
tue. 

"Virtue" here refers to good fortune. One not 
only has to plant and nurture but do so extensively. 
When one broadens one's mind and practice, one's 
good fortune will be profound and great. Even in 
this corrupt and evil world, one will still be able to 
enjoy good fortune. Those who do not cultivate 
good fortune are the most miserable people in the 
world. They are pitiable! The truest, greatest, ulti- 
mate, and perfect good fortune is mindfully chant- 
ing the Buddha-name and seeking rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land. 



300 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The world is filled with suffering. What people 
drink is suffering and what they eat is poison. 
There is no solace, nor does it end. Even if one gets 
all the wealth and prestige that one wants — just 
like the effect of a cardiac stimulant being injected 
into a patient, a spark from a flint, or a flash of 
lightning — they will soon be gone. 

Besides, when people are enjoying their good 
fortune, committing transgressions is unavoidable. 
More often than not, the offenses they commit are 
more extensive than those committed by the poor. 

Hence, people should know to cultivate good 
fortune. 

"Do not violate the precepts of the Way." In a 
restricted sense, "precepts of the Way" refers to the 
precepts taught by the Buddha. We should be clear 
about what the Buddha taught us: what not to do, 
what not to say, and what thoughts not to have. In 
a broader sense, "precepts of the Way" encom- 
passes laws, customs, and taboos. We should not 
violate any of these. 

Also, for example, we should never go to other 
people's cultivation centers to post notices, hand 



301 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



out flyers, or get their followers to come to our 
cultivation center. These are all within the scope of 
"the precepts of the Way." In particular, we should 
not do these things at cultivation centers that give 
talks. 

"Practice patience and diligence." We should be 
patient and diligent in everything. If there is no pa- 
tience, there is no diligence. We should have en- 
durance when facing natural disasters. We should 
be even more patient in human relationships. 

When there is a group of people, there will be 
differences in views and thoughts on an issue. If 
every one of us has very stubborn attachments, 
conflict is inevitable. If we can each yield a little, 
the problem will be resolved. That is why it is said, 
"Under the heavens, there were originally no prob- 
lems." Give in, even just a little, and there will be 
no problems. Therefore, we should be patient and 
diligent. 

"Be compassionate and single-minded." "Com- 
passion" means that we need to have great compas- 
sion towards beings and help those who are suffer- 
ing by relieving their suffering and giving them 



302 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



happiness. What is the gravest suffering for people 
today? Being deluded and ignorant! If one is 
wrong about the truth of life and the universe in 
one's thoughts, views, speech, and deeds and yet 
still seeks to have good fortune, this is the gravest 
suffering! 

"Repay the Four Kinds of Kindness above, and 
relieve the suffering of those in the Three Paths 
below." This is our obligation. This is what we 
should do. How do we repay kindness? How do 
we save those who are suffering in the Three Paths 
below? What ability do we have to relieve the suf- 
fering of those in the Three Paths below? We do 
not have this ability! 

Relieving the suffering of those in the Three 
Paths below means that we should help people to- 
day who have created these karmic causes but have 
not yet fallen into the Three Evil Paths. We cannot 
do anything to help those who have fallen into the 
Three Evil Paths. Frankly, it is difficult to help 
those in the Three Evil Paths, even for Ksitigarbha 
Bodhisattva, let alone for us. 

Who will undergo suffering in The Three Evil 
Paths? Those who are heavily afflicted with greed, 
anger, or ignorance. Ignorant people cannot tell 
right from wrong, and are confused about proper 
and improper, and good and bad. This is the kar- 
mic cause for the animal path. 

In other words, when we see someone heavily 
afflicted with greed, anger, or ignorance, this is a 
person who will fall into the Three Evil Paths. We 
should do our best to help and remind this person, 
which will allow this person to awaken and reform 
on his own. This is great compassion. 

"Single-minded" refers to ourselves. It means to 
be One Mind Undisturbed. One should not only 
have One Mind Undisturbed as the goal of one's 
daily routine practice, one's mind should also be 
undisturbed at all times, in all places, and when- 
ever one is helping others. One's mind should still 
be undisturbed when one is applying great com- 
passion, repaying kindness, and relieving suffering. 

If one's mind is disturbed when helping others, 
one should stop helping and just chant the 



304 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Buddha- name diligently and unquestioningly. One 
is not at fault in doing so. 

The Surangama Sutra says: "If you can change 
the environment, then you are the same as the 
Thus Come One." If one is able to change the envi- 
ronment and be unaffected by it, then one has the 
ability to help others. If one does not have this abil- 
ity, one should first cultivate oneself, seeking to 
achieve in cultivation, before helping others to 
change. This is very important! 

Some bodhisattvas generate the great mind of 
helping others before they achieve in their own cul- 
tivation. They can do so because their minds are 
focused and are not affected by the environment. 
They do not change according to the environment. 
Not achieving in their own cultivation means not 
attaining Buddhahood, but they are able to become 
arhats or bodhisattvas. If in helping others, we still 
fall into the Three Evil Paths, then this is wrong. 

We should learn diligently and should not mis- 
understand the teachings in the sutras. 



305 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty-three 

Only in this world are there little good and 
plenty of evil. What people drink is suffering 
and what they eat is poison. There is no 
peace or ending. 



"This world" refers to the Saha world. An evil 
world of the Five Corruptions — this is what our 
present society is. In today's society, there is little 
good and a lot of evil. Everyone can see this. 

"What people drink is suffering and what they 
eat is poison. There is no peace or ending." Food is 
essential to us ordinary beings in the Six Paths. 
But what are we consuming today? Suffering and 
poison. 

Great Master Yinguang earnestly urged us to 
maintain a vegetarian diet. Why? 

Generally when people are angry, their sweat is 
poisonous. Therefore, anger and hatred are poi- 
sons. When anger or hatred arises, every part of 



306 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



the body is filled with poisonous liquid. In the past, 
there was a woman who breast-fed her baby when 
she was angry. The baby died after a few days, poi- 
soned by the milk. 

Let's look at animals. When an animal is being 
killed by a human, would it be very happy about 
it? No. It is just that the animal is unable to resist! 
In addition, with extreme anger, how can it not be- 
come poisonous? Therefore, when one eats meat 
over a long period of time, poison will accumulate 
in one's body. When the poison takes effect, one 
will have strange diseases. As it is said, "Illness en- 
ters through the mouth." If we wish for good 
health and longevity, we should start to have a 
vegetarian diet. This is very important. Frankly, 
there are also toxins in vegetarian food: there are 
pesticides in vegetables. But a vegetarian diet is 
still better than a meat diet because it is less toxic. 



307 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty-four 

To your elders and juniors, men and women, 

family members, and friends, you should 
impart my teachings. Discipline and reflect 
upon yourself. Be in harmony and conform 

with justice and truth. Be happy, 
compassionate, and filial. If your action is a 
transgression, feel remorse about the offense. 
Eradicate evil and cultivate virtue. When you 
learn about a fault of yours in the morning, 
correct it by evening. 

"To your elders and juniors, men and women, fam- 
ily members, and friends, you should impart my 
teachings." 

"Elders" refers to our parents or seniors. "Jun- 
iors" refers to our children, nephews and nieces, or 
anyone younger than ourselves. "Men and women, 
family members, and friends" refers to our rela- 



308 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



tives, from our family to the family clan, and then 
to distant relatives and friends. 

When we follow the Buddha's teachings, prac- 
tice accordingly, and receive the true, wondrous 
benefits of Buddhism, we should also do our best 
to introduce Buddhism to others and urge them to 
learn. When they benefit from the learning, they 
will also teach others. This way, we will truly repay 
the kindness of the Buddha. Urge and encourage 
others to learn this true teaching. Introduce and 
recommend it to a town, a city, a country, and even 
the world. Then society will be in harmony and the 
world will be at peace. 

Great Master Yinguang once held a "Protecting 
the Country and Averting Disasters Dharma 
Ceremony" in Shanghai. He clearly explained how 
to protect the country and avert disasters — mind- 
fully chant the Buddha-name and maintain a vege- 
tarian diet. When everyone maintains a vegetarian 
diet and mindfully chants the Buddha- name, disas- 
ters will naturally be averted and the country will 
naturally be protected. Therefore, we should 
spread this teaching to the whole world. This is 



309 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



truly repaying the Four Kinds of Kindness above, 
and relieving the suffering of those in the Three 
Paths below. This is protecting the world and 
eliminating disasters. 

There are many ways to spread the Buddha's 
teachings. For example, one could print the sutras 
and give them to others or circulate cassette tapes, 
video tapes, CDs, and video discs on Dharma lec- 
tures. One does one's best to help others. As for 
oneself, one should sincerely chant the Buddha- 
name and seek rebirth in the Western Pure Land. 
But one should not force others to have the same 
aspiration. One only needs to help others to (1) 
have a good heart, (2) say kind words, (3) do good 
deeds, and (4) have a happy family. 

"Discipline and reflect upon yourself. Be in 
harmony and conform with justice and truth. Be 
happy, compassionate, and filial." These words are 
well said. They are not only for our cultivation. 
When introducing Buddhism to others, we should 
teach not only with words but also with exemplary 
behavior. If we teach only with words but cannot 
practice what we teach, others may not believe us 



310 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



or accept the teachings. We must truly practice the 
teachings so as to really help others build confi- 
dence. 

"Discipline and reflect upon yourself." One's 
thoughts, spoken words, and behavior should ac- 
cord with the teachings in the sutras. One should 
discipline oneself and reflect on one's behavior and 
thoughts. 

"Be in harmony and conform with justice and 
truth." One should be amiable and get along har- 
moniously with others. "Harmony" refers to the 
Six Harmonies. "Conform" refers to being in ac- 
cordance with all beings. Harmony and conformity 
should not be based on emotions but on justice and 
truth. There is a principle that one should follow 
when one accords with others: while according 
with others, one should inspire and change them. If 
one cannot help others awaken and reform, one 
should not indulge them. 

"Be happy, compassionate, and filial." Children 
should be filial to their parents, and parents should 
love their children. The family will be happy. This 
is the foundation. Families make up a society. So- 



311 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



cieties make up a country. Countries make up the 
world. Therefore, we should know that the origin 
of happiness is family. 

Happiness is also the most basic requirement in 
one's interacting with others and engaging in tasks. 
As the Mahayana sutras say: wherever bodhisatt- 
vas go, they make all beings happy. The bodhisatt- 
vas absolutely do not have any thought of, let alone 
commit any act of, harming others. This is why 
they are happy, and so is everyone else. 

"Compassion" is impartial and pure. All of 
Buddha's teachings are developed from filial piety. 
In Buddhism, filial piety, since the past, has no be- 
ginning and into the future, has no end. It extends 
through time in the three time periods and through 
space in the ten directions. The entire universe is 
oneself. It is one entity. 

"If your action is a transgression, feel remorse 
about the offense. Eradicate evil and cultivate vir- 
tue. When you learn about a fault in the morning, 
correct it by evening." 

"As people are not sages, how can they be fault- 
less? When a person becomes aware of a fault and 



312 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



corrects it, there is no virtue greater than this." 
[This Confucian quote tells us that] the greatest 
virtue is correcting faults, which is the teaching of 
the sages. If one is aware of one's faults, one is 
awakened. Cultivation is correcting one's faults, 
and correcting one's faults is cultivation. Being 
aware of one's faults is awakening, and correcting 
one's faults is true cultivation. When our thoughts, 
views, spoken words, and behavior are wrong, we 
should repent. Repentance is not about seeking the 
forgiveness of Buddhas and bodhisattvas. Rather, 
sincerely admit one's wrongdoings, completely cor- 
rect them, and never make the same mistakes 
again. 

"Eradicate evil and cultivate virtue. When you 
learn about a fault of yours in the morning, correct 
it by evening." This describes truly regretting one's 
mistakes. One should awaken quickly and correct 
one's faults quickly. When one realizes a fault, one 
should correct it immediately. 



313 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty-five 

Correct your past wrongs and cultivate good 

karma for your future. Cleanse your mind 
and change your behavior. You will naturally 
receive a response. Your wishes will 
be fulfilled. 

This excerpt talks about the saying: "In Buddhism, 
every sincere request will receive a response." 

"Correct your past wrongs and cultivate good 
karma for the future. Cleanse your mind and 
change your behavior." This teaches us how to 
seek. If we seek according to the truth and the 
teachings, our wish will be fulfilled. If our seeking 
is unreasonable and unlawful, our wish, as ex- 
pected, will not come to fruition. How can we seek 
within the truth and the teachings? "Correct your 
past wrongs and cultivate good karma for the fu- 
ture" is to accord with the teachings. "Cleanse your 



314 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



mind and change your behavior" is to accord with 
the truth. 

Correct bad habits to end all wrongdoings and 
cultivate virtuous deeds— this is to "cultivate good 
karma for the future." For the future, we should 
cultivate diligently. This is from the aspect of phe- 
nomena. 

"Cleanse your mind and change your behavior." 
This is from the aspect of the truth. The mind con- 
tains afflictions, wandering thoughts, and attach- 
ments. These are defilements that need to be re- 
moved in order to restore a pure mind. "Behavior" 
refers to actions — the physical actions of killing, 
stealing, and sexual misconduct, and the verbal ac- 
tions of false speech, divisive speech, and so on, 
and other bad behaviors. 

When our mind, thoughts, and views are not 
pure, we use "Amituofo" — the method of having 
belief, vow, and chanting the Buddha- name — to 
cleanse our mind and change our behavior. When 
we use the method of ending wrongdoings and 
practicing virtuous conduct, it is correcting our 



315 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



past wrongs and cultivating good karma for the 
future. 

"You will naturally receive a response. Your 
wishes will be fulfilled." If we practice in this way, 
we will naturally receive a response and our wish 
will be fulfilled. 

Therefore, when we learn Buddhism, we must 
accord with the truth and the teachings, and not 
seek extraordinary powers or any response. As 
long as we cultivate the causes according to the 
teachings, we will reap what we sow — this princi- 
ple is definite. A Chinese proverb says, "Just focus 
on farming. Do not ask what you will harvest. " 



316 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty-six 

Wherever the Buddha goes, whether to a 
country, a city, or a village, people will be 
moved and will benefit. All the lands will be 
enveloped in peace and harmony. The sun 
and moon will shine clear and bright. Wind 
and rain will come when needed. Disasters 
and epidemics will not occur. The country 
will flourish and the people will enjoy peace. 
There will be no need for soldiers or 
weapons. Virtue will be revered and 
benevolence will be promoted. People will 
practice courtesy and humility. There will be 
no thieves or robbers in the country. There 
will be neither injustice nor resentment. The 
strong will not dominate the weak. Everyone 
will naturally get their fair reward. 

"Wherever the Buddha goes, whether to a country, 
a city, or a village, people will be moved and will 

317 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



benefit." "The Buddha" here refers to the Buddha's 
teachings. "Goes" refers to implementation. 
"Wherever the Buddha goes" refers to the places 
where the Buddha's teachings are implemented. 
From a place as large as a country to a place as 
small as a village, if the people there truly practice 
the Buddha's teachings, they will change for the 
better. Those who receive the Buddha's teachings 
will have a change in disposition, go from being 
evil to being virtuous, from being defiled to being 
pure, and from being improper to being proper. 
This is the achievement from implementing the 
Buddha's teachings. 

"All the lands will be enveloped in peace and 
harmony." "Peace" means to acquiesce and not go 
against. Specifically, it means that people under- 
stand and accord with the teachings. When every- 
one abides by and follows the laws, society will 
naturally be harmonious. 

"The sun and moon will shine clear and bright. 
Wind and rain will come when needed. Disasters 
and epidemics will not occur." These describe the 



318 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



presence of favorable climatic, geographical, and 
social conditions. 

Nowadays, natural disasters occur more and 
more frequently around the world. It is worthwhile 
for us to reflect deeply on this. Where do disasters 
come from? The Buddha said: "Dependent re- 
wards change according to proper rewards." 
Proper rewards refers to the human mind. De- 
pendent rewards refers to the environment. When 
the human mind is good, wind and rain will come 
as they are needed. When the human mind is not 
good, disasters will occur frequently. Therefore, if 
we can accept the Buddha's teachings and practice 
accordingly, it is certain that "the sun and the moon 
will shine clear and bright, and wind and rain will 
come when needed." 

In Chinese history, we read that when there 
was a major disaster in the nation, the emperor 
would cleanse his mind of impurities, abstain from 
all enjoyments, and maintain a vegetarian diet. He 
would seriously reflect on himself, "What faults do 
I have? Why has such a major disaster occurred?" 
When a disaster occurred, the emperor reflected on 



319 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



himself, thought about his faults, diligently ended 
wrongdoings, practiced virtuous conduct, cor- 
rected his wrong ways, and made a fresh start, all 
in the hope of changing the will of Heaven. This 
makes sense. This is absolutely not superstitious 
action. It is very rational. 

If everyone accepts the Buddha's teachings and 
practices accordingly, cleansing one's mind and 
changing one's behavior, all the lands will naturally 
be harmonious and peaceful. 

Only after people live in harmony, will we have 
a favourable climate. Then nature will also be har- 
monious and peaceful. "The sun and the moon will 
shine clear and bright. Wind and rain will come 
when needed." 

During Great Master Lianchi's lifetime, there 
was a drought one year in Hangzhou. The gover- 
nor of Hangzhou requested Great Master Lianchi 
to pray for rain for the local people. Great Master 
Lianchi said, "I do not know how to pray for rain. I 
only know Buddha-name chanting." But since 
praying for rain was for the benefit of the public, 
he had to do his best. Playing an instrument called 



320 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



a wood fid h and leading the followers, he walked in 
the fields, mindfully chanting "Amituofo." As it is 
said, "Sincerity will receive a response." A pure, 
sincere mind will naturally obtain a response. In- 
deed, it rained wherever the great master walked! 
This is a wondrous benefit from truly learning and 
practicing according to the Buddha's teachings. 
This is also the best proof. 

"The country will flourish and the people will 
enjoy peace." "Flourish" means that manufactured 
goods and food are abundant. People will have 
sufficient food and clothing, so body and mind will 
be at peace, and everyone will be at ease and 
happy. 

"There will be no need for soldiers or weap- 
ons." There will be no wars. 

"Virtue will be revered and benevolence will be 
promoted." "Virtue" is morality. "Revered" means 
to respect and follow. "Benevolence" means putting 
oneself in others' positions: "Do not do to others 
what you would not want to be done to you." 
When everyone praises morality highly, and abides 



321 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



by laws and follows rules of conduct, society will 
naturally be peaceful. 

"People will practice courtesy and humility. 
There will be no thieves or robbers in the country. 
There will be neither injustice nor resentment." 
These are the few requirements in terms of human 
affairs that must be fulfilled for families to be 
happy societies to be harmonious, and countries to 
be prosperous. "Courtesy" means that people re- 
spect and yield to one another. Social order will 
naturally be good. As it is said, "No doors are shut 
at night." 41 "There will be neither injustice nor re- 
sentment" means that judicial trials are fair. 

"The strong will not dominate the weak." This 
sentence means that everyone is able to respect one 
another regardless of status, wealth, or academic 
achievement. 

"People will naturally get their fair reward." 
Everyone will be happy with their roles. 



From Great Learning. — Trans. 

322 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty-seven 

Ajita, you should know that doubt and 
delusion will do bodhisattvas great harm and 
cause them to lose great benefit. Therefore, 
you should understand and believe the 
supreme wisdom of all Buddhas. 



"Ajita" is Maitreya Bodhisattva. At the discourse 
on the Infinite Life Sutra, there were two primary 
beneficiaries: Elder Ananda in the first part of the 
discourse and Maitreya Bodhisattva in the latter 
part. The significance of this is very profound. As 
Maitreya Bodhisattva will be the next Buddha in 
this world, the Buddha exhorted him, that when he 
attained Buddhahood in the future, to be sure to 
speak the Infinite Life Sutra and to urge people to 
mindfully chant the Buddha-name and seek rebirth 
in the Western Pure Land. 

"You should know that doubt and delusion will 
do bodhisattvas great harm and cause them to lose 



323 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



great benefit." "Doubt" refers to having doubts 
about the Dharma door of seeking rebirth in the 
Pure Land — of "belief, vow, and mindfully chant- 
ing the Buddha-name." Consequently, this loss is 
too immense. For example, if a bodhisattva believes 
in "belief, vow, and mindfully chanting the 
Buddha- name," sincerely chants "Amituofo," and 
seeks rebirth in the Pure Land, he will attain 
Buddhahood in one lifetime. He does not need to 
go through three asamkheya kalpas. 42 This is why 
here the Buddha said that not believing the Pure 
Land method is an immense loss. 

We usually do not have true confidence in 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas. We still have doubts. 
Although we learn Buddhism, we continue to con- 
sult with fortune-tellers and feng shui experts. This 
means that we do not have confidence in Buddhas 
and bodhisattvas. Our minds are contaminated 
with impurities. The loss is enormous. The purpose 



Since asamkheya means uncountable, exact measurements 
of time are not known. But some common values are 10 51 , 
10 59 , and 10 63 years. — Trans. 



324 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



of learning Buddhism is to seek a pure mind — One 
Mind Undisturbed. 

"Therefore, you should understand and believe 
the supreme wisdom of all Buddhas." The three 
Pure Land sutras contain the teachings of being 
mindful of Buddha and seeking rebirth in the 
Western Pure Land. We will still not completely 
understand this even if we have the help of the 
Buddhas' causal vows. 

In this lifetime, we have encountered the Pure 
Land method. If we can truly believe and vow to 
seek rebirth in the Western Pure Land, then this is 
supreme wisdom. Not only is our wisdom supreme, 
our good fortune is also supreme. If we do not have 
the highest wisdom and good fortune, we will not 
practice this method. 



325 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty-eight 

The Buddha said: "They plant the good roots, 

and they are unable to detach from form. 
They do not seek the Buddha's wisdom. They 
are deeply attached to worldly pleasures and 
the good fortune of the human world. 
Although they repeatedly cultivate good 
fortune, the rewards they seek are in the 
human and heavenly paths. When they 
obtain the rewards, everything will be 
abundant, but they are unable to leave the 
prison of the Three Realms." 

"The Buddha said: They plant the good roots, and 
they are unable to detach from form.'" This is culti- 
vation with attachment to form. When one has 
wandering thoughts, discriminations, and attach- 
ments, and aspires to do good deeds, one will re- 
ceive good rewards in the future. But having the 



326 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



thought of seeking the good fortune of the human 
and heavenly paths is a great obstacle. 

"They do not seek the Buddha's wisdom." 
"Buddha's wisdom" is mentioned in the previous 
excerpt: "You should understand and believe the 
supreme wisdom of all Buddhas." To seek the 
Buddha's wisdom is to seek rebirth in the Western 
Pure Land. The Pure Land is "the supreme wis- 
dom of all Buddhas." 

True wisdom is not to be sought. 43 It is the 
complete understanding of everything. When the 
Buddha taught all beings, he answered questions as 
they were raised, without thinking or contemplat- 
ing the answer. This is because true wisdom is the 
innate ability of the true nature. It is innate in the 
true nature and is not acquired from learning. This 
is why Ashvaghosha Bodhisattva taught us to be 
free of the mark of speech, the mark of terms, and 
the mark of mental cognition. 

43 Wisdom comes by letting go of attachments, discrimina- 
tions, and wandering thoughts. From deep concentration, 
wisdom arises. It cannot be sought by thinking that one 
wants wisdom. The thought about seeking wisdom is a wan- 
dering thought. — Trans. 

327 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Being free of the mark of speech means not be- 
ing attached to the words when one listens to the 
lectures on the sutras. Being free of the mark of 
terms means not being attached to terminology. 
Being free of the mark of mental cognition means 
not using the sixth consciousness to think and con- 
template. 

Listening to lectures on the sutras without be- 
ing attached to the mark of speech, the mark of 
terms, and the mark of mental cognition is cultivat- 
ing meditative concentration. Listening clearly and 
understanding perfectly is cultivating wisdom. Lis- 
tening to the lectures on the sutras in this way is 
the simultaneous practice of meditative concentra- 
tion and wisdom. 

"They are deeply attached to worldly pleas- 
ures." Being deeply attached to worldly pleasures 
is a hindrance that arises from afflictions. One is 
deeply attached to the Five Desires and the Six 
Dusts, and to riches and honor and is unwilling to 
let go of them. "Not seeking the Buddha's wisdom" 
is a hindrance that arises from the attachment to 



328 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



knowledge. These two hindrances are extremely 
serious. 

"Although they repeatedly cultivate good for- 
tune, the rewards they seek are in the human and 
heavenly paths." This is saying that if one truly ob- 
serves the precepts and practices goodness, one 
will have the karmic result of being reborn in the 
human or heavenly path. If one practices good 
deeds but transgresses the precepts, one will have 
the karmic result of being reborn in the Three Evil 
Paths. 

When one who practices good deeds but trans- 
gresses the precepts is reborn in the path of hungry 
ghosts, one will be a king of the ghosts or a deity. 
Generally the spirits that the Chinese people wor- 
ship have great influence, are rich, powerful, and 
have many followers. If one is reborn in the animal 
path, one will be a pet in a wealthy family and en- 
joy good fortune in that path. These are examples 
of those who cultivate good fortune but transgress 
the precepts. 

"When they obtain the rewards, everything will 
be abundant." When one receives the good fortune 



329 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



in the human and heavenly paths, one may be a 
high government official, a general, or belong to a 
rich family. But which one of them has not created 
negative karmas or wronged people since ancient 
times? When one uses up one's good fortune, one 
will probably go to the Three Evil Paths in the next 
lifetime. Even if one does not go to the Three Evil 
Paths, one will not be that rich in the human path. 
Each lifetime will become worse and worse than 
the previous one. 

When we realize this, how can we not go to the 
Western Pure Land? 

When we look at the conduct and actions of the 
powerful or influential people in today's society, 
then we know that we do not want to come back to 
this human world again. If we do come to the hu- 
man path again, we should come as a Buddha or a 
bodhisattva manifested as a being. If we do not 
come as a Buddha or a bodhisattva manifested as a 
being, it is still karmic retribution — this is terrible! 

We should be constantly vigilant: enjoying the 
good fortune in the human path is very frightening, 
but enjoying the good fortune in the heavenly path 



330 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



is not the ultimate either. Although there are few 
opportunities for us to commit evil deeds in 
heaven, we will still fall into a lower path when the 
good fortune is used up. As it is stated in the Lotud 
Sutra: "There is no peace in the Three Realms, just 
like a house on fire." 



331 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Fifty-nine 

There are beings who plant good roots and 
create immense fields of good fortune. But 
they hold on to form, discriminate, and have 
a deep and strong attachment to feelings. 
They seek to transcend samsara but 
ultimately will be unable to do so. 

The previous excerpt talks about people who "are 
unable to detach from form. They do not seek the 
Buddha's wisdom." This excerpt talks about those 
who "hold on to form, discriminate, and have a 
deep and strong attachment to feelings." This is a 
criterion for cultivation — if one commits all these, 
one will not be able to transcend the Three Realms. 
At most, one will only enjoy imperfect good fortune 
in the Three Realms. In this world, one who has 
great wealth or prestige is one who cultivated in 
past lifetimes but was unable to eliminate attach- 



332 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ment to feelings. Consequently, one obtains their 
good fortune in the human and heavenly paths. 

Therefore, if one truly learns and practices 
Buddhism and wants to transcend samsara, one 
must correct one's past wrongs and cultivate good 
karma for one's future, and cleanse one's mind and 
change one's behavior. Whether one does a good 
deed, great or small, one absolutely should not hold 
on to form, discriminate, or even be attached to it. 
One should always maintain a pure mind, always 
be mindful of Amitabha Buddha, and seek rebirth 
in the Pure Land — everything else should be 
cleansed. 

In "create immense fields of good fortune," 
"create" is more wondrous than "plant." "Plant" 
means that one plants the field alone. "Create" 
means that one allows all beings to come and plant. 

For example, giving wealth and possessions 
and making offerings to the Three Jewels are fields 
of good fortune. If we build a cultivation center, we 
"create immense fields of good fortune," as we al- 
low many beings to come and plant good fortune. 



333 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The larger the cultivation center, the greater the 
field of good fortune. 

Another example is being filial and providing 
for parents — this is a field of good fortune. If we 
run a retirement home, this is also to "create im- 
mense fields of good fortune." 

Charitable undertakings like these are great 
fields of good fortune. We should sincerely and 
wholeheartedly engage in these undertakings, but 
we should not "hold on to form, discriminate." 
Otherwise, we will not be able to handle things 
fairly and our minds will not be pure. 

Having impure minds and handling things un- 
fairly—doing good deeds this way, ultimately, we 
will not be able to succeed in seeking to transcend 
samsara. 



334 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



Excerpt Sixty 

Be filial to the Buddha and be constantly 
mindful of the teachers' kindness. Let this 
teaching stay in this world for the longest 
time and do not let it die out. Firmly uphold 
it and do not let it be destroyed or lost. 

"Be filial to the Buddha." What do we do to be filial 
to the Buddha? We follow his teachings and prac- 
tice accordingly. If our minds, vows, understand- 
ing, practices, and virtues are the same as those of 
the Buddha and we become one with him, this is 
being filial to the Buddha. 

The Avatarruaka Sutra says: "Sentient and non- 
sentient beings all have the same Buddha- wisdom." 
This is the showing of filial piety being practiced to 
perfection. In this sutra, filial piety is an impartial 
mind and an awakened mind. When one has dis- 
criminations and attachments, one is not impartial. 
When one is free of all discriminations and attach- 



335 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



ments, the entire Dharma Realm will be one entity. 
At that time, the pure Dharma Body will manifest. 
Filial piety arises therefrom. Phenomenally filial 
piety is an impartial, greatly compassionate mind. 
Great wisdom and great compassion are filial piety 
at work. 

One should "be constantly mindful of the 
teachers' kindness." "Teachers" refers to good 
teachers. After the Buddha entered parinirvana, 
the past patriarchs and eminent masters passed 
down the Buddha's teachings. Thus, we are able to 
hear the Dharma. Therefore, we should be con- 
stantly mindful of the kindness of the Buddha and 
the past great teachers who passed down the 
Dharma. 

How do we repay their kindness? By practicing 
the teachers' teachings and propagating them ex- 
tensively! This is repaying the teachers' kindness. 

The Buddha's original vow teaches us "to pro- 
vide all manner of sentient beings the benefit of es- 
caping the long night 44 and not let them fall into 

44 "Long night" refers to cycle of rebirth and death within the 
Five Paths. There are sufferings in the Five Paths. — Trans. 

336 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



the five paths of rebirth and undergo sufferings." 
We should wholeheartedly and diligently put in 
our utmost effort to fulfill this. 

"Let this teaching stay in this world for the 
longest time and do not let it die out" This action 
truly fulfills filial piety to the Buddha and mindful- 
ness of the teachers' kindness. "Let this teaching 
stay in this world for the longest time and do not 
let it die out" also refers specifically to the Dharma 
door of mindfully chanting the Buddha-name and 
seeking rebirth in the Western Pure Land as taught 
in this sutra. We should diligently practice it and 
do our best to propagate it so that it will not die 
out. 

"Firmly uphold it." We should firmly hold on to 
our belief and vow and diligently propagate the 
Buddha's teachings. 

There are two ways to look at "not let it be de- 
stroyed or lost." The first: we misunderstand the 
teachings, so our learning and practice do not ac- 
cord with the teachings. The teachings are thus de- 
stroyed and lost. 



337 



ESSENCE OF THE INFINITE LIFE SUTRA 



The second is that we use our worldly intelli- 
gence and do not propagate the teachings accord- 
ing to the true Dharma. As a result, the people who 
listen misunderstand the teachings, and they can- 
not attain rebirth in the Western Pure Land. This 
is also destroying and losing the teachings. 

Therefore, we should learn and practice ac- 
cording to the Buddha's teachings. We should also 
propagate the Dharma in accordance with how the 
Buddha taught us. In this way, we will not cause 
the Buddhas' and patriarchs' teachings to be de- 
stroyed or lost by us. 

This Dharma assembly comes to a perfect com- 
pletion now. 



338 



May the merits and virtues 
accrued from this work 
adorn the Buddha's Pure Land, 
repay the Four Kinds of Kindness above, 
and relieve the sufferings of those 
in the Three Paths below. 

May all those who see and hear of this 
bring forth the heart 
of understanding and compassion, 
and at the end of this life, 
be born together 
in the Land of Ultimate Bliss. 



For a list of 
Amitabha Buddhist Societies 
and 

Pure Land Centers 
please visit 
www.purelandcollege. org. au 

This book is 
compliments of 