the record of

LINJI

translation and
commentary by

Ruth Fuller Sasaki
edited by

Thomas Yūhō Kirchner

the record of linji

NANZAN LIBRARY
OF ASIAN RELIGION
AND CULTURE

editorial advisory board
James W. Heisig
Okuyama Michiaki
Paul L. Swanson
Watanabe Manabu
Nanzan Institute for Religion and Culture
Hayashi Makoto
Aichi Gakuin University
Thomas Kasulis
Ohio State University

James W. Heisig & John Maraldo, eds., Rude Awakenings: Zen, the Kyoto School, &
the Question of Nationalism (1995)
Jamie Hubbard & Paul L. Swanson, eds., Pruning the Bodhi Tree: The Storm over
Critical Buddhism (1997)
Mark R. Mullins, Christianity Made in Japan: A Study of Indigenous Movements
(1998)
Jamie Hubbard, Absolute Delusion, Perfect Buddhahood: The Rise and Fall of a Chinese Heresy (2001)
James W. Heisig, Philosophers of Nothingness: An Essay on the Kyoto School (2001)
Victor Sōgen Hori, Zen Sand: The Book of Capping Phrases for Kōan Practice
(2003)
Robert J. J. Wargo, The Logic of Nothingness: A Study of Nishida Kitarō (2005)
Paul L. Swanson & Clark Chilson, eds., Nanzan Guide to Japanese Religions (2006)
Ruth Fuller Sasaki, trans. and commentator, and Thomas Yūhō Kirchner, ed., The
Record of Linji (2009)

The Record of Linji

translation and commentary by

Ruth Fuller Sasaki
edited by

Thomas Yūhō Kirchner

University of Hawai‘i Press

honolulu

© 2009 University of Hawai‘i Press
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
14 13 12 11 10 09   6 5 4 3 2 1

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Yixuan, d. 867.
[Linji lu. English & Chinese]
The record of Linji / translation and commentary by Ruth Fuller Sasaki ; edited by
Thomas Yuho Kirchner.
   p. cm.
Includes original Chinese text.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8248-2821-9 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN 978-0-8248-3319-0 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Linji (Sect)—Early works to 1800. 2. Zen Buddhism—Early works to 1800.
3. Yixuan, d. 867. Linji lu. I. Sasaki, Ruth Fuller, 1892–1967. II. Kirchner, Thomas
Yuho. III. Title.
BQ9399.I554L5513 2008
294.3'85—dc22
2008028329

The typesetting of this book was done by the Nanzan Institute
for Religion and Culture.
University of Hawai‘i Press books are printed on acid-free
paper and meet the guidelines for permanence and
durability of the Council on Library Resources.
Printed by The Maple-Vail Book Manufacturing Group

Contents

Foreword, by Yamada Mumon
Preface to the 1975 Edition, by Furuta Kazuhiro
Editor’s Prologue

vii
ix
xiii

Abbreviations

xxxi

The Record of Linji, translated by Ruth Fuller Sasaki

1

Discourses 3
Critical Examinations 34
Record of Pilgrimages 42
Preface to the Recorded Sayings of Chan Master
Linji Huizhao of Zhenzhou 54
Historical Introduction and Commentary

57

Historical Introduction to The Record of Linji,
by Yanagida Seizan 59
Commentary, by Ruth Fuller Sasaki 117
Chinese Text

347

The Linji lu in Chinese 349
Bibliography

365

List of Personal Names

437

Cumulative Index

451

v

Foreword
Yamada Mumon 山田無文

Indian Buddhism is distinctly contemplative, quietistic, and
inclined to speculative thought. By contrast, Chinese Buddhism is practical
and down-to-earth, active, and in a sense transcendental at the same time.
This diﬀerence reﬂects, I believe, the national characters of the two peoples.
Zen, the name given to the Buddhism the ﬁrst Zen patriarch Bodhidharma
brought with him to China when he came from India, proved well suited to
the Chinese mentality, and achieved a remarkable growth and development
in its new environment. An Indian would no doubt ﬁnd incredible the Chinese Zen master Baizhang’s famous saying, “A day of no work is a day of no
eating.”
The lines, “One ﬂower opens ﬁve petals / The fruit naturally ripen,” traditionally attributed to Bodhidharma, are said to foretell the branching oﬀ of
the ﬁve Zen schools that later appeared in China. These schools—the Yunmen, Guiyang, Linji, Fayan, and Caodong—derive their names from their
founders, and their overall complexions also are traceable to the respective
personalities of those men. Zen attaches the highest importance to each
person’s particular individuality, even as it concerns itself with that person’s
universality. The Linji or Rinzai school of Zen begins in the ﬁgure of the
Tang priest Linji Yixuan (J. Rinzai Gigen). The Linji lu, in Japanese the Rinzai
roku, is the record of his words and deeds.
Rinzai Zen is distinguished from the other Zen schools by its brusque
and somewhat martial disposition. Its central concern is “the person who
is master in all places,” whose eﬀortless activity is a giving and taking away,
creating and annihilating absolutely at will, with the “sword that kills, and the
sword that gives life.” This is one reason the school has been given the label
“Shōgun Zen,” and no doubt also accounts for the great success it enjoyed in
the past among the samurai classes of Japan.
Nishida Kitarō, the greatest Japanese philosopher of modern times and
Editor’s note: Yamada Mumon’s Foreword and Furuta Kazuhiro’s Preface have been
reprinted in close to their original form, but with some sections retranslated and with the
Chinese names changed from Wade-Giles to Pinyin.

vii

viii | f o r e w o r d

lifelong friend of the late Suzuki Daisetz, held the Linji lu in special regard.
He once wrote, “If there should come a time when books were to disappear
from the earth, or I was banished to some bookless land, it would be enough
for me if I had only Shinran’s Tannishō and the Linji lu.”
I believe that Zen, particularly Rinzai Zen, has a signiﬁcant role in the
present world. Modern people are adrift amid the great confusion and
uncertainty of contemporary life. The Linji lu can give us a foundation on
which to construct a new and powerful view of human existence.
It thus gives me great joy to know that with the appearance of this ﬁrst
English translation of the Linji lu, this Zen classic will be available more than
ever before to readers throughout the world.
Kyoto, Institute for Zen Studies

Preface to the 1975 Edition
Furuta Kazuhiro 古田和弘

The Linji lu (J. Rinzai roku) consists of the recorded sayings of
Linji Yixuan (d. 866), the founder of the Linji school of Chan (Zen) Buddhism, which emerged toward the end of the Tang dynasty (618–907). Linji’s
lifetime coincided with the declining years of the mighty Tang empire, when
Chinese society was in a state of great turmoil.
Buddhism, initially transmitted to China in the ﬁrst century, gradually
became more Sinified from the fourth century on. During the sixth and
seventh centuries—the Sui (581–618) and early Tang dynasties—a systematic
organization of the Buddhist teaching took place, reaching a peak in the philosophical structures of the Tiantai, Sanlun, Huayan, Faxiang, and Jingtu (Pure
Land) schools.
Linji shook himself free from the standardized views of humanity and
religion prevalent in the historical period he lived in, and proclaimed a new
Buddhism based on the personal experience of reality in a free and open mode
of life. His voice carries to us across the centuries in the pages of the Linji lu.
Traditionally, Chan traces its origins in China back to Bodhidharma,
the First Patriarch, who is said to have arrived there in the sixth century.
Chan came to maturity at the time of Huineng (638–713), the Sixth Patriarch. Huineng’s dharma was inherited by Linji after passing through four
generations of illustrious Chan masters: Nanyue Huairang (677–744), Mazu
Daoyi (709–788), Baizhang Huaihai (720–814), and Huangbo Xiyun (d. ca.
850). The Linji lu, then, can perhaps be regarded as providing a true index of
this tradition of Chan at the end of the Tang dynasty. Although Chan later
branched out into the “Five Houses and Seven Schools,” by the Northern
Song dynasty (960–1127) the school established by Linji’s descendents had
assumed preeminence as the central line.
Nothing is known of the ﬁrst edition of the Linji lu. The earliest extant
text is a reprint edition for which the woodblocks were cut in 1120, with a
preface written by the Song court oﬃcial Ma Fang. This became the standard version used in Linji Chan down through the years. The Linji school’s
traditional way of reading the Linji lu is also said to have evolved during the
Northern Song period. As a product of the Chan world as it existed in the
ix

x | p r e fa c e t o t h e 1 9 7 5 e d i t i o n

Song dynasty, the reading reﬂects, of course, the concerns and interests of
that age. This reading was transmitted to Japan, where it was passed down
from generation to generation in the training halls of Rinzai monasteries.
Until the present day the way Japanese priests have interpreted the Linji lu
has followed largely along the general lines set in the Song dynasty.
The present English translation has its beginnings in the desire of the
late Ruth Fuller Sasaki to fulﬁll the dying wish of her husband Sōkei-an
(Sasaki Shigetsu Roshi; 1882–1945). In all, the actual work went on for close to
thirty years, only to be discontinued, just short of ﬁnal completion, by Ruth’s
sudden death in 1967.
Sōkei-an, the dharma heir of Shaku Sōkatsu Roshi (1870–1954), went to
America at his teacher’s suggestion for the purpose of making available to
American students the traditional teaching of Japanese Rinzai Zen. In 1930
he founded in New York the First Zen Institute of America. There, while
directing his students in their Zen practice, he gave talks on the Linji lu,
which led him to attempt an English translation of the work.
Mrs. Sasaki began her Rinzai Zen studies in Japan in 1932, and continued
them under Sōkei-an in New York from 1938 until his death in 1945. They
were married during the Second World War, when Sōkei-an was in the midst
of a serious illness. In 1949, in keeping with her husband’s deathbed wish,
Mrs. Sasaki went to Japan to resume her Zen study under the elder dharma
brother of Sōkei-an, Gotō Zuigan Roshi, Chief Abbot of Daitoku-ji. She also
set about preparing the manuscripts of Sōkei-an’s translation for publication.
In the meantime, she received permission from Daitoku-ji to restore as a residence the subtemple Ryōsen-an, where she established a branch of the First
Zen Institute of America to provide training facilities in Japan for foreign
students. Ryōsen-an had formerly been the head of an important branch in
the Daitoku-ji temple system; Sōkei-an had belonged to that line of Daitokuji priests.
Coming to believe that the satisfactory translation of Chan texts into
English could be achieved only with the participation of scholars trained
in the colloquial Chinese language of the Tang and Song dynasties—the
language of most Chan texts—Mrs. Sasaki asked Prof. Iriya Yoshitaka, a
member of the Institute for Humanistic Studies of Kyoto University and a
specialist in the Chinese colloquial language, to help her examine Sōkei-an’s
manuscript translation of the Linji lu. Prof. Kanaseki Hisao of Dōshisha
University participated in the work as well. When Iriya pointed out a number of questionable points in the traditional reading of the text, Mrs. Sasaki
decided to attempt a new and scholarly accurate translation directly from
the original.
A small group of Japanese and American scholars was organized to work

p r e f a c e t o t h e 1 9 7 5 e d i t i o n | xi

on the project. In addition to Prof. Iriya, the group included Prof. Yanagida
Seizan, a specialist in Chan history at Hanazono College; Dr. Burton Watson
of Columbia University; and Dr. Philip Yampolsky, also of Columbia University. By 1960 this team had completed research on the text of the Linji lu,
an initial English translation, and the draft versions for approximately ﬁve
hundred notes and a lengthy bibliography. Another four years, until 1964,
were required to ﬁnish a second version of the text and notes. Members of
the staﬀ during this part of the work were Mrs. Sasaki, Profs. Iriya, Kanaseki,
and Yanagida, and Furuta Kazuhiro of Ōtani University.
The same people completed a third version in 1966; in 1967 a fourth
version, complete up to the end of the “Discourses” section, was ﬁnished.
With the work at that point, in the summer of 1967 Mrs. Sasaki traveled to
Europe to make arrangements for printing the translation, and to the United
States to discuss its publication with an American publishing house. At that
time the plan was to publish three separate volumes, the ﬁrst to include an
introduction, the Chinese text of the Linji lu, and the English translation; the
second to contain approximately six hundred pages of notes; and the third to
include a bibliography, appendices, and an index. Upon Mrs. Sasaki’s return
to Japan the entire staﬀ hastened to ﬁnish the remaining portions of the
fourth, or semiﬁnal, draft. That work was brought to an abrupt and unfortunate halt by Mrs. Sasaki’s sudden death on 24 October 1967.
During the fifteen years of their collaboration, Mrs. Sasaki and the
research staﬀ produced three publications: The Development of Chinese Zen
(1953), in collaboration with Heinrich Dumoulin, S.J.; The Zen Koan (1965),
together with Miura Isshū Roshi; and Zen Dust (1966). With her untimely
death, the daily activities of the Kyoto branch of the First Zen Institute and
the plans for publishing The Record of Linji had to be suspended.
It was decided by the remaining members of the Ryōsen-an staﬀ to at
least complete the unﬁnished part of the fourth draft so that a full semiﬁnal
version could be made. They enlisted for this work the aid of Gary Snyder,
American poet and former member of the Institute. In the spring of 1968 the
semiﬁnal version was ﬁnally ﬁnished, with the help of a generous grant from
the American Council of Learned Societies, arranged through the oﬃces of
Prof. William T. de Bary and Dr. Philip Yampolsky of Columbia University.
In the summer of 1968, still without any deﬁnite plans for publication,
Prof. Iriya, joined by Mr. Dana R. Fraser (a Zen student at Shōkoku-ji and
former member of the Institute), and myself commenced work on the ﬁfth
and ﬁnal version. From the enormous amount of note material that had been
assembled, new notes were compiled that would provide the minimal information necessary for the general reader. A wealth of information of great
value to specialists and scholars, which in the original plans was to have been

xii | p r e f a c e t o t h e 1 9 7 5 e d i t i o n

included in the second volume, had to be eliminated. It is still preserved in
thick notebooks in the Ryōsen-an library.
In 1969 the text and notes were ﬁnished. At the request of Prof. Yanagida,
the Institute for Zen Studies at Hanazono College kindly oﬀered to publish it,
with arrangements made under the direction of the Institute’s Prof. Kimura
Jōyū.
As it now stands, this edition represents a compromise version of the
work originally planned by Mrs. Sasaki and so diligently worked upon by
her, Prof. Iriya, and the other members of the staﬀ. Yet in the sense that all
their years of work can be said to have reached a culmination in the translation itself, the publication at this time of The Recorded Sayings of Linji may
be regarded as a satisfactory denouement after all. It was a similar feeling that
led to the decision to publish The Recorded Sayings of Layman P’ang, another
translation that was left unﬁnished at her passing.
The Chinese text used for the translation is given at the end of the
volume. It was established by collating the edition in the Taishō shinshū
daizōkyō, vol. 47, with the variant readings noted in that edition and also with
the text in the Xu guzunsu yuyao (Zoku kosonshuku goyō). For the reader’s
convenience the Chinese text that follows the notes has been paragraphed at
appropriate intervals and numbered, with corresponding numbers appearing in the text of the English translation. The Song-dynasty preface by Ma
Fang, which is usually found at the head of the Linji lu, has been moved to
the end. The original plans called for a detailed introduction, but it was never
actually written. A preparatory essay by Yanagida dealing mainly with the
historical aspects of Linji and the Linji lu was prepared and translated at Mrs.
Sasaki’s request. It was published in 1972 in the Eastern Buddhist, n.s. 5/2.

Editor’s Prologue

Ruth Fuller Sasaki’s translation of the Linji lu was one of
the ﬁrst Zen texts I encountered after starting Zen practice in Japan in the
early 1970s. Even prior to the publication of the Institute for Zen Studies’
1975 edition (see Furuta Kazuhiro’s Preface), typescripts of the translation,
minus the notes, had found their way to Western Zen students attending
retreats at Ryūtaku-ji 龍澤寺, a Rinzai Zen monastery south of Mount Fuji
that was at the time a popular place of practice with foreigners. It was there,
at the November 1970 retreat (the ﬁrst Zen retreat I ever attended), that I was
given a well-used sheaf of bound, double-spaced typewritten pages to read
in lieu of listening to the daily Zen teishō (lecture) in Japanese. This initial
encounter, I must confess, was not particularly auspicious. We Westerner
participants, clutching our Record of Linji manuscripts, made our way up a
long ﬂight of wooden stairs to a cold tatami room, where we attempted to
ﬁnd reasonably comfortable sitting positions as we contemplated the text’s
puzzling pronouncements. For some reason the following passage remained
ingrained in my mind:
When Linji was planting pine trees, Huangbo asked, “What’s the good of planting so many trees in the deep mountains?” “First, I want to make a natural
setting for the main gate. Second, I want to make a landmark for later generations,” said Linji, thumping the ground with his mattock three times. “Be that
as it may, you’ve already tasted thirty blows of my stick,” replied Huangbo.
Again Linji thumped the ground with his mattock three times and breathed
out a great breath. “Under you my line will ﬂourish throughout the world,” said
Huangbo.

This famous passage, so inspiring to generations of Zen monks, left me
utterly mystiﬁed. Together with the late autumn cold, the excruciating leg
pain, the lack of sleep, and all the other discomforts of the retreat, it made
me wonder just what exactly I was doing in this far distant land practicing a
strange, incomprehensible foreign religion.
As it was, I remained intrigued enough by Zen to remain in Japan, making my way seven months later to Shōfuku-ji 祥福寺, a monastery in the city
of Kobe, where I spent three years as a lay monk under Yamada Mumon 山
田無文 (1900–1988). Mumon Roshi saw Shōfuku-ji as a place of Zen training
not only for ordained Zen monks but also for laypeople, and consequently
xiii

xiv | e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e

opened the doors of the meditation hall to ordinary Japanese and Westerners who were interested in experiencing the full monastic life. Mumon Roshi
also served as president of both Hanazono University and the Institute for
Zen Studies in Kyoto, and it was with his support that the plan to publish an
abbreviated version of Ruth’s manuscript ﬁnally got under way, resulting in
the 1975 edition.
It was also around this time, in 1973, that I ﬁrst met Matsunami Taiun
松濤泰雲, the Zen monk who was later to become priest of Ryōsen-an 龍泉
庵, the Daitoku-ji subtemple restored by Ruth Sasaki. At the time he was a
monk at the monastery Bairin-ji 梅林寺 on the southern island of Kyūshū.
Our paths crossed again ﬁve years later when I was a guest monk at his home
temple, Kōtoku-ji 廣德寺 in Tokyo. When Rev. Matsunami was installed as
priest of Ryōsen-an in 1985, I was living at Hōshun-in 芳春院, the Daitoku-ji
subtemple just north of Ryōsen-an.
The Ryōsen-an that he entered was pretty much as it had been at the
time of Ruth’s death eighteen years earlier. The kitchen was still outﬁtted
with her 1950s-vintage American refrigerator and gas stove, and the library
still housed her excellent book collection, complete until 1967, the year of
her death. The thick black looseleaf notebooks containing the laboriously
compiled material for The Record of Linji lay, untouched and dusty, on the
shelves of the temple storehouse. Feeling that republication of the Record
(this time in an edition containing her note material) would make the most
suitable memorial for Ruth, Rev. Matsunami considered ways of seeing
the project through to completion. In 1998, when I assumed my present
position as an associate researcher at the International Research Institute
for Zen Buddhism (iriz) at Hanazono University, he approached Dr. Urs
App (former iriz Assistant Director) and Dr. Michel Mohr (former Staﬀ
Research Fellow) about the possibility of my completing Ruth’s work as an
Institute project. The idea was submitted to Prof. Nishimura Eshin and Prof.
Okimoto Katsumi, the former directors of the iriz, who approved the proposal. Following this, Dr. James Heisig and Dr. Paul Swanson of the Nanzan
Institute for Religion and Culture agreed to handle the ﬁnal editing of the
manuscript as part of the Nanzan Library of Asian Religion and Culture, for
publication by the University of Hawai‘i Press.
The present volume therefore represents the culmination of decades of
work involving a large number of individuals, from Ruth’s husband Sōkei-an
in the 1930s and 1940s, to Ruth and the research staﬀ at the First Zen Institute at Ryōsen-an in the 1950s and 1960s, to the people who produced the
1975 edition, and ﬁnally to all those who have participated in the publication of this Nanzan Library edition. In many respects, though, the central
ﬁgure was, and remains, Ruth Fuller Sasaki, the remarkable woman whose

e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e | xv

Photograph from 1 February 1955. Seated (left to right): Philip Yampolsky, Gary Snyder,
Donatienne Lebovich, Ruth Fuller Sasaki, Miura Isshū, Vanessa Coward, Manzōji
Yōko, Walter Nowick, Yanagida Seizan. (Photo, courtesy of Gary Snyder)

energy, vision, and force of personality have inspired the project throughout.
Although considerations of space do not permit a lengthy account of her life
here, any proper introduction of her Linji lu translation requires, at the very
least, a summary of her life and work.1
ruth fuller sasaki
Ruth was born in Chicago on 31 October 1892, to Clara Elizabeth and George
E. Fuller, a wealthy couple of Canadian background. She had a brother
named David, three years her junior. Ruth attended private high school in
Chicago, and while still a student traveled in Europe. Following graduation she returned to Europe to study music (particularly piano) and receive
private instruction in French and German. Her educational opportunities
appear not to have been solely the result of her privileged family circumstances—already in high school Ruth, who served as president of the Theta
1. Ruth’s story is fully deserving of book-length treatment, and fortunately a monograph
on her life is now available. Zen Pioneer: The Life and Works of Ruth Fuller Sasaki, by Isabel
Stirling, presents Ruth’s biography and reprints of three of her lengthy essays on Zen and Zen
practice—essays as valuable now as they were in the mid-twentieth century. Much of the
material in the following biographical sketch is based on Stirling’s book.

xvi | e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e

Society and editor of the yearbook, showed exceptional intelligence, energy,
and leadership.
These were qualities that served Ruth well following her marriage in
1917, at the age of twenty-four, to the wealthy attorney Edward Warren Everett (1872–1940), a senior partner in one of Chicago’s major law ﬁrms. Edward
and Ruth and their daughter Eleanor, born in 1918, became a prominent
presence in the Chicago social scene, often mentioned in the society columns of the Chicago newspapers. Ruth was fully up to the demands of her
position as mistress of the house. Her capabilities were eloquently described
by Mary Farkas (1911–1992), a friend and colleague of Ruth at the First Zen
Institute of America. Farkas noted that, although Ruth would sometimes
refer to herself as an ordinary American woman and housewife, this
by no means described her skill in the feminine arts nor indicated the scale
of her abilities as a hostess. As the wife of a prominent Chicago attorney she
had had a great deal of experience at entertaining. There was no dish she
wouldn’t try to make, no problem of gardening, decorating, or construction she wouldn’t undertake to solve. Servants in her employ left trained
professionals. I asked her one time how she had learned to do all the things
she did so well. Her blue eyes blazed. “When I was a young woman I would
watch how others did things. I assumed if they could do them I must be able
to.” Cooking, gardening, driving, typewriting, book designing, cataloguing,
written Chinese and Japanese, all were achieved by diligent application. Her
early education had included extensive travel abroad and study of various
languages, but in a sense she was a self-made rather than the spoiled society
woman the popular press tends to make of her. Her unﬂagging industry and
perseverance dismayed as well as impressed those of lesser energy. (Farkas
1967)

Despite her social status (or perhaps in part because of it), Ruth’s concerns at this time started to move beyond literature, music, and the skills
required of a well-to-do housewife. She reports that she became “conscious
of another hunger than that for food, and of another thirst than that which
water can quench. There comes a great yearning to understand the ‘why’ of
existence and a longing to ﬁnd one’s own place in and relationship to the
great Universe” (Farkas 1967). In a “Personal History and Academic Background,” prepared by Ruth in 1958, she reported that already in 1917 she had
become interested in Theravada Buddhism and started to practice meditation. In 1923 and 1924 Ruth and Eleanor, both of whom had developed
some medical problems, stayed at a resort in Nyack, New York, run by an
exponent of yoga and Eastern religion named Pierre A. Bernard (1875–1955),
also known in the popular press as “Oom the Omnipotent.” It may have been
there that she ﬁrst started to practice yoga; in any event her drive to excel

e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e | xvii

apparently expressed itself in this area too, since Alan Watts (the well-known
Buddhist writer and scholar, who married Ruth’s daughter Eleanor in 1938)
later described her as “a graciously handsome woman who could go through
the most astonishing hatha-yoga contortions I have ever seen, although
Virginia Denison of Los Angeles comes a close second” (Watts 1972, p. 146).
Ruth’s interest in Eastern religions led her in 1927 to begin a two-year study
of Pali, Sanskrit, Buddhism, and Indian philosophy at the University of Chicago. She may have attended as an unoﬃcial student, since Farkas mentions
“a year of Sanskrit at Chicago University plus two years of private instruction
and some self-taught Pali” (Farkas 1967).
Ruth’s studies of Theravada Buddhism did not bring her what she
was seeking, and she eventually became interested in Zen Buddhism. She
described her contacts with the respective Buddhist traditions and her
encounter with Zen as follows:
When I came to read the life and teachings of Gotama Buddha for the ﬁrst time
I found a satisfactory answer to my own questionings. When Gotama was asked
about the future life, he answered to this eﬀect, that when men had learned all
there was to know about this life, then only might they begin to learn about the
future life. His teaching, he said, had to do only with unhappiness (that is, the
misery and sorrow of this everyday life), the cause of unhappiness, the way that
unhappiness might be got rid of, and the path which led to the getting rid of
unhappiness in this life. He himself had tested out the path and found it successful. His teaching was the technique of walking in that path. But each man
would himself have to tread the path and only as he found the results successful
was he to accept the teaching as true. Each man was to work out his own salvation. Salvation, Nirvana, Satori, this was an aﬀair not of the future but was to be
obtained here and now, today, in the midst of this everyday life.
Deeper study of Hinayana Buddhism and of various forms of the Mahayana
at ﬁrst brought me great disappointment. They had all grown far away from and
had forgotten what seemed to me to be the essential teaching of Buddhism. It
was not until I came to the study of Zen that I found that simple and eloquent
truth again re-established. (Quoted in Farkas 1967)

Ruth’s ﬁrst actual contact with Zen was in 1930, when she and her husband
traveled to China and Japan. On their return voyage, after their ship docked
in Kobe, Ruth traveled to the nearby city of Kyoto and there met the Zen
scholar D. T. Suzuki and his wife, Beatrice Lane Suzuki, through the introduction of a friend, Dr. William M. McGovern. Their meeting went well, marking
the beginning of a cooperative relationship that was to last, with some ups
and downs, until Suzuki’s death in 1966.2 At this initial meeting they had
2. Apparently Beatrice did not always share the friendship; in one unpublished letter to
Suzuki she expressed annoyance with Ruth’s “conquering heroine” attitude.

xviii | e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e

dinner at the Miyako Hotel, a ﬁrst-class Western hotel where Ruth was often
to stay during subsequent sojourns in Kyoto. Several days later they visited
the monastery Enpuku-ji 圓福寺, in the town of Yawata just south of Kyoto,
where Kōzuki Tesshū 神月徹宗 Roshi (1879–1937) had established facilities
for Westerners interested in Zen practice. Suzuki’s unpublished diaries mention a number of meetings with Ruth over the course of the next decade,
both in Japan and the United States (in one intriguing entry dated 19 June
1936, made during a visit to Chicago, Suzuki writes, “Talk on Zen with Mrs.
Everett under the apple tree”). Ruth also helped proofread some of Suzuki’s
work, particularly his Essays in Zen Buddhism, Third Series (1934).
Suzuki’s help was instrumental when, in March 1932, Ruth returned to
Japan with the intention of practicing Zen at a formal training monastery.
Suzuki met her at the port of Yokohama and accompanied her to Kyoto,
where he tried ﬁrst to arrange a stay at Daitoku-ji 大徳寺 monastery. When
the authorities there proved unwilling to accept her, Suzuki turned to
Nanzen-ji 南禅寺 monastery, then under the guidance of Kōno Mukai 河
野霧海 (1864–1935). Kōno Mukai, usually referred to by his teaching name,
Nanshinken 南針軒, was more open to the idea of having a foreign seeker
train at his temple. On 1 April 1932 Ruth began her practice there, staying at a
rented house nearby during the evenings and spending her days doing zazen
at Nanshinken’s private temple, Senko-an 僊壺庵. After a month she was
allowed to sit in the zendō (meditation hall) with the monks. Ruth continued
her practice at Nanzen-ji until the end of the June sesshin (week-long meditation retreat) and returned to the United States in the late summer.
In 1933 Ruth met the Zen master who was to become her main teacher
during the late 1930s and early 1940s. In April, on the recommendation
of Dwight Goddard (best known as the author of A Buddhist Bible), Ruth
visited Sasaki Shigetsu 佐々木指月 (1882–1945) in New York, where he was
teaching Zen to a small group of students. She and Sasaki (more commonly
known by his teaching name, Sōkei-an 曹谿庵) continued to meet occasionally when Ruth was in New York or Sōkei-an was in Chicago, though their
formal master-disciple relationship had not yet begun. Ruth returned to
Japan in the autumn of 1933 for ten months of further training under Nanshinken, and received from him the Buddhist name Kūge 空花 (kū 空 means
both “sky” and “śūnyatā”; ge 花 means “ﬂower”).
Ruth’s husband Edward had been in declining health for some time.
Although well enough to accompany Ruth and D. T. Suzuki to China in 1934,
by 1935 he had to retire from his Chicago law ﬁrm, and in 1938 he entered a
sanatorium in Hartford, Connecticut, for treatment of mental illness. Ruth,
too, left Chicago at this time and moved to New York, a few hours by train
from Hartford. Edward died in January 1940, aged sixty-seven years.

e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e | xix

Ruth’s move to New York allowed her ﬁnally to begin serious Zen study
under Sōkei-an. At that time Sōkei-an had been living in the United States for
about thirty years. Born in 1882, he had learned the craft of woodcarving in
his youth and later entered the Imperial Academy of Arts, where he studied
sculpture. While at the academy he also became interested in Zen and joined
the lay Zen group under Shaku Sōkatsu 釋宗活 (1869–1954), in the lineage of
Shaku Sōen 釋宗演 (1859–1919).3 Sōkei-an married Tome, one of Sōkatsu’s
students, and joined Sōkatsu when the latter left for the United States in 1906
intending to establish a Zen farm near San Francisco. Although the venture
proved unsuccessful and Sōkatsu returned to Japan in 1910, Sōkei-an stayed
on in America with Sōkatsu’s blessings. He moved the family to Seattle, supporting them with woodcarving and other activities. When Tome returned to
Japan in 1913 with their children, Sōkei-an again chose to remain. He moved
east and took up residence in New York. Twice, from 1919 to 1921 and again
from 1926 to 1928, he returned to Japan for further study under Sōkatsu,
and at the end of his second stay received inka (dharma transmission) and
permission to teach. Back in New York, he rented a two-room apartment and
began to oﬀer Zen instruction to the group of students that gradually formed
around him. In June 1938 Ruth began sitting with this group, then known as
the Buddhist Society of America. In a ceremony on 10 December she became
a full member and was given the name Eryū 慧龍 (Wise Dragon).
Sōkei-an’s approach to teaching was in many ways very traditional, centering around koan practice and formal teishō, although he did not demand
that students adopt the cross-legged sitting position (a practice that Ruth
later made eﬀorts to implement). He gave teishō (lecture) twice a week,
preceded by sanzen (individual meditation guidance) and a short chanting
service. One of the principal texts on which he lectured was the Linji lu, for
which he prepared his own English translations—translations that, in eﬀect,
formed the ﬁrst draft of the present work.
Ruth, with her energy, leadership skills, and ﬁnancial resources, soon
became a central ﬁgure in the Society. Within several years she was its vicepresident and the editor of its newsletter, Cat’s Yawn, and was planning to
provide the organization with a larger headquarters. This she did by purchasing and renovating a brownstone at 124 East 65th Street, to which the Society
relocated in December 1941, just prior to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor
and the United States’ subsequent entry into ww ii. As a result of the war
Sōkei-an was interned, ﬁrst at Ellis Island and then at Fort Meade, Maryland.
3. Shaku Sōen Roshi was the master of Engaku-ji 圓覺寺 in the city of Kamakura, on the
coast south of Tokyo. He became the ﬁrst Japanese Zen master to visit the United States when
he attended the World Parliament of Religions in Chicago in 1893.

xx | e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e

Although his students helped secure his release in August 1943, by then his
health had considerably weakened. Soon after leaving the internment camp
he suﬀered a coronary thrombosis, necessitating a long period of convalescence. One bright spot was that following his release the name of the Buddhist Society of America was changed to the First Zen Institute of America,
in accordance with Sōkei-an’s long-standing wish.
In spite of his weak health, around this time he and Ruth decided to
marry. Several explanations for the union have been oﬀered, including a
desire on the part of Sōkei-an to leave his family name to Ruth so that she
could more eﬀectively carry on his work after his death. It is unlikely, in any
case, that the two would have considered marriage unless there had been
some genuine aﬀection between them, and that, according to Alan Watts,
was certainly the case: “[Sōkei-an] and Ruth had just fallen in love, and we
were the fascinated witnesses of their mutually fructifying relationship—she
drawing out his bottomless knowledge of Buddhism; and he breaking down
her rigidities with ribald tales that made her blush and giggle” (1972, p. 145).
At the time Sōkei-an was still married to his estranged wife Tome, so there
were legal issues to consider. The couple went to Arkansas, where Sōkei-an
obtained a divorce and, on 10 June 1944, married Ruth in a civil ceremony.
Sōkei-an’s health problems continued, ultimately leading to his death on
17 May 1945, less than a year after his marriage to Ruth. Ruth remained in
New York for several years, continuing the Institute’s activities and seeking
ways to ﬁnd a new Zen master. The main person to whom she turned for help
was Gotō Zuigan 後藤瑞巖 (1879–1965), chief abbot of Daitoku-ji and Sōkeian’s dharma brother under Shaku Sōkatsu. When repeated appeals failed to
bring about any concrete results, Ruth decided to go to Japan herself to present the Institute’s case.
She arrived in Kyoto in November 1949, and soon met with Zuigan
Roshi. While proceeding with her search for a new Institute master, Ruth
began sanzen and translation work with Zuigan Roshi and within a short
time sought his help in ﬁnding a more permanent place to live in the vicinity
of the monastery. Zuigan Roshi’s successor, Oda Sessō 小田雪窓 (1901–1966),
oﬀered her a house on the Daitoku-ji grounds that had been the residence of
a former master, Den’enshitsu (an interesting development, as Den’enshitsu
had been abbot of Daitoku-ji when Ruth was denied permission to practice
there in 1932). This house was located on the site of the defunct but onceimportant subtemple Ryōsen-an, which had served as the headquarters of
one of Daitoku-ji’s four sublineages—the sublineage to which Sōkei-an,
unknown to him, had been aﬃliated. This house, soon renamed Ryōsen-an
in honor of the former temple, was to serve as the headquarters of Ruth’s
activities in Japan until her death nearly two decades later in 1967.

e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e | xxi

Ruth moved into her new quarters in August 1950, and within a year
had embarked on the building program that, over the years, was to give
Ryōsen-an its present complement of buildings and restore it as a fully
operating temple. In 1951, to remedy the shortage of storage space, Ruth built
a two-story storehouse in the Japanese style with thick, ﬁreproof plaster
walls. In 1956 she ﬁnanced construction of a library and adjoining study
room, the latter a well-designed, comfortable Japanese structure with white
plaster walls, exposed wooden beams, a small Western-style ﬁreplace, and a
hardwood-ﬂoored area with space for ﬁve or six desks. Facing the ﬁreplace
was a large, well-stuﬀed couch. The following year she built a meditation hall,
designed along traditional monastic lines but smaller in scale, and with the
same architectural warmth as the study room.
During these years of building Ruth maintained her usual full schedule
of activities: writing articles, assisting Western Zen students, and working
on a growing number of translation projects. Periodically she returned
to America to help manage the First Zen Institute, where she still kept an
apartment. The gate of Ryōsen-an was always open to visitors, and Ruth
made eﬀorts to cultivate a wide circle of friends and colleagues. A number
of these acquaintances were later to assist her in her work. One of the ﬁrst
of her Japanese assistants, whom she met soon after her arrival in Kyoto,
was Kanaseki Hisao 金関寿夫 (1918–1996), a professor of English literature
at Dōshisha University. By 1954 she was working with Iriya Yoshitaka 入矢義
高 (1910–1998), a specialist in Chinese at Kyoto University, on the translation
of the Pang jushi yulu 龐居士語錄 (Record of Layman Pang) and other texts.
When, with the completion of the library in 1956, Ruth decided to establish
a Ryōsen-an branch of the First Zen Institute of America, she had already
formed connections with many of the young scholars—Philip Yampolsky
(1920–1996), Yanagida Seizan 柳田聖山 (1922–2006), Burton Watson, and
Gary Snyder—who were to form the core of the Institute’s research staﬀ.
Ruth’s successful eﬀorts to reestablish Ryōsen-an as a temple and organize it as a center for spreading Zen to the West were recognized in 1958
when Daitoku-ji formally ordained her as a priest; Ruth became the ﬁrst
Westerner ever to receive this honor. She was given the name Jōkei 紹谿 by
the Daitoku-ji oﬃcials and appointed the ﬁrst jūshoku (abbess) of the newly
restored Ryōsen-an.
From the very beginning, one of the Ryōsen-an research staﬀ ’s principal
tasks was to continue work on Sōkei-an’s Linji lu translation. Owing to its
connections with Sōkei-an, this translation was a project close to Ruth’s heart
and the one that she hoped to complete ﬁrst. Progress proved to be slow,
however. Ruth was convinced that the Institute’s work had to meet the highest academic standards if the Buddhist teachings were to receive the respect

xxii | e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e

they deserved, and consequently her approach to scholarship was meticulous and time-consuming. It was decided that much of Sōkei-an’s original
work could not be used, as many problems with the traditional Zen readings
were pointed out by the scholars of Chinese on the staﬀ. This necessitated a
reexamination of the entire work, which was carried out in meetings where
the nuances of every word and phrase were discussed and possible translations considered. Detailed notes were prepared on the content and grammar
of the original text, and work was also started on a lengthy descriptive bibliography of all the classical Buddhist texts directly and indirectly related to
the Linji lu. In the meantime other projects, like Zen Dust, came up that were
valuable in themselves but that diverted the staﬀ ’s energies for years.
The situation was further complicated by personal tensions that arose
between Ruth and the staﬀ. Ruth was by all accounts a formidable personality, competent in her work, accustomed to running things, and never lacking
in self-conﬁdence. These qualities were important in helping her accomplish
all that she did, but they were often the cause of friction between her and
her associates. Such frictions emerged within a few short years of the Institute’s establishment. At the beginning of 1960 Walter Nowick, a Zen student
who had assisted Ruth as vice-president of the Institute, submitted a formal
resignation. Also in 1960 her teacher, Zuigan Roshi, cut her oﬀ as a sanzen
student because, he explained to senior members of the Institute, she had
insisted on purchasing Zuiken, a Daitoku-ji property located adjacent to the
Daitoku-ji monastery, to use as a dormitory for foreign students—a project
he had speciﬁcally requested her to stop.
At the Institute itself dissatisfactions were growing over Ruth’s
approach and the slow pace of progress—Yampolsky commented that
“little of substance was being accomplished; the atmosphere was becoming oppressive” (Halper 1991, p. 68). Things came to a head in July
1961, when Ruth, suspecting that Yampolsky was intending to publish
the Institute’s Linji lu work as his own, confronted him in front of the
staﬀ. Though her suspicions were shown to be without foundation, they led
to Yampolsky’s dismissal; Burton Watson and Gary Snyder resigned in protest. Ruth was left to work on her publication projects with the help of only
her Japanese associates. The remaining staﬀ carried on bravely, but progress
was further slowed.
Ruth eventually mended fences with Zuigan Roshi, and Gary Snyder
returned to the staﬀ after several years. In 1963 Leon Hurvitz started to help
with research on The Record of Linji. Ruth, then in her seventies, hoped to
focus more completely on her translation work, reducing her involvement
with the increasing number of foreign students drawn to Japan by the international interest in Zen. Ruth had long had plans to publish English versions

e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e | xxiii

of other important Zen works, including the Wumenguan (J. Mumonkan)
and the Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, but for the time being limited
her eﬀorts to the Institute’s ongoing projects. Zen Dust was published in 1966,
and sections of the Linji lu translation approached ﬁnal draft form. Work on
the Pang jushi yulu continued.
Virtually all of this activity ceased with Ruth’s death from a heart attack
on 24 October 1967. Ruth had hoped to arrange things so that the Institute
could continue its activities after she was gone, but at the time of her sudden
death no preparations had been made. As described in Furuta Kazuhiro’s
Preface, several members of the staﬀ continued work on the unﬁnished
manuscripts, resulting in the publication of The Recorded Sayings of Layman
P’ang by Weatherhill in 1971 and The Record of Lin-chi by the Institute for Zen
Studies in 1975.
the 2008 edition
Although Ruth’s death in 1967 put an end to the Record of Linji project on the
large scale that she had envisioned, the labor she and her team of scholars
had invested was far from lost. As mentioned above, their full translation,
along with an abridged version of the notes, became available with the 1975
Institute for Zen Studies edition. Furthermore, the late Yanagida Seizan and
Iriya Yoshitaka—Ruth’s two chief Japanese collaborators on the project—
published much of the original research they had done (together with the
results of further study and reﬂection) in their detailed Japanese-language
monographs on the Linji lu (Yanagida 1977 and Iriya 1989).
Nevertheless, as someone who found the detailed notes in Zen Dust to be
one of that work’s most valuable assets, I could not help feeling a sense of disappointment when I read the 1975 edition and came across Furuta Kazuhiro’s
words in the preface that “a wealth of information of great value to specialists
and scholars, which in the original plans was to have been included in the
second volume, had to be eliminated. It is still preserved in thick notebooks
in the Ryōsen-an library” (p. xiii, above). It was thus with great anticipation
that in early 1999 I took up the present project and started editing the very
notebooks that Furuta had mentioned.
These notebooks contained, in addition to the manuscript for the Linji lu
translation, Dr. Yanagida’s lengthy Historical Introduction outlining Chinese
Chan history, providing biographical information on Linji, and explaining
the development of the “recorded sayings” (yulu 語録) literature; hundreds
of notes at various stages of completion; and rough-draft entries for the
planned descriptive bibliography of Chinese and Japanese Zen texts.
Of these, the portion needing the least work was, of course, the transla-

xxiv | e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e

tion, since this portion had been put into ﬁnal form for the 1975 edition by
the remaining members of Ruth’s team, and given a ﬁnal revision for style
by Dana Fraser. The only further changes that I thought were justiﬁed were
some further stylistic polishings and the correction of several errors of
interpretation that had been brought to light by Dr. Yanagida and Dr. Iriya in
their subsequent research on the Linji lu. Alterations that aﬀect the meaning
are identiﬁed and explained in the present edition in “Editor’s Notes” added
to Ruth’s original annotation.
The material in the Historical Introduction and Text and Note sections
reﬂects the state of Buddhist scholarship as it was in the 1950s and 1960s,
and is thus dated in many ways. At the time, the general supposition among
scholars was still that the Chan classics more or less adhered to the actual
words of the masters they were attributed to. However, subsequent textual
research has revealed that the actual situation was considerably more subtle
and complex. In the years (and occasionally the centuries) that separated the
lives of the masters from the compilation of the records that were issued in
their names, the texts often underwent a signiﬁcant process of change. This
is not to assert that the resulting works are no longer genuine reﬂections
of the original teachings and spirit of the masters, but simply to recognize
that Chan texts, like religious texts everywhere, evolved in response to the
historical and doctrinal development of the Chan lineages themselves. This
is particularly true of the case of the Linji lu, the representative text of the
lineage that came to dominate Chinese Buddhism.
Dr. Yanagida nevertheless advised against revising the content of the
Historical Introduction and Text and Note sections for this new edition,
feeling that the original manuscript possessed its own unique historical
value as a work of the times, and that as a presentation of materials and
views that are still very much accepted in the Zen tradition today it would
be of continuing use to those practicing Zen meditation. This point of view
was supported by the iriz and Nanzan Institute. In any event, much of the
manuscript would not have required updating anyway, based as it is on
translated passages from primary sources (often the ﬁrst translations of
the respective passages into English). Such material is as relevant now as it
was then, and it was Ruth’s emphasis on this type of textual scholarship that
makes her earlier book, Zen Dust, so eagerly sought by scholars even today.
For the most part, whatever stylistic alterations I made were related only
to matters of format and academic convention, and were made as much as
possible in accordance with what I believe would have been Ruth’s preferences had she been alive today to oversee the ﬁnal revisions. For example,
Ruth was deeply concerned with adherence to current scholarly protocol,
and would almost certainly have chosen nowadays to romanize Chinese

e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e | xxv

terminology using the Pinyin system, rather than the Wade-Giles system
that she used at the time. I have thus changed all readings of Chinese words
to this system.
Certain alterations in usage and convention were made in the hope that
they would render the work a bit more congenial to the modern reader. In
particular, there has been since Ruth’s time a major change in the use of
gender-speciﬁc terminology. As was standard practice at the time, Ruth routinely used “he” as a general-use pronoun, and “man” as a neutral term meaning “person.” Such usages can grate on the ear nowadays, and I have therefore
tried to make the language as gender-neutral as possible (usually the result
is stylistically preferable as well). Also in the last few decades there has been
a tendency away from the capitalization of many religious terms, such as
“buddha” (when used as a general term for “awakened one,” and not as the
honoriﬁc name of the historical buddha, Śākyamuni). I have thus opted to
use the lowercase for many words that were generally capitalized at the time
Ruth was compiling the present volume.
In the case of certain other academic conventions, however, I have
followed Ruth’s preferences as indicated in Zen Dust. Ruth always provided glosses for foreign titles, for example, and repeated dates and other
identifying information for ﬁgures who appeared only infrequently in the
notes. She was also careful that Sanskrit and Japanese terms had the proper
diacritical marks; the only such words that I have left without diacritics are
those that have long since passed into common usage, such as “sutra,” “koan,”
“Mahayana,” “roshi,” and “nirvana”. I have followed the convention used by
certain scholars of not italicizing Sanskrit terminology.
Dr. Yanagida’s Historical Introduction was in relatively ﬁnished form.
Much of the editing work had already been done by Dr. Burton Watson in
the course of translating the original Japanese text, and the biographical section on Linji had been further revised and polished for publication in the
Eastern Buddhist (Yanagida 1972). Since the material in the essay was pretty
much limited to strictly historical factors, it was suggested that this section
be supplemented with an English translation of the long interpretive introduction to Dr. Yanagida’s own Japanese Rinzairoku. This, however, seemed
inadvisable for several reasons. First was the simple matter of space—the
present work is long enough as it is, and hardly needs another lengthy section. Second, interesting though Dr. Yanagida’s analysis is, it is only one of
many possible interpretations. Given that Ruth intended The Record of Linji
primarily as an authoritative translation of the Linji lu rather than as a work
of exegesis, I thought it best to present just Dr. Yanagida’s historical material
along with the translation and notes, and let the reader arrive at his or her

xxvi | e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e

own conclusions as to what Linji meant. This, I imagine, would have been
more in line with what Linji himself might have wanted.
The Notes section was more of a challenge than I had expected. The
information itself was detailed and valuable, of course, particularly for its
abundance of material from primary sources (Ruth’s approach, stressed in
a comment she typed at the bottom of one of the pages, was to clarify the
meaning of the Linji lu principally by contextualizing it in the broader Buddhist literature). However, the notes themselves remained in quite unﬁnished
form. The individual entries had been prepared by the team in stages, with
Dr. Yanagida composing the original versions of notes pertaining to history
and doctrine, and Dr. Iriya handling those relating to grammar. These drafts
were then given to Dr. Yampolsky, while he was still part of the staﬀ, for revisions and suggestions. The material was later examined by Ruth for further
suggestions and revisions, and for eventual recomposition into her clear,
grammatically precise style. As it was, most of the more than ﬁve hundred
notes existed in two or three versions, carefully dated and typed out on different colors of paper, with many additions, deletions, and rewordings as the
versions progressed. The margins often contained corrections and queries
written out in Ruth’s precise longhand script. In some cases (fortunately
quite rare) the notes were simply ﬁrst drafts, written in Dr. Yanagida’s and Dr.
Iriya’s impressively good English, but obviously not yet examined or edited
by Ruth. In a number of other cases (also fortunately rare) there were nothing more than entry headings; here I attempted to piece together something
from reference works and the later books of Dr. Yanagida and Dr. Iriya.
Generally speaking, what Ruth intended to include in the ﬁnal note
entries was fairly clear, although in a number of cases some editorial
judgment on my part was required. Taking my cue from the informationpacked notes in Zen Dust, I tried to err on the side of excess, including as
much as possible of the material that Ruth and her team had assembled—
even, in some cases, material that Ruth had apparently slated for exclusion,
but which I regarded as particularly interesting. The notes were anything
if not detailed—from all appearances Ruth designed her annotation so
that the reader would never have to consult any outside reference material. The example that particularly struck me when I started work on the
manuscript was the note on the term “mountain monk” 山僧—the item
receives a mere fourteen words in the 1975 The Record of Lin-chi, while in
the original manuscript the explanation went on for several typewritten
pages. Dr. Yanagida recalled that it was an entry that he had particularly
enjoyed working on.
A separate notebook, compiled by Dr. Iriya, was devoted to grammatical issues; at one point a special section on grammar seems to have been

e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e | xxvii

planned, but the idea was apparently abandoned as it was not mentioned by
Furuta in his description of Ruth’s ﬁnal design for publication (see page xi,
above). Dr. Iriya himself expressed reservations about use of this grammatical material when consulted in 1998, having in the intervening years changed
his thinking on a number of points. Dr. Iriya had a certain iconoclastic side
that occasionally led him to be a bit hasty in criticizing traditional readings—
a number of traditional interpretations that were scathingly critiqued in his
1960s-era grammatical notes for Ruth had been quietly rehabilitated by the
time he published his own Rinzai roku in 1989. This openness to reassessment testiﬁes, of course, to his scholarly integrity. Dr. Iriya’s work on Tang
colloquial language remains his legacy, providing new insights into the Linji
lu that have inﬂuenced subsequent interpretations of the text.
As it was, Ruth had apparently decided to forgo many of the less important grammatical comments, and to incorporate signiﬁcant entries within
the main body of the notes. That is where they were in the version of the
manuscript that came into my hands, and this is the approach that I have
followed.
One part of Ruth’s original design that I was eager to preserve was her
plan to have all notes on the same page as the related text. Among the materials at Ryōsen-an was a short mockup section of the book that Ruth had
made, in which the translation occupied a portion of the left-hand page, with
the remainder of the page plus the facing right-hand page being devoted to
notes. Given the amount of annotation (certain sections of the translation
have at least one note for nearly every sentence) this was probably the only
workable approach, as endnotes would have required incessant ﬂipping back
and forth by the reader. A perfect match of text and annotation was in the
end not possible, but I attempted at least to spare the reader the eﬀort of
turning more than a page or two.
Adjusting the layout to Ruth’s design was a complex process, particularly
since the amount of note material declined greatly toward the conclusion of
the translation, by which time most of the terms and concepts had already
been dealt with. The Preface by Ma Fang, placed at the end of the text in
accordance with Ruth’s design, required no annotation at all. I was unable
to ﬁnd any explanation among Ruth’s materials for her decision to move Ma
Fang’s Preface from its traditional location. I can only assume that she had
good reason for doing so and I therefore decided to respect her wishes.
Several other features of Ruth’s original plans for The Record of Linji
proved to be impractical. One that Ruth herself appears to have abandoned
(or at least failed to reach a ﬁnal decision on) was for a romanized Japanese
text for the original Linji lu. This was intended to help Westerners who
wished to study Linji lu koans under Japanese Zen masters. The diﬃculty was

xxviii | e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e

that the original Chinese can be rendered into Japanese in various diﬀerent
ways depending on how one understands the text—Chinese is a remarkably
ﬂexible language, with the same word potentially serving several diﬀerent
grammatical functions. As a result the same scholar or Zen master will often
oﬀer several possible readings for the same line; there is no single “correct”
Japanese reading for the Linji lu, and Ruth seems to have decided in the end
that disciples of Japanese masters are best oﬀ learning their teacher’s preferred readings directly from the teacher.
Another of Ruth’s planned sections that had to be modiﬁed for the present edition was the comprehensive descriptive bibliography of Chinese and
Japanese Zen texts. Even the existing ﬁrst-draft manuscript, if completed in
the way that Ruth envisioned, would have been of nearly book length, with
much material only distantly related to the Linji lu. Such a text might make
a useful reference work in itself, but as a bibliography for a Linji lu translation it seemed disproportionately large. In the end I included in the present
edition’s descriptive bibliography basic information on all of the texts mentioned in the book, incorporating a signiﬁcant amount of the material that
Ruth had assembled as well as information from standard reference works,
both published and digital. Among the materials that were especially helpful were the Oxford Dictionary of Buddhism, by Damien Keown; The Soka
Gakkai Dictionary of Buddhism, by the English Buddhist Dictionary Committee of Soka Gakkai; the Sōgō Bukkyō daijiten 総合佛教大辞典, by Yokochō
Enichi 横超慧日 et al.; the Daizōkyō zenkaisetsu daijiten 大蔵経全解説大事
典, by Kamata Shigeo 鎌田茂雄 et al.; the Bussho kaisetsu daijiten 佛書解説
大辭典, by Ono Genmyō 小野玄妙 et al.; the Digital Dictionary of Buddhism,
maintained by Charles Muller; and the WWW Database of Chinese Buddhist
Texts, maintained by Christian Wittern.
A table giving the Wade-Giles and Japanese readings of all Pinyin Chinese names appearing in the present volume is appended to the Bibliography.
In addition, the Japanese readings for the names of several Chinese masters
who are known primarily for their work in Japan or their connection with
Japanese Zen monks have been provided in the text where appropriate.
The Nanzan editorial staﬀ added marginal numbers in the Translation to
indicate the pages of the corresponding passages in the Commentary. Thus
readers who wish to read the translation straight in the Translation section
can quickly locate the relevant comments for items or passages on which
they would like more information.
All in all, Ruth’s original plans for the present book seem symptomatic of
the perfectionism that was one of her greatest strengths as a scholar and yet
at the same time one of the reasons why The Record of Linji and many of her
other projects remained unﬁnished even after years of work. However, it is

e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e | xxix

also this perfectionism that we have to thank for the wealth of information in
the work that she did complete, like Zen Dust, and for the valuable material
that now appears in The Record of Linji. Even in unﬁnished form, the notes
and other sections were fascinating to edit. The enthusiasm of Ruth and her
staﬀ for the work, and their commitment to solid scholarship, were evident
on every page. The information oﬀered—historical facts, traditional biographical sketches, translated passages from the Buddhist literature—adds
much to the body of material presently available on Chinese Chan, and is
certain to contribute greatly to the experience of reading the Linji lu.
Preparation of The Record of Linji involved for Ruth and her staﬀ a long
process of painstaking research, but nevertheless much remained to be done
at the time of her death. In the course of my editorial work I attempted to
check information that seemed incomplete or otherwise questionable, but,
given my lack of full academic training in the ﬁeld of Buddhist studies, I am
certain that errors remain. I accept full responsibility for these, of course,
and would greatly appreciate any corrections that readers can provide, in the
event that this book is fortunate enough to see a second edition.
acknowledgments
The process of publication always involves many individuals, but this is especially true in the case of The Record of Linji, a project that continued over several decades. The central ﬁgures in this project were, of course, Sōkei-an and
Ruth Sasaki, without whose vision and dedication the original work never
would have gotten under way. Of nearly equal importance were the researchers on Ruth’s staﬀ at Ryōsen-an: Kanaseki Hisao, Iriya Yoshitaka, Yanagida
Seizan, Philip Yampolsky, Burton Watson, Gary Snyder, Dana Fraser, and
others. Thanks to the thoroughness of their work, my own job was largely
limited to purely editorial tasks.
The notebooks containing the results of these individuals’ eﬀorts would
still be gathering dust on the shelves of the Ryōsen-an storehouse had it not
been for the desire of Matsunami Taiun, abbot of Ryōsen-an, to produce a
complete, fully annotated edition of The Record of Linji as a memorial to
Ruth. Rev. Matsunami was thus in many ways responsible for initiating the
present edition, and has been a constant source of support throughout the
editorial process.
Production of the present volume was facilitated in many ways by the
Institute for Zen Studies’ 1975 The Record of Lin-chi, which provided in convenient form the ﬁnal translation produced by the First Zen Institute staﬀ
and a complete Chinese text of the Linji lu. Permission to use the material
in the 1975 edition was generously granted by Rev. Toga Masataka, adminis-

xxx | e d i t o r ' s p r o l o g u e

trative director of the Institute for Zen Studies, who also made available the
steady support of the Institute staﬀ.
The recommendations of Dr. Urs App and Dr. Michel Mohr, both formerly
of the iriz, were instrumental in helping obtain permission to work on this
edition of The Record of Linji as an iriz project. Dr. Mohr also did a valuable
assessment of the original manuscript when publication was being considered
by the University of Hawai‘i Press. I would also like to thank Prof. Nishimura
Eshin and Prof. Okimoto Katsumi, the iriz’s directors, for their willingness to
let me take on this very time-consuming task.
I also owe a debt of gratitude to Dr. Victor Sogen Hori of McGill University and Dr. John McRae of the University of Tokyo, who carefully read
through my ﬁrst revision of the manuscript. They caught many errors that
had crept in during the editing and retyping process, and oﬀered valuable
advice that helped bring the entire manuscript into line with present academic conventions.
Much of the actual work on the manuscript, particularly at the ﬁnal
stages, was possible only with the help of Dr. James Heisig and Dr. Paul
Swanson of the Nanzan Institute for Religion and Culture at Nanzan University in Nagoya. Their advice concerning content, format, and layout
signiﬁcantly shaped the way this volume was edited and designed, and their
uncanny ability to solve any computer problem saved me immense amounts
of time. They also handled all communications with the publisher, the University of Hawai‘i Press.
I would also like to thank Edmund Skrzypczak, former copy editor at
the Nanzan Institute for Religion and Culture, who went through the manuscript when it was nearing completion and discovered numerous errors and
inconsistencies of the type that only an experienced copy editor can spot.
Isabel Stirling, Associate University Librarian at the University of California at Berkeley, generously shared the manuscript for her recent book Zen
Pioneer: The Life and Work of Ruth Fuller Sasaki, making it immeasurably easier
for me to write my biographical sketch of Ruth for the Editor’s Prologue to the
present volume.
Wayne Yokoyama of the Eastern Buddhist was of steady help throughout
the years with his investigative and editing skills, checking facts, tracking
down obscure references, and unearthing all types of valuable information.
Finally, I would like to thank Prof. Yoshizawa Katsuhiro and the staﬀ at
the iriz at Hanazono University for the help and advice they provided, and
for their patience and generosity in allowing me to devote most of my time
at the Institute during the past several years to The Record of Linji project.
Without this support the results of Ruth’s long years of labor still would not
have seen the light of day.

Abbreviations

BG

Baizhang guanglu 百丈廣錄 (Extensive record of Baizhang)

BL

Biyan lu 碧巖錄 (The blue cliﬀ record)

BZ

Baolin zhuan 寶林傳 (Biographies of the Precious Forest Temple) (801)

CF

Chuanxin fayao 傳心法要 (Essentials on the transmission of mind-dharma)
(857)

CS

Chanlin sengbao zhuan 禪林僧寶傳 (Biographies of monks of the Chan
school) (1331)

CZ

Chuanfa zhenzong ji 傳法正宗記 (Record of the transmission of the dharma in the
true school) (1064)

DB

Dunhuang bianwen ji 敦煌變文集 (A collection of popularizations from Dunhuang)

DL

Dazhidu lun 大智度論 (Treatise on the great perfection of wisdom)

DQ

Dasheng qixin lun 大乘起信論 (Treatise on the awakening of faith in Mahayana)

GY

Guzunsu yulu 古尊宿語錄 (Recorded sayings of the ancient worthies) (1267)

GZ

Gaoseng zhuan 高僧傳 (Biographies of eminent monks) (519)

JC

Jingde chuandeng lu 景德傳燈錄 (Jingde-era Record of the transmission of the
lamp) (1011)

LL

Linji lu 臨濟錄 (Record of Linji)

QT

Quantangwen 全唐文 (Complete prose literature of the Tang)

RY

Rentian yanmu 人天眼目 (The eye of humans and gods) (1188)

SG

Song gaoseng zhuan 宋高僧傳 (Song-dynasty Biographies of eminent monks)
(988)

SY

Sijia yulu 四家語錄 (Recorded sayings of the four houses) (1607)

T

Taishō shinshū daizōkyō 大正新修大藏經 (Taishō-era revised Buddhist canon)

TG

Tiansheng guangdeng lu 天聖廣燈錄 (Tiansheng-era Extensive record of the transmission) (1148)

WG

Wumen guan 無門關 (The gateless barrier) (1229)

WH

Wudeng huiyuan 五燈會元 (Compendium of the ﬁve lamps) (1253)

WL

Wanling lu 宛陵錄 (The Wanling record)

xxxi

xxxii | a b b r e v i at i o n s
WZ
X

Wujia zhengzong zan 五家正宗贊 (In praise of the ﬁve houses of the true
school)
Xuzangjing 續藏經 (Taiwan edition of the Japanese canonical collection Zoku
zōkyō)

XG

Xu gaoseng zhuan 續高僧傳 (Supplementary Biographies of eminent monks)
(645 and 667)

YK

Yunmen Kuangzhen chanshi guanglu 雲門匡真禪師廣錄 (Extensive record of
Chan Master Yunmen Kuangzhen)

ZD

Zen Dust

ZH

Zongmen liandeng huiyao 宗門聯燈會要 (Essential materials from the Chan
school’s successive lamp records) (1183)

ZJ

Zutang ji 祖堂集 (Annals of the ancestral hall) (952)

ZL

Zongjing lu 宗鏡錄 (Records of the source-mirror) (961)

ZY

Zhengfayan zang 正法眼藏 (Treasury of the true dharma eye)

The Record of Linji

臨濟慧照禪師語錄
translated by Ruth Fuller Sasaki

The Recorded Sayings
of Chan Master
Linji Huizhao of Zhenzhou
Compiled by his humble heir
Huiran of Sansheng
discourses
i
The Prefectural Governor, Councilor Wang, along with the other oﬃcials,
requested the master to address them. The master took the high seat in the
Dharma Hall and said:
“Today, I, this mountain monk, having no choice in the matter, have
perforce yielded to customary etiquette and taken this seat. If I were to demonstrate the Great Matter in strict keeping with the teaching of the ancestral
school, I simply couldn’t open my mouth and there wouldn’t be any place for
you to ﬁnd footing. But since I’ve been so earnestly entreated today by the
councilor, why should I conceal the essential doctrine of our school? Now, is
there any adept warrior who forthwith can array his battle line and unfurl his
banners here before me? Let him try proving himself before the assembly!”
A monk asked, “What about the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?”
The master gave a shout. The monk bowed low.
“As an opponent in argument this young reverend is rather good,” said
the master.
A monk asked, “Master, of what house is the tune you sing? To whose
style of Chan do you succeed?”
The master said, “When I was staying with Huangbo I questioned him
three times and was hit three times.”
3

117

119

120

4 | the record of linji

122

125

126

The monk hesitated. The master gave a shout and then struck him, saying,
“You can’t drive a stake into the empty sky.”
A lecture master asked, “The Three Vehicles’ twelve divisions of teachings
make the buddha-nature quite clear, do they not?”
“This weed patch has never been spaded,” said Linji.
“Surely the Buddha would not have deceived people!” said the lecture
master.
“Where is the Buddha?” asked Linji.
The lecture master had no reply.
“You thought you’d make a fool of me in front of the councilor,” said the
master. “Get out, get out! You’re keeping the others from asking questions.”
The master continued, “Today’s dharma assembly is concerned with the
Great Matter. Does anyone else have a question? If so, let him ask now! But
the instant you open your mouth you’re already way oﬀ. Why is this? Don’t
you know that Venerable Śākyamuni said, ‘Dharma is separate from words,
because it is neither subject to causation nor dependent upon conditions’?
Your faith is insuﬃcient, therefore we have bandied words today. I fear I
am obstructing the councilor and his staﬀ, thereby obscuring the buddhanature. I had better withdraw.”
The master shouted and then said, “For those whose root of faith is weak
the ﬁnal day will never come. You have been standing a long time. Take care
of yourselves.”

ii
128

One day Linji went to He Prefecture. The governor, Councilor Wang,
requested the master to take the high seat.
At that time Mayu came forward and asked, “The Great Compassionate
One has a thousand hands and a thousand eyes. Which is the true eye?”
The master said, “The Great Compassionate One has a thousand hands
and a thousand eyes. Which is the true eye? Speak, speak!”
Mayu pulled the master down oﬀ the high seat and sat on it himself.
Coming up to him, the master said, “How do you do?” Mayu hesitated. The
master, in his turn, pulled Mayu down oﬀ the high seat and sat upon it himself. Mayu went out. The master stepped down.

iii
129

The master, taking the high seat in the hall, said, “On your lump of red
ﬂesh is a true man without rank who is always going in and out of the face of
every one of you. Those who have not yet conﬁrmed this, look, look!”

discourses | 5

Then a monk came forward and asked, “What about the true man without rank?”
The master got down from his seat, seized the monk, and cried, “Speak,
speak!”
The monk faltered.
Shoving him away, the master said, “The true man without rank—what
kind of dried piece of shit is he!” Then he returned to his quarters.

131

iv
The master took the high seat in the hall. A monk came forward and
bowed. The master gave a shout.
“Venerable priest,” said the monk, “you’d better not try to spy on me.”
“Tell me what you’ve arrived upon,” the master said.
The monk shouted.
Another monk asked, “What about the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?”
The master shouted. The monk bowed.
“Do you say that was a good shout?” asked the master.
“The bandit in the grass has met complete defeat,” returned the monk.
“What’s my oﬀense?” asked the master.
“It won’t be pardoned a second time,” replied the monk. The master gave
a shout.
That same day the head monks of the two halls had met and simultaneously given shouts.
A monk asked the master, “Was there a guest and a host?”
“Guest and host were obvious,” replied the master. He continued, “If you
of the assembly want to understand the ‘guest and host’ that I speak of, ask
the two head monks of the halls.”
Then the master stepped down.

132

133

v
The master took the high seat in the hall. A monk asked, “What about the
cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?”
The master raised his whisk. The monk shouted. The master struck him.
Another monk asked, “What about the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?”
Again the master raised his whisk. The monk shouted. The master also
shouted. The monk faltered; the master struck him.
Then the master said, “You of the assembly, those who live for dharma
do not shrink from losing their bodies or sacriﬁcing their very lives. Twenty

135

136

6 | the record of linji

years ago, when I was with my late master Huangbo, three times I asked him
speciﬁcally about the cardinal meaning of the buddhadharma, and three
times he favored me with blows from his stick. But it was as if he were patting
me with a branch of mugwort. How I would like now to taste another dose of
the stick! Who can give it to me?”
A monk stepped forward and said, “I can.”
The master held out his stick to him. The monk tried to take it; the master
struck him.

vi
137

138

139

The master took the high seat in the hall. A monk asked, “What about the
matter of the sword blade?”
“Heavens, heavens!” cried the master.
The monk hesitated; the master struck him.
Someone asked, “The lay worker Shishi in treading the pestle shaft of the
rice mortar would forget he was moving his feet; where did he go?”
“Drowned in a deep spring!” the master replied.
Then he continued, “Whoever comes to me, I do not fail him; I know
exactly where he comes from. Should he come in a particular way, it’s just
as if he’d lost [himself]. Should he not come in a particular way, he’d have
bound himself without a rope. Never ever engage in random speculation—
whether you understand or don’t understand, either way you’re mistaken. I
say this straight out. Anyone in the world is free to denounce me as he will.
You have been standing a long time. Take care of yourselves.”

vii
141

The master took the high seat in the hall and said, “One person is on top
of a solitary peak and has no path by which to leave. One person is at the
busy crossroads and has neither front nor back. Which is ahead, which is
behind? Don’t make the one out to be Vimalakīrti and the other to be Fu
Dashi. Take care of yourselves.”

viii
143

The master took the high seat in the hall and said, “One man is endlessly
on the way, yet has never left home. Another has left home, yet is not on
the way. Which one deserves the oﬀerings of humans and gods?” Then he
stepped down.

discourses | 7

ix
The master took the high seat in the hall.
A monk asked, “What about the First Statement?”
The master said:
The Seal of the Three Essentials being lifted, the vermilion impression is sharp;
With no room for speculation, host and guest are clear and distinct.
“What about the Second Statement?”
The master said:
How could Miaojie permit Wuzhuo’s questioning?
How could expedient means go against the activity that cuts
through the stream?
“What about the Third Statement?”
The master said:
Look at the wooden puppets performing on the stage!
Their jumps and jerks all depend upon the person behind.”
The master further said, “Each Statement must comprise the Gates of
the Three Mysteries, and the gate of each mystery must comprise the Three
Essentials. There are expedients and there is functioning. How do all of you
understand this?” The master then stepped down.

144

145

148

x
At the evening gathering the master addressed the assembly, saying:
“Sometimes I take away the person but do not take away the surroundings; sometimes I take away the surroundings but do not take away the person; sometimes I take away both person and surroundings; sometimes I take
away neither person nor surroundings.”
Then a monk asked, “What about ‘to take away the person and not take
away the surroundings’?”
The master said:
The spring sun comes forth, covering the earth with brocade;
A child’s hair hangs down, white as silken strands.
The monk asked, “What about ‘to take away the surroundings and not
take away the person’?”
The master said:
The rule of the sovereign prevails throughout the land;
The general has laid to rest the dusts of battle beyond the frontiers.

150

151

8 | the record of linji

153

155

158

Again the monk asked, “What about ‘to take away both person and surroundings’?”
The master said:
No news from Bing and Fen,
Isolated and away from everywhere.
The monk asked, “What about ‘to take away neither person nor the surroundings’?”
The master said:
The sovereign ascends into the jeweled palace;
Aged rustics sing songs.
Then the master said, “Nowadays, he who studies buddhadharma must
seek true insight. Gaining true insight, he is not aﬀected by birth-and-death,
but freely goes or stays. He needn’t seek the excellent—that which is excellent
will come of itself.
“Followers of the Way, our eminent predecessors from of old have all had
their ways of saving people. As for me, what I want to make clear to you is
that you must not accept the deluded views of others. If you want to act, then
act. Don’t hesitate.
“Students today can’t get anywhere. What ails you? Lack of faith in yourself is what ails you. If you lack faith in yourself, you’ll keep on tumbling
along, following in bewilderment after all kinds of circumstances and being
taken by them through transformation after transformation without ever
attaining freedom.
“Bring to rest the thoughts of the ceaselessly seeking mind, and you will
not diﬀer from the patriarch-buddha. Do you want to know the patriarchbuddha? He is none other than you who stand before me listening to my
discourse. But because you students lack faith in yourselves, you run around
seeking something outside. Even if, through your seeking, you did find
something, that something would be nothing more than fancy descriptions
in written words; never would you gain the mind of the living patriarch.
Make no mistake, worthy Chan men! If you don’t ﬁnd it here and now, you’ll
go on transmigrating through the three realms for myriads of kalpas and
thousands of lives, and, held in the clutch of captivating circumstances, be
born in the wombs of asses or cows.
“Followers of the Way, as I see it we are no diﬀerent from Śākya. What do
we lack for our manifold activities today? The six-rayed divine light never
ceases to shine. See it this way, and you’ll be a man who has nothing to do his
whole life long. Virtuous monks,
The three realms lack tranquility
Just like a burning house.

discourses | 9

This is not a place we remain for long. The death-dealing demon of impermanence comes in an instant, without discriminating between noble and
base, old and young.
“If you wish to diﬀer in no way from the patriarch-buddha, just don’t seek
outside. The pure light in a single thought of yours—this is the dharmakāya
buddha within your own house. The nondiscriminating light in a single
thought of yours—this is the saṃbhogakāya buddha within your own
house. The nondiﬀerentiating light in a single thought of yours—this is
the nirmāṇakāya buddha within your own house. This threefold body is
you, listening to my discourse right now before my very eyes. It is precisely
because you don’t run around seeking outside that you have such meritorious activities.
“According to the masters of the sutras and śāstras, the threefold body is
regarded as the ultimate norm. But in my view this is not so. The threefold
body is merely a name; moreover, it is a threefold dependency. A man of old
said, ‘The [buddha-]bodies are posited depending upon manifested meaning; the [buddha]lands are postulated in keeping with essential substance.’
Therefore we clearly know that ‘dharma-natured bodies’ and ‘dharmanatured lands’ are no more than shimmering reﬂections.
“Virtuous monks, you must recognize the one who manipulates these
reﬂections. ‘He is the primal source of all the buddhas,’ and the place to
which every follower of the Way returns.
“This physical body of yours, composed of the four great elements, can
neither expound the dharma nor listen to it; your spleen and stomach,
liver and gallbladder can neither expound the dharma nor listen to it; the
empty sky can neither expound the dharma nor listen to it. Then what can
expound the dharma and listen to it? This very you standing distinctly
before me without any form, shining alone—just this can expound the
dharma and listen to it! Understand it this way, and you are not diﬀerent
from the patriarch-buddha. Just never ever allow interruptions, and
all that meets your eyes will be right. But, because ‘when feeling arises,
wisdom is barred, and when thinking changes, the substance varies,’ people
transmigrate through the three realms and undergo all kinds of suﬀering.
As I see it, there are none who are not of the utmost profundity, none who
aren’t emancipated.
“Followers of the Way, mind is without form and pervades the ten directions.
In the eye it is called seeing, in the ear it is called hearing.
In the nose it smells odors, in the mouth it holds converse.
In the hands it grasps and seizes, in the feet it runs and carries.

160

162

163

165

10 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

166

171

173

176

Fundamentally it is one pure radiance; divided it becomes the six harmoniously united spheres of sense. If the mind is void, wherever you are, you are
emancipated.
“What is my purpose in speaking this way? I do so only because you followers of the Way cannot stop your mind from running around everywhere
seeking, because you go clambering after the worthless contrivances of the
men of old.
“Followers of the Way, if you take my viewpoint you’ll cut oﬀ the heads
of the saṃbhogakāya and nirmāṇakāya buddhas; a bodhisattva who has
attained the completed mind of the tenth stage will be like a mere hireling;
a bodhisattva of equivalent enlightenment or a bodhisattva of marvelous
enlightenment will be like pilloried prisoners; an arhat and a pratyekabuddha will be like privy ﬁlth; bodhi and nirvana will be like hitching posts
for asses. Why is this so? Followers of the Way, it is only because you haven’t
yet realized the emptiness of the three asamkhyeya kalpas that you have such
obstacles.
“A true follower of the Way is never like this; conforming with circumstances as they are he exhausts his past karma; accepting things as they are
he puts on his clothes; when he wants to walk he walks, when he wants to sit
he sits; he never has a single thought of seeking buddhahood. Why is this so?
A man of old said:
If you seek buddha through karma-creating activities,
Buddha becomes the great portent of birth-and-death.
“Virtuous monks, time is precious. And yet, hurrying hither and thither,
you try to learn meditation, to study the Way, to accept names, to accept
phrases, to seek buddha, to seek a patriarch, to seek a good teacher, to think
and speculate.
“Make no mistake, followers of the Way! After all, you have a father and
a mother—what more do you seek? Turn your own light inward upon yourselves! A man of old said:
Yajñadatta [thought he had] lost his head,
But when his seeking mind came to rest, he was at ease.
“Virtuous monks, just be ordinary. Don’t put on airs. There’re a bunch of
shavepates who can’t tell good from bad; they see spirits, they see demons;
they point to the east, they point to the west; they like fair weather, they like
rain. The day will come when such men as these, every one of them, will have
to repay their debts in front of Old Yama by swallowing red-hot iron balls.
“[You] sons and daughters of good families, bewitched by this pack of
wild foxes, lose your senses. Blind idiots! Someday you’ll be made to pay up
for the vittles you’ve eaten!”

d i s c o u r s e s | 11

xi
The master addressed the assembly, saying, “Followers of the Way, it
is urgently necessary that you endeavor to acquire true insight and stride
boldly [here] under the heavens, not losing your senses owing to that bunch
of spirits. [He who has] nothing to do is the noble one. Simply don’t strive—
just be ordinary. Yet you look outside, searching side paths and seeking help.
You’re all wrong!
“You keep trying to ﬁnd buddha, but buddha is merely a name. Don’t you
know what it is that you are running around seeking? The buddhas and the
patriarchs of the three periods and the ten directions appear only in order
to seek the dharma. You followers of the Way who are studying today—you,
too, have only to seek the dharma. Attain dharma and you’re all done. Until
then, you’ll go on transmigrating through the ﬁve paths of existence just as
you have been.
“What is dharma? ‘Dharma’ is the dharma of mind. Mind is without form;
it pervades the ten directions and is manifesting its activity right before your
very eyes. But because people lack suﬃcient faith [in this] they turn to names
and phrases, attempting to grasp the buddhadharma through written words.
They’re as far away as heaven from earth!
“Followers of the Way, when I, this mountain monk, expound the dharma,
what dharma do I expound? I expound the dharma of mind-ground, which
enters the secular and the sacred, the pure and the deﬁled, the real and the
temporal. But your ‘real and temporal,’ your ‘secular and sacred,’ cannot
attach labels to all that is real and temporal, secular and sacred. The real and
the temporal, the secular and the sacred, cannot attach a name to this person. Followers of the Way, grasp and use, but never name—this is called the
‘mysterious principle’.
“My discourse on dharma is diﬀerent from that of every other man on
earth. Supposing Mañjuśrī and Samantabhadra were to appear before me,
manifesting their respective bodily forms for the purpose of questioning me
about dharma. The moment they said, ‘Venerable Priest, what...,’ I would have
discerned them through and through. And if a follower of the Way comes for
an interview as I sit quietly here, I discern him through and through. Why is
this so? Just because my way of viewing things is diﬀerent; outside, I make no
distinction between the secular and the sacred; inside, I do not dwell in the
absolute; I see right through, and am free from all doubt.”

178

180

181

183

184

xii
The master addressed the assembly, saying, “Followers of the Way, as to
buddhadharma, no eﬀort is necessary. You have only to be ordinary, with

185

12 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

186

188

nothing to do—defecating, urinating, wearing clothes, eating food, and lying
down when tired.
Fools laugh at me,
But the wise understand.
A man of old said,
Those who make work for themselves outside
Are just a bunch of blockheads.
“Just make yourself master of every situation, and wherever you stand is
the true [place]. No matter what circumstances come they cannot dislodge
you [from there]. Though you bear the inﬂuence of past delusions or the
karma of [having committed] the ﬁve heinous crimes, these of themselves
become the ocean of emancipation.
“Students nowadays know nothing of dharma. They’re just like sheep
that take into their mouths whatever their noses happen to hit against. They
neither discriminate between master and slave, nor distinguish host from
guest. Such as these, coming to the Way with crooked motives, readily enter
bustling places. They cannot be called true renouncers of home. True householders are what they are.
“Renouncers of home must possess true insight at all times, distinguishing between the Buddha and Māra, between true and false, between secular
and sacred. If they can do this, they may be called true renouncers of home.
But those who cannot distinguish Māra from Buddha have only left one
house to enter another. They may be described as karma-creating beings, but
they cannot be called true renouncers of home.
“Now suppose there were Buddha-Māra, inseparably united in one body
like a mixture of water and milk. The King of Geese would drink only the
milk, but an open-eyed follower of the Way would handle Māra and Buddha
equally.
If you love the sacred and hate the secular,
you’ll ﬂoat and sink in the sea of birth-and-death.”

xiii
190

191

Someone asked, “What is Buddha-Māra?”
The master said, “One thought of doubt in your mind is Māra. But if you
realize that the ten thousand dharmas never come into being, that mind is
like a phantom, that not a speck of dust nor a single thing exists, that there is
no place that is not clean and pure—this is Buddha. Thus Buddha and Māra
are simply two states, one pure, the other impure.
“In my view there is no Buddha, no sentient beings, no past, no present.
Anything attained was already attained—no time is needed. There is nothing

d i s c o u r s e s | 13

to practice, nothing to realize, nothing to gain, nothing to lose. Throughout
all time there is no other dharma than this. ‘If one claims there’s a dharma
surpassing this, I say that it’s like a dream, like a phantasm.’ This is all I have
to teach.
“Followers of the Way, the one who at this very moment shines alone
before my eyes and is clearly listening to my discourse—this man tarries
nowhere; he traverses the ten directions and is freely himself in all three
realms. Though he enters all types of situations with their various diﬀerentiations, none can confuse him. In an instant of time he penetrates the dharma
realms, on meeting a buddha he teaches the buddha, on meeting a patriarch
he teaches the patriarch, on meeting an arhat he teaches the arhat, on meeting a hungry ghost he teaches the hungry ghost. He travels throughout all
lands bringing enlightenment to sentient beings, yet is never separate from
his present mind. Everywhere is pure, light illumines the ten directions, and
‘all dharmas are a single suchness.’
“Followers of the Way, right now the resolute man knows full well that
from the beginning there is nothing to do. Only because your faith is insufﬁcient do you ceaselessly chase about; having thrown away your head you go
on and on looking for it, unable to stop yourself. You’re like the bodhisattva
of complete and immediate [enlightenment], who manifests his body in any
dharma realm but within the Pure Land detests the secular and aspires for
the sacred. Such ones have not yet left oﬀ accepting and rejecting; ideas of
purity and deﬁlement still remain.
“For the Chan school, understanding is not thus—it is instantaneous,
now, not a matter of time! All that I teach is just provisional medicine, treatment for a disease. In fact, no real dharma exists. Those who understand this
are true renouncers of home, and may spend a million gold coins a day.
“Followers of the Way, don’t have your face stamped with the seal of sanction by any old master anywhere, then go around saying, ‘I understand Chan,
I understand the Way.’ Though your eloquence is like a rushing torrent, it is
nothing but hell-creating karma.
“The true student of the Way does not search out the faults of the world,
but eagerly seeks true insight. If you can attain true insight, clear and complete, then, indeed, that is all.”

192

193

194

xiv
Someone asked, “What is ‘true insight’?”
The master said, “You have only to enter the secular, enter the sacred,
enter the deﬁled, enter the pure, enter the lands of all the buddhas, enter the
Tower of Maitreya, enter the dharma realm of Vairocana and all of the lands
everywhere that manifest and come into being, exist, decay, and disappear.

195

14 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
196

197

198

199

200

“The Buddha appeared in the world, turned the Wheel of the Great
Dharma, then entered nirvana, yet no trace of his coming and going can be
seen. Though you seek his birth and death, you will never ﬁnd it.
“Then, having entered the dharma realm of no-birth and traveled
throughout every country, you enter the realm of the lotus-womb, and there
see through and through that all dharmas are characterized by emptiness
and that there are no real dharmas whatsoever.
“There is only the man of the Way who depends upon nothing, here listening to my discourse—it is he who is the mother of all buddhas. Therefore
buddhas are born from nondependence. Awaken to nondependence, then
there is no buddha to be obtained. Insight such as this is true insight.
“Students do not understand this, and, because they adhere to names and
phrases and are obstructed by such terms as ‘secular’ and ‘sacred’, becloud
their Dharma Eye and cannot obtain clarity of vision. Take, for instance, the
twelve divisions of the teachings—all are nothing but surface explanations.
Not understanding this, students form views based on these superficial
words and phrases. All such students are dependent and thus fall into causation; they haven’t escaped birth-and-death in the three realms.
“If you want to be free to live or to die, to go or to stay as you would put
on or take oﬀ clothes, then right now recognize the one listening to my discourse, the one who has no form, no characteristics, no root, no source, no
dwelling place, and yet is bright and vigorous. Of all his various responsive
activities, none leaves any traces. Thus the more you chase him the farther
away he goes, and the more you seek him the more he turns away; this is
called the ‘Mystery’.
“Followers of the Way, don’t acknowledge this illusory companion, your
body—sooner or later it will return to impermanence. What is it you seek in
this world that you think will bring you emancipation? You hunt about for
a mouthful to eat and while away time patching your robe. You should be
searching for a good teacher! Don’t just drift along pursuing comfort. Value
every second. Each successive thought-moment passes quickly away. The
grosser part of you is at the mercy of [the four elements:] earth, water, ﬁre,
and wind; the subtler part of you is at the mercy of the four phases: birth,
being, decay, and death. Followers of the Way, you must right now apprehend
the state in which the four elements [and four phases] are formless, so that
you may avoid being buﬀeted about by circumstances.”

xv
201

Someone asked, “What is the state in which the four elements [and four
phases] are formless?”
The master said, “An instant of doubt in your mind and you’re obstructed

d i s c o u r s e s | 15

by earth; an instant of lust in your mind and you’re drowned by water; an
instant of anger in your mind and you’re scorched by ﬁre; an instant of joy
in your mind and you’re blown about by wind. Gain such discernment as
this, and you’re not turned this way and that by circumstances; making use
of circumstances everywhere—you spring up in the east and disappear in
the west, spring up in the south and disappear in the north, spring up in the
center and disappear at the border, spring up at the border and disappear in
the center, walk on the water as on land, and walk on the land as on water.
“How is this possible? Because you have realized that the four elements
are like dreams, like illusions. Followers of the Way, the you who right now is
listening to my discourse is not the four elements; this you makes use of the
four elements. If you can fully understand this, you are free to go or to stay
[as you please].
“From my point of view, there is not a thing to be disliked. If you love the
‘sacred’, what is sacred is no more than the name ‘sacred’.
“There’s a bunch of students who seek Mañjuśrī on Mount Wutai. Wrong
from the start! There’s no Mañjuśrī on Wutai. Do you want to know Mañjuśrī?
Your activity right now, never changing, nowhere faltering—this is the living
Mañjuśrī. Your single thought’s nondiﬀerentiating light—this indeed is the
true Samantabhadra. Your single thought that frees itself from bondage and
brings emancipation everywhere—this is the Avalokiteśvara samādhi. Since
these [three] alternately take the position of master and attendants, when
they appear they appear at one and the same time, one in three, three in one.
Gain understanding such as this, and then you can read the sutras.”

202

204

xvi
The master addressed the assembly, saying, “You who today study the
Way must have faith in yourselves. Don’t seek outside or you’ll just go on
clambering after the realm of worthless dusts, never distinguishing true
from false. [Notions] like ‘There are buddhas, there are patriarchs’ are no
more than matters in the teachings. When someone brings forward a phrase
or comes forth from the hidden and the revealed, you are at once beset by
doubt. You appeal to heaven, appeal to earth, run to question your neighbors,
and are utterly perplexed. Resolute men, don’t pass your days in idle chatter
this way, talking of rulers and talking of outlaws, discussing right and discussing wrong, speaking of women and speaking of money.
“As for me, whoever comes here, whether monk or layman, I discern him
through and through. Regardless of where he comes from, his words and
phrases are all just dreams and illusions. On the other hand, it’s obvious that
one in control of every circumstance [embodies] the mysterious principle of
all the buddhas. The state of buddhahood does not of itself proclaim, ‘I am

205

206

16 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

208

the state of buddhahood!’ Rather, this very man of the Way, dependent upon
nothing, comes forth in control of every circumstance.
“If someone comes and asks about seeking buddha, I immediately appear
in conformity with the state of purity; if someone asks about bodhisattvahood, I immediately appear in conformity with the state of compassion; if
someone asks me about bodhi, I immediately appear in conformity with
the state of pure mystery; if someone asks me about nirvana, I immediately
appear in conformity with the state of serene stillness. Though there be ten
thousand diﬀerent states, the person does not diﬀer. Therefore,
According with things he manifests a form,
Like the moon [reﬂecting] on the water.
“Followers of the Way, if you want to accord with dharma, just be men of
great resolve. If you just shilly-shally spinelessly along, you’re good for nothing. Just as a cracked jug is unﬁt to hold ghee, so he who would be a great
vessel must not be taken in by the deluded views of others. Make yourself
master everywhere, and wherever you stand is the true [place].
“Whatever comes along, don’t accept it. One thought of doubt, and
instantly the demon [māra] enters your mind. Even a bodhisattva, when in
doubt, is taken advantage of by the demon of birth-and-death. Just desist
from thinking, and never seek outside. If something should come, illumine
it. Have faith in your activity revealed now—there isn’t a thing to do.
“One thought of your mind produces the three realms and, in accordance
with causal conditions and inﬂuenced by circumstances, the division into
the six dusts takes place. What is lacking in your present responsive activity!
In an instant you enter the pure, enter the dirty, enter the Tower of Maitreya,
enter the Land of the Three Eyes, and everywhere you travel all you see are
empty names.”

xvii
209

210

Someone asked, “What about the ‘Land of the Three Eyes’?”
The master said, “When you and I together enter the Land of Pure Mystery we put on the robe of purity and preach as the dharmakāya buddha;
when we enter the Land of Nondiﬀerentiation we put on the robe of nondiﬀerentiation and preach as the saṃbhogakāya buddha; when we enter
the Land of Emancipation we put on the robe of brightness and preach as
the nirmāṇakāya buddha. These Lands of the Three Eyes are all dependent
transformations.
“According to the masters of the sutras and śāstras, the dharmakāya
is regarded as basic substance and the saṃbhogakāya and nirmāṇakāya
as function. From my point of view the dharmakāya cannot expound the

d i s c o u r s e s | 17

dharma. Therefore a man of old said, ‘The [buddha-]bodies are posited
depending upon meaning; the [buddha-]lands are postulated in keeping with substance.’ So we clearly know that the dharma-nature body and
dharma-nature land are fabricated things, based on dependent understanding. Empty ﬁsts and yellow leaves used to fool a child! Spiked gorse seeds!
Horned water chestnuts! What kind of juice are you looking for in such
dried-up bones!
“Outside mind there’s no dharma, nor is there anything to be gained
within it. What are you seeking? Everywhere you say, ‘There’s something to
practice, something to obtain.’ Make no mistake! Even if there were something to be gained by practice, it would be nothing but birth-and-death
karma. You say, ‘The six pāramitās and the ten thousand [virtuous] actions
are all to be practiced.’ As I see it, all this is just making karma. Seeking buddha and seeking dharma are only making hell-karma. Seeking bodhisattvahood is also making karma; reading the sutras and studying the teachings are
also making karma. Buddhas and patriarchs are people with nothing to do.
Therefore, [for them] activity and the deﬁling passions and also nonactivity
and passionlessness are ‘pure’ karma.
“There are a bunch of blind shavepates who, having stuﬀed themselves
with food, sit down to meditate and practice contemplation. Arresting the
ﬂow of thought they don’t let it rise; they hate noise and seek stillness. This
is the method of the heretics. A patriarch said, ‘If you stop the mind to look
at stillness, arouse the mind to illumine outside, control the mind to clarify
inside, concentrate the mind to enter samādhi—all such [practices] as these
are artiﬁcial striving.’
“This very you, the man who right now is thus listening to my discourse,
how is he to be cultivated, to be enlightened, to be adorned? He is not one to
be cultivated, he is not one to be adorned. But if you let him do the adorning,
then everything would be adorned. Don’t be mistaken!
“Followers of the Way, you seize upon words from the mouths of those
old masters and take them to be the true Way. You think, ‘These good teachers are wonderful, and I, simple-minded fellow that I am, don’t dare measure
such old worthies.’ Blind idiots! You go through your entire life holding such
views, betraying your own two eyes. Trembling with fright, like donkeys on
an icy path, [you say to yourselves,] ‘I don’t dare disparage these good teachers for fear of making karma with my mouth!’
“Followers of the Way, it is only a great teacher who dares to disparage
the buddhas, dares to disparage the patriarchs, to determine the right and
the wrong of the world, to reject the teachings of the Tripiṭaka, to revile all
infantile fellows, and to look for a Person amidst fortunate and unfortunate
circumstances.

212

214

216

18 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
217

218

219

220

“Therefore, when I look back over the past twelve years for a single thing
having the nature of karma, I can’t ﬁnd anything even the size of a mustard
seed. The Chan master who is like a new bride will fear lest he be thrown out of
his temple, be given no food to eat, and have no contentment and ease. From
olden days our predecessors never had people anywhere who believed in
them. Only after they had been driven out was their worth recognized. If they
had been fully accepted by people everywhere, what would they have been
good for? Therefore it is said, ‘The lion’s single roar splits the jackals’ skulls.’
“Followers of the Way, people everywhere say that there is a Way to be
practiced, a dharma to be conﬁrmed. Tell me, what dharma will you conﬁrm, what Way will you practice? What is lacking in your present activity?
What still needs to be patched up?
“The immature young monk, not understanding this, believes in these
fox-spirits and lets them speak the kind of nonsense that binds other people,
nonsense such as, ‘Only by harmonizing the principle and practice and by
guarding [against] the three karmas can buddhahood be attained.’ People
who talk like this are as common as spring showers.
“A man of old said:
If on the road you meet a man who has mastered the Way,
Above all do not speak of the Way.
Therefore it is said:
When a man tries to practice the Way, the Way does not function,
And ten thousand evil circumstances vie in raising their heads.
But when the sword of wisdom ﬂashes forth, nothing remains;
Before brightness is manifest, darkness is bright.
For that reason a man of old said, ‘Ordinary mind is the Way.’
“Virtuous monks, what are you looking for? [You] nondependent people
of the Way who listen to my discourse right now before my eyes, [you are]
bright and clear and have never lacked anything. If you want to be no diﬀerent from the patriarch-buddha, just see things this way. There’s no need to
waver.
“Your minds and Mind do not diﬀer—this is called [your] living patriarch. If mind diﬀers, its essence will diﬀer from its manifestations. Since
mind does not diﬀer, its essence and its manifestations do not diﬀer.”

xviii
221

Someone asked, “What about the state where ‘mind and Mind do not
diﬀer’?”
The master said, “The instant you ask the question they are already separate, and essense diﬀers from its manifestations.

d i s c o u r s e s | 19

“Followers of the Way, make no mistake! All the dharmas of this world
and of the worlds beyond are without self-nature. Also, they are without produced nature. They are just empty names, and these names are also empty.
All you are doing is taking these worthless names to be real. That’s all wrong!
Even if they do exist, they are nothing but states of dependent transformation, such as the dependent transformations of bodhi, nirvana, emancipation, the threefold body, the [objective] surroundings and the [subjective]
mind, bodhisattvahood, and buddhahood. What are you looking for in these
lands of dependent transformations! All of these, up to and including the
Three Vehicles’ twelve divisions of teachings, are just so much waste paper to
wipe oﬀ privy ﬁlth. The Buddha is just a phantom body, the patriarchs just
old monks.
“But you, weren’t you born of a mother? If you seek the Buddha, you’ll be
held in the grip of Buddha-Māra. If you seek the patriarchs, you’ll be bound
by the ropes of Patriarch-Māra. If you engage in any seeking, it will all be
pain. Much better to do nothing.
“There are a bunch of shavepate monks who say to students, ‘The Buddha
is the Ultimate; he attained buddhahood only after he came to the fruition
of practices carried on through three great asaṃkhyeya kalpas.’ Followers of
the Way, if you say that the Buddha is the ultimate, how is it that after eighty
years of life the Buddha lay down on his side between the twin śāla trees at
Kuśinagara and died? Where is the Buddha now? We clearly know that his
birth and death were not diﬀerent from ours.
“You say, ‘The thirty-two [primary] features and the eighty [secondary]
features indicate a buddha.’ Then must a cakravartin also be considered a
tathāgata? We clearly know that these features are illusory transformations.
A man of old said:
The Tathāgata’s various bodily features
Were assumed to conform with worldly sensibilities.
Lest men conceive annihilist views,
He provisionally provided unreal names.
Temporarily we speak of the ‘thirty-two,’
The ‘eighty,’ also, are but empty sounds.
The mortal body is not the awakened body,
Featurelessness is the true ﬁgure.
“You say, ‘A buddha has six supernatural powers. This is miraculous!’
All the gods, immortals, asuras, and mighty pretas also have supernatural
powers—must they be considered buddhas? Followers of the Way, make
no mistake! For instance, when Asura fought against Indra and was routed
in battle he led his entire throng, to the number of eighty-four thousand,
into the tube in a ﬁber of a lotus root to hide. Wasn’t he then a sage? Such

222

223

224

225

226
227

20 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

228

230

231

supernatural powers as these I have just mentioned are all reward powers or
dependent powers.
“Those are not the six supernatural powers of a buddha, which are entering the world of color yet not being deluded by color; entering the world of
sound yet not being deluded by sound; entering the world of odor yet not
being deluded by odor; entering the world of taste yet not being deluded by
taste; entering the world of touch yet not being deluded by touch; entering
the world of dharmas yet not being deluded by dharmas. Therefore, when
it is realized that these six—color, sound, odor, taste, touch, and dharmas—
are all empty forms, they cannot bind the man of the Way, dependent upon
nothing. Constituted though he is of the seepage of the ﬁve skandhas, he has
the supernatural power of walking upon the earth.
“Followers of the Way, true buddha has no ﬁgure, true dharma has no
form. All you’re doing is devising models and patterns out of phantoms.
Anything you may ﬁnd through seeking will be nothing more than a wild
fox-spirit; it certainly won’t be the true buddha. It will be the understanding
of a heretic.
“The true student of the Way has nothing to do with buddhas and nothing to do with bodhisattvas or arhats. Nor has he anything to do with the
good things of the triple world. Having transcended these, solitary and free,
he is not bound by things. Heaven and earth could turn upside down and
he wouldn’t have a doubt; the buddhas of the ten directions could appear
before him and he wouldn’t feel an instant of joy; the three hells could suddenly yawn at his feet and he wouldn’t feel an instant of fear. Why is this
so? Because, as I see it, all dharmas are empty forms—when transformation
takes place they are existent, when transformation does not take place they
are nonexistent. The three realms are mind-only, the ten thousand dharmas
are consciousness-only. Hence,
Illusory dreams, ﬂowers in the sky,
Why trouble to grasp at them!
“Only you, the follower of the Way right now before my eyes listening to
my discourse, [only you] enter ﬁre and are not burned, enter water and are
not drowned, enter the three hells as though strolling in a pleasure garden,
enter the realms of the hungry ghosts and the beasts without suﬀering their
fate. How can this be? There are no dharmas to be disliked.
If you love the sacred and hate the secular
You’ll ﬂoat and sink in the birth-and-death sea.
The passions exist dependent on mind;
Have no-mind, and how can they bind you?
Without troubling to discriminate or cling to forms
You’ll attain the Way naturally in a moment of time.

d i s c o u r s e s | 21

“But if you try to get understanding by hurrying down this byway and
that, you’ll still be in the round of samsara after three asakhyeya kalpas.
Better take your ease sitting cross-legged on a meditation platform in the
monastery.
“Followers of the Way, students come from every quarter, and after
host and guest have met the student will test the teacher with a phrase.
Some tricky words are chosen by the student and ﬂung at the corner of the
teacher’s mouth. ‘Let’s see if you can understand this!’ he says. If you teachers
recognize it as a device, you seize it and throw it into a pit. Whereupon the
student quiets down and asks the teacher to say something. As before, the
teacher robs him of his attitude. The student says, ‘What superlative wisdom!
A great teacher, indeed!’ To which you teachers instantly retort, ‘You can’t
even tell good from bad.’
“Or a teacher may take out a bunch of stuﬀ and play with it in front of a
student. The latter, seeing through this, makes himself master in every case
and doesn’t fall for the humbug. Now the teacher reveals half of his body,
whereupon the student gives a shout. Again the teacher tries to rattle the student by using all sorts of expressions having to do with diﬀerentiation. ‘You
can’t tell good from bad, you old shavepate!’ exclaims the student. And the
teacher, with a sigh of admiration, says, ‘Ah, a true follower of the Way!’
“There are teachers all around who can’t distinguish the false from the
true. When students come asking about bodhi, nirvana, the trikāya, or the
[objective] surroundings and the [subjective] mind, the blind old teachers
immediately start explaining to them. When they’re railed at by the students
they grab their sticks and hit them, [shouting,] ‘What insolent talk!’ Obviously you teachers yourselves are without an eye so you’ve no right to get
angry with them.
“And then there’re a bunch of shavepates who, not knowing good from
bad, point to the east and point to the west, delight in fair weather, delight
in rain, and delight in lanterns and pillars. Look at them! How many hairs
are left in their eyebrows! There is a good reason for this [loss of eyebrows].
Lacking understanding, students become infatuated with them. Such [shavepates] as these are all wild fox-spirits and nature-goblins. Good students
snicker and say, ‘Blind old shavepates, deluding and bewitching everyone
under heaven!’
“Followers of the Way, he who is a renouncer of home must needs study
the Way. Take me, for example—I started out devoting myself to the vinaya
and also delved into the sutras and śāstras. Later, when I realized that they
were only remedies to help the world and displays of opinion, I threw them
all away, and, searching for the Way, I practiced meditation. Still later I met
a great teacher. Then, indeed, my dharma-eye became clear and for the ﬁrst

232

234

235

22 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

236

237

238

239

time I was able to understand all the old teachers of the world and to tell the
true from the false. It is not that I understood from the moment I was born
of my mother, but that, after exhaustive investigation and grinding practice,
in one instant I knew for myself.
“Followers of the Way, if you want insight into dharma as it is, just don’t
be taken in by the deluded views of others. Whatever you encounter, either
within or without, slay it at once. On meeting a buddha slay the buddha, on
meeting a patriarch slay the patriarch, on meeting an arhat slay the arhat, on
meeting your parents slay your parents, on meeting your kinsman slay your
kinsman, and you attain emancipation. By not cleaving to things, you freely
pass through.
“Among all the students from every quarter who are followers of the
Way, none has yet come before me without being dependent on something.
Here I hit them right from the start. If they come forth using their hands, I
hit them on the hands; if they come forth using their mouths, I hit them on
the mouth; if they come forth using their eyes, I hit them on the eyes. Not
one has yet come before me in solitary freedom. All are clambering after the
worthless contrivances of the men of old. As for myself, I haven’t a single
dharma to give to people. All I can do is to cure illnesses and untie bonds.
You followers of the Way from every quarter, try coming before me without
being dependent upon things. I would confer with you.
“Five years, nay ten years, have passed, but as yet not one person [has
appeared]. All have been [ghosts] dependent upon grasses or attached to
leaves, souls of bamboos and trees, wild fox-spirits. They recklessly gnaw on
all kinds of dung clods. Blind fools! Wastefully squandering the alms given
them by believers everywhere and saying, ‘I am a renouncer of home,’ all the
while holding such views as these!
“I say to you there is no buddha, no dharma, nothing to practice, nothing to enlighten to. Just what are you seeking in the highways and byways?
Blind men! You’re putting a head on top of the one you already have. What
do you yourselves lack? Followers of the Way, your own present activities do
not diﬀer from those of the patriarch-buddhas. You just don’t believe this
and keep on seeking outside. Make no mistake! Outside there is no dharma;
inside, there is nothing to be obtained. Better than grasp at the words from
my mouth, take it easy and do nothing. Don’t continue [thoughts] that have
already arisen and don’t let those that haven’t yet arisen be aroused. Just this
will be worth far more to you than a ten years’ pilgrimage.
“As I see it, there isn’t so much to do. Just be ordinary—put on your
clothes, eat your food, and pass the time doing nothing. You who come here
from here and there all have a mind to seek buddha, to seek dharma, to seek

d i s c o u r s e s | 23

emancipation, to seek escape from the three realms. Foolish fellows! When
you’ve left the three realms where would you go?
“‘Buddha’ and ‘patriarch’ are only names of praise-bondage. Do you want
to know the three realms? They are not separate from the mind-ground
of you who right now are listening to my discourse. Your single covetous
thought is the realm of desire; your single angry thought is the realm of
form; your single delusive thought is the realm of formlessness. These are the
furnishings within your own house. The three realms do not of themselves
proclaim, ‘We are the three realms!’ But you, followers of the Way, right now
vividly illumining all things and taking the measure of the world, you give
the names to the three realms.
“Virtuous monks, the physical body [composed] of the four great elements is impermanent; [every part of it,] including the spleen, stomach, liver,
and gallbladder, the hair, nails, and teeth as well, only proves that all dharmas
are empty appearances. The place where your one thought comes to rest is
called the bodhi tree; the place where your one thought cannot come to rest
is called the avidyā tree. Avidyā has no dwelling place; avidyā has no beginning and no end. If your successive thoughts cannot come to rest, you go
up the avidyā tree; you enter the six paths of existence and the four modes
of birth, wear fur on your body and horns on your head. If your successive
thoughts can come to rest, then this [very body] is the pure body.
“When not a single thought arises in your mind, then you go up the bodhi
tree: you supernaturally transform yourself in the three realms and change
your bodily form at will. You rejoice in the dharma and delight in samādhi,
and the radiance of your body shines forth of itself. At the thought of garments a thousand lengths of brocade are at hand; at the thought of food a
hundred delicacies are before you; furthermore, you never suﬀer unusual
illness. ‘Bodhi has no dwelling place, therefore it is not attainable.’
“Followers of the Way, what more is there for the resolute fellow to doubt?
The activity going on right now—whose is it? Grasp and use, but never
name—this is called the ‘mysterious principle.’ Come to such understanding
as this, and there is nothing to be disliked. A man of old said:
[My] mind turns in accordance with the myriad circumstances,
And this turning, in truth, is most mysterious.
Recognizing [my] nature while according with the ﬂow,
[I] have no more joy nor any sorrow.
“Followers of the Way, the view of the Chan school is that the sequence
of death and life is orderly. The student of Chan must examine [this] most
carefully.
“When host and guest meet they vie with each other in discussion. At
times, in response to something, they may manifest a form; at times they may

240

241

242

244

245

24 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

246

247

248

act with their whole body; or they may use tricks or devices to appear joyful
or angry; or they may reveal half of the body; or again they may ride upon a
lion or mount a lordly elephant.
“A true student gives a shout, and to start with holds out a sticky lacquer
tray. The teacher, not discerning that this is an objective circumstance, goes
after it and performs a lot of antics with it. The student again shouts but still
the teacher is unwilling to let go. This is a disease of the vitals that no doctoring can cure; it is called ‘the guest examines the host.’
“Sometimes a teacher will oﬀer nothing, but, the moment a student asks
a question, grabs it away. The student, his question having been taken from
him, resists to the death and will not let go. This is called ‘the host examines
the guest.’
“Sometimes a student comes forth before a teacher in conformity with a
state of purity. The teacher, discerning that this is an objective circumstance,
seizes it and ﬂings it into a pit. ‘What an excellent teacher!’ exclaims the student, and the teacher replies, ‘Bah! You can’t tell good from bad!’ Thereupon
the student makes a deep bow: this is called ‘the host examines the host.’
“Or again, a student will appear before a teacher wearing a cangue and
bound with chains. The teacher fastens on still more chains and cangues for
him. The student is so delighted that he can’t tell what is what; this is called
‘the guest examines the guest.’
“Virtuous monks, all the examples I have brought before you serve to
distinguish demons and point out heretics, thus making it possible for you
to know what is erroneous and what is correct.
“Followers of the Way, true sincerity is extremely diﬃcult to attain, and
the buddhadharma is deep and mysterious, yet a goodly measure of understanding can be acquired. I explain it exhaustively all day long, but you students give not the slightest heed. Though a thousand times, nay ten thousand
times, you tread it underfoot, you are still in utter darkness. It is without a
vestige of form, yet is clear in its solitary shining.
“Because your faith [in yourselves] is insuﬃcient, you students turn to
words and phrases and base your understanding upon them. Until you’ve
reached the half-century mark you continue dragging [your] dead bodies up
blind alleys and running about the world bearing your heavy load. The day
will come when you’ll have to pay up for the straw sandals you’ve worn out.
“Virtuous monks, when I state that there are no dharmas outside, the
student does not comprehend and immediately tries to ﬁnd understanding
within. He sits down cross-legged with his back against a wall, his tongue
glued to the roof of his mouth, completely still and motionless. This he takes
to be the buddhadharma of the patriarchal school. That’s all wrong.
“If you take the state of motionlessness and purity to be correct, then you

d i s c o u r s e s | 25

are recognizing the darkness [of avidyā] as master. This is what a man of old
meant when he said, ‘Fearful indeed is the bottomless black pit!’ If on the
other hand you recognize motion to be correct, since all plants and trees can
move, must they then be the Way?
“Thus ‘motion is the wind element; motionlessness is the earth element.’
Motion and motionlessness both are without self-nature. If you try to seize it
within motion, it takes a position within motionlessness. If you try to seize it
within motionlessness, it takes a position within motion.
Like a ﬁsh hidden in a pool,
Smacking the waves as it leaps [from the water].
Virtuous monks, motion and motionlessness are merely two kinds of states;
it is the nondependent Man of the Way who utilizes motion and utilizes
motionlessness.
“As for the students who come from every quarter, I myself divide them
into three categories according to their inherent capacities. If one of less
than average capacity comes, I snatch away his state but do not take away
his dharma. If one of better than average capacity comes, I snatch away both
his state and dharma. If one of superior capacity comes, I snatch away neither his state, his dharma, nor himself. But should a man of extraordinary
understanding come, I would act with my whole body and not place him
in any category. Virtuous monks, when a student has reached this point, his
manifest power is impenetrable to any wind and swifter than a spark from
ﬂint or a ﬂash of lightning.
“The moment a student blinks his eyes he’s already way oﬀ. The moment
he applies his mind, he’s already diﬀered. The moment he arouses a thought,
he’s already deviated. But for the man who understands, it’s always right here
before his eyes.
“Virtuous monks, you carry your bowl-bag and lug your dung-sack,
rushing up blind alleys in search of buddha and in search of dharma. Do you
know who it is who right now is running around searching this way? He is
brisk and lively, with no roots at all. Though you [try to] embrace him, you
cannot gather him in; though you [try to] drive him away, you cannot shake
him oﬀ. If you seek him he retreats farther and farther away; if you don’t seek
him, then he’s right there before your eyes, his wondrous voice resounding in
your ears. If you have no faith [in this], you’ll waste your entire life.
“Followers of the Way, in an instant you enter the Lotus World, the Land
of Vairocana, the Land of Emancipation, the Land of Supernatural Powers,
the Land of Purity, and the dharma realm; you enter the dirty and the pure,
the secular and the sacred, the realm of hungry ghosts and the realm of
beasts. Yet however far and wide you may search, nowhere will you see any
birth or death; there will only be empty names.

250

251

252

254

26 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

257

258

259

260

Illusory transformations, ﬂowers in the sky—
Don’t trouble to grasp at them.
Gain and loss, right and wrong—
Away with them once and for all!
“Followers of the Way, my buddhadharma is that of the correct transmission, a transmission that has continued in a single line through the masters
Mayu, Danxia, Daoyi, Lushan, and Shigong, and has spread abroad over all
the world. Yet no one has faith in it and everyone heaps slander on it.
“Venerable Daoyi’s activity was pure and simple; not one of his three to
ﬁve hundred students could discern what he meant. Venerable Lushan was
free and true; whether conforming or opposing, his actions were unfathomable to his students—they were all dumbfounded. Venerable Danxia played
with the pearl, concealing and revealing it; every single student who came
was reviled by him. As for Venerable Mayu, his activity was as bitter as the
huangbo tree; no one could approach him. Venerable Shigong’s activity was
to search for a man with the point of his arrow; all who came before him
were struck with fear.
“With respect to my own activity today—true creation and destruction—
I play with miraculous transformations, enter into all kinds of circumstances,
yet nowhere have I anything to do. Circumstances cannot change me.
“Whenever someone comes here seeking I immediately go out and look
at him. He doesn’t recognize me. Thereupon I don various kinds of robes.
The student, assigning some meaning to this, straightway falls into words
and phrases. What a pity that the blind shavepate, a man without the eye [to
see], grasps at the robe I’m wearing and declares it to be blue or yellow, red or
white! When I remove the robe and enter the state of purity, the student takes
one look and is immediately ﬁlled with delight and longing. Then, when I
cast oﬀ everything, the student is stunned and, running about in wild confusion, cries, ‘You have no robe!’ If I say, ‘Do you know me, the man who wears
these robes?’ he’ll abruptly turn his head around and recognize me through
and through.
“Virtuous monks, don’t acknowledge robes. Robes cannot move of themselves, but people can put them on. There is the robe of purity, the robe of
birthlessness, the robe of bodhi, the robe of nirvana, the patriarch-robe, and
the buddha-robe. Virtuous monks, these spoken words and written phrases
are all nothing but changes of robes.
“Churning up the sea of breath in your belly and clacking your teeth
together, you devise wordy interpretations. So it’s clear that these are only
illusory transformations. Virtuous monks:
Acts of speech are displayed without,
Mental activities are manifested within.

d i s c o u r s e s | 27

Because of mental activities thoughts arise, but these are all just robes.
“If all you do is acknowledge as real the robes that are merely put on,
even after the passage of kalpas numerous as dust you’ll still have nothing
but an understanding of robes, and will continue going round and round in
the three realms, transmigrating through birth-and-death. Much better do
nothing.
I meet [him] yet do not recognize [him],
I speak with [him] yet do not know his name.
“Students of today get nowhere because they base their understanding
upon the acknowledgment of names. They inscribe the words of some dead
old guy in a great big notebook, wrap it up in four or ﬁve squares of cloth,
and won’t let anyone look at it. ‘This is the Mysterious Principle,’ they aver,
and safeguard it with care. That’s all wrong. Blind idiots! What kind of juice
are you looking for in such dried-up bones!
“Then there’re a bunch of guys who, not knowing good from bad, guess
around and speculate about the scriptures and make wordy interpretations
of them. They’re like men who, having held dung clods in their mouths, spit
them out for the other people. They’re like peasants engaged in playing a passing-the-word game. They spend their entire lifetime in vain, yet declare ‘We
are renouncers of home!’ Questioned about buddhadharma, they just shut
their mouths, bereft of words. Their eyes are as vacant as black chimney holes
and their mouths sag like [loaded] carrying-poles. Such men as these, even
though they were to be present when Maitreya appears in this world, would
be banished to another region and there, lodged in hell, suﬀer its torments.
“Virtuous monks, what are you seeking as you go around hither and yon,
walking until the soles of your feet are ﬂat? There is no buddha to seek, no
Way to complete, no dharma to attain.
If you seek outside for a buddha having form,
You won’t ﬁnd him to resemble you;
If you know your own original mind,
It’s neither united with nor apart from [him].
“Followers of the Way, true buddha has no shape, true Way has no substance, true dharma has no form; these three are fused together harmoniously united into one. Just because you can’t understand this, you’re called
‘sentient beings with unlimited karmic consciousness’.”

261

262

263

xix
Someone asked, “What about the true buddha, the true dharma, and the
true Way? We beg of you to disclose this for us.”
The master said, “Buddha is the mind’s purity; dharma is the mind’s

264

28 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

radiance; the Way is the pure light pervading everywhere without hindrance.
The three are one, yet all are empty names and have no real existence. With
the true man of the Way, from moment to moment mind is not interrupted.
“From the time the great teacher Bodhidharma came from the Western Land, he just sought a man who would not accept the deluded views
of others. Later, he met the Second Patriarch, who, having understood at
[Bodhidharma’s] one word, for the ﬁrst time realized that hitherto he had
been futilely engaged in striving.
“As for my understanding today, it’s no diﬀerent from that of the patriarchbuddhas. He who attains at the First Statement becomes the teacher of
patriarch-buddhas; he who attains at the Second Statement becomes the
teacher of men and gods; he who attains at the Third Statement cannot save
even himself.”

xx
265

266

267

268

Someone asked, “What was the purpose of the [Patriarch’s] coming from
the West?”
The master said, “If he had had a purpose he couldn’t have saved even
himself.”
Someone asked, “Since he had no purpose, how did the Second Patriarch
obtain the dharma?”
The master said, “‘To obtain’ is to not obtain.”
Someone asked, “If it is ‘to not obtain,’ what is the meaning of ‘to not
obtain’?”
The master said, “It is because you cannot stop your mind which runs on
seeking everywhere that a patriarch said, ‘Bah, superior men! Searching for
your heads with your heads!’ When at these words you turn your own light in
upon yourselves and never seek elsewhere, then you’ll know that your body
and mind are not diﬀerent from those of the patriarch-buddhas and on the
instant have nothing to do—this is called ‘obtaining the dharma.’
“Virtuous monks, at present I’ve no other choice than to speak so much
trash and rubbish. Don’t be mistaken. As I see it there really aren’t so many
problems. If you want to act, act; if you don’t, don’t.
“There are people in every quarter who assert that the ten thousand practices and the six pāramitās constitute the buddhadharma. But I say to you
that they are merely means of adornment, expedients for carrying out the
buddha’s work; they are not buddhadharma [itself]. Even those who keep the
rules regarding food and conduct with the care of a man carrying a bowl of
oil so as not to spill a drop, if their dharma-eye is not clear they’ll have to pay
their debts, and the day will come when the cost of their food will be exacted
from them. Why is this so?

d i s c o u r s e s | 29

Since he entered the Way but didn’t penetrate the Principle,
He returned in the ﬂesh to repay the alms he’d received.
When the rich man reaches four score and one,
The tree will no longer produce the fungus.
“Even those who live alone on a solitary peak, or who eat their single
meal at dawn, sit for long periods of time without lying down, and worship
buddha at the six appointed hours of the day—all such persons are simply
creating karma. There are others who give away everything as alms—their
heads and eyes, marrow and brains, states and cities, wives and children,
elephants, horses, and the seven precious things—but all such acts only cause
suﬀering of body and mind and end up inviting future sorrow. It is better to
have nothing to do, better to be plain and simple.
“Even if bodhisattvas having the completed mind of the tenth stage were
to search for traces of this follower of the Way, they could never ﬁnd them.
Therefore [it is said]: ‘All the gods rejoice, the gods of earth clasp his feet in
adoration, and of all the buddhas of the ten directions, there are none who
do not praise him.’ Why is this so? Because the person of the Way who is now
listening to my discourse leaves no trace of his activity.”

270

xxi
Someone asked, “[The sutra says:]
The Buddha of Supreme Penetration and Surpassing Wisdom
Sat for ten kalpas in a place of practice,
But the buddhadharma did not manifest [itself to him],
And he did not attain the buddha-way.
I don’t understand the meaning of this. Would the master kindly explain?”
The master said, “‘Supreme Penetration’ means that one personally penetrates everywhere into the naturelessness and formlessness of the ten thousand dharmas. ‘Surpassing Wisdom’ means to have no doubts anywhere and
to not obtain a single dharma. ‘Buddha’ means pureness of the mind whose
radiance pervades the entire dharma realm. ‘Sat for ten kalpas in a place of
practice’ refers to [the practice of] the ten pāramitās. ‘The buddhadharma
did not manifest’ means that buddha is in essence birthless and dharma
(dharmas) in essence unextinguished. Why should it manifest itself! ‘He did
not attain the buddha-way’: a buddha can’t become a buddha again.
“A man of old said, ‘Buddha is always present in the world, but is not
stained by worldly dharmas.’ Followers of the Way, if you want to become a
buddha, don’t go along with the ten thousand things.
When mind arises, all kinds of dharmas arise;
When mind is extinguished, all kinds of dharmas are extinguished.

271

272

30 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
273

When mind does not arise,
The ten thousand dharmas have no fault.
Neither in this world nor beyond this world is there any buddha or dharma;
they neither reveal themselves nor are they ever lost. Even if such things
existed, they would only be words and writings for placating little children,
expedient remedies for illnesses, displays of names and phrases. Moreover,
names and phrases are not of themselves names and phrases; it is you,
who right now radiantly and vividly perceive, know, and clearly illumine
[everything]—you it is who aﬃx all names and phrases.
“Virtuous monks, by creating the karma of the ﬁve heinous crimes, you
attain emancipation.”

xxii
275

276

Someone asked, “What is the karma of the ﬁve heinous crimes?”
The master said, “Killing the father, slaying the mother, shedding the
blood of a buddha, destroying the harmony of the sangha, and burning the
scriptures and images—this is the karma of the ﬁve heinous crimes.”
“What is meant by ‘father’?”
The master said, “Avidyā is the father. When the place of arising or extinguishing of a single thought in your mind is not to be found, as with a sound
reverberating throughout space, and there is nothing anywhere for you to
do—this is called ‘killing the father’.”
“What is meant by ‘mother’?”
The master said, “Covetousness is the mother. When a single thought in
your mind enters the world of desire and seeks covetousness, but sees that
all dharmas are only empty forms, and [thus] has no attachment anywhere—
this is called ‘slaying the mother’.”
“What is meant by ‘shedding the blood of a buddha’?”
The master said, “When in the midst of the pure dharma realm you
haven’t in your mind a single reasoning thought, and [thus] pitch blackness
pervades everywhere—this is called ‘shedding the blood of a buddha’.”
“What is meant by ‘destroying the harmony of the sangha’?”
The master said, “When a single thought in your mind truly realizes that
the bonds and enticements of the passions are like space with nothing upon
which to depend—this is called ‘destroying the harmony of the sangha’.”
“What is meant by ‘burning the scriptures and images’?”
The master said, “When you see that causal relations are empty, that mind
is empty, and that dharmas are empty, and [thus] your single thought is decisively cut oﬀ and, transcendent, you’ve nothing to do—this is called ‘burning
the scriptures and images.’

d i s c o u r s e s | 31

“Virtuous monks, reach such understanding as this, and you’ll be free
from the hindrances of names [like] ‘secular’ and ‘sacred’.
“Yet a single thought in your mind is doing nothing but
Conceiving an empty ﬁst or a [pointing] ﬁnger to be real;
Senselessly conjuring up apparitions from among the dharmas of
the sense-ﬁelds.
You belittle yourselves and modestly withdraw, saying, ‘We are but commoners; he is a sage.’ Bald idiots! What’s the frantic hurry to wrap yourselves in
lions’ skins while you’re yapping like jackals!
“Resolute fellows [though you are], you do not draw the breath of the
resolute. Unwilling to believe in what you have in your own house, you do
nothing but seek outside, go clambering after the worthless sayings of the
men of old, rely upon yin and depend upon yang and are unable to achieve
[by yourselves]. On meeting [outer] circumstances, you establish relationship with them; on meeting [sense-]dusts you cling to them; wherever you
are doubts arise, and you yourselves have no standard of judgment.
“Followers of the Way, don’t accept what I state. Why? Statements have
no proof. They are pictures temporarily drawn in the empty sky, as in the
metaphor of the painted ﬁgures.
“Followers of the Way, don’t take the Buddha to be the ultimate. As I see it,
he is just like a privy hole. Both bodhisattvahood and arhatship are cangues
and chains that bind one. This is why Mañjuśrī tried to kill Gautama with his
sword, and why Aṅgulimāla attempted to slay Śākyamuni with his dagger.
“Followers of the Way, there is no buddha to be obtained. Even the doctrines [including those] of the Three Vehicles, the ﬁve natures, and complete
and immediate enlightenment—all these are but provisional medicines for
the treatment of symptoms. In no sense do any real dharmas exist. Even if
they were to exist, they would all be nothing but imitations, publicly displayed proclamations, arrangements of letters stated that way just for the
time being.
“Followers of the Way, there’re a bunch of shavepates who try to seek a
transcendental dharma by directing their eﬀorts inward. A great mistake! If
you seek buddha you lose buddha, if you seek the Way you lose the Way, if
you seek the patriarchs you lose the patriarchs.
“Virtuous monks, make no mistake. I don’t care whether you understand
the sutras and śāstras, whether you’re a king or a high minister, whether
you’re as eloquent as a rushing torrent, or whether you’re clever or wise. I
only want you to have true insight.
“Followers of the Way, even if you should master a hundred sutras and
śāstras, you’re not as good as a teacher with nothing to do. If you do master
them, you’ll regard others with contempt. Asura-like conﬂict and egotisti-

277

278

279

281

282

32 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

283

284

285

cal ignorance increase the karma that leads to hell. Such was the case of
Sunakṣātra bhikku—though he understood the twelve divisions of the
teachings, he fell alive into hell. The great earth had no place for him. It’s better to do nothing and take it easy.
When hunger comes I eat my rice;
When sleep comes I close my eyes.
Fools laugh at me, but
The wise man understands.
“Followers of the Way, don’t seek within words, for when the mind is
stirred you become wearied, and there’s no beneﬁt in gulping icy air. It’s better, by the single thought that causal relations are [fundamentally] birthless,
to surpass the bodhisattvas who depend upon the provisional teaching of the
Three Vehicles.
“Virtuous monks, don’t spend your days drifting along. In the past
when I had as yet no understanding, all about me was utter darkness. But I
wasn’t one to waste time, so with a burning belly and a turbulent mind, I ran
around inquiring about the Way. Later, however, I got some help and ﬁnally
today I can talk to you like this. I advise all you followers of the Way not to
live for food and clothes. Look! The world passes swiftly away, and meeting a
good teacher is as rare as the ﬂowering of the udumbara tree.
“Hearing everywhere of old man Linji, you come here intending to bait
me with diﬃcult questions and make it impossible for me to answer. Faced
with a demonstration of the activity of my whole body, you students just
stare blankly and can’t move your mouths at all; you’re at such a loss you
don’t know how to answer. I tell you, ‘Asses can’t bear being trampled by a
dragon-elephant.’
“You go around everywhere thumping your chests and whacking your
ribs, saying, ‘I understand Chan! I understand the Way!’ But let two or three
of you come here and you can’t do a thing. Bah! Carrying that body and
mind of yours, you go around everywhere ﬂapping your lips like winnowing
fans and deceiving villagers. The day will come when you’ll be ﬂogged with
iron rods. You’re not [true] renouncers of home. You’ll all be herded together
in the realm of the asuras.
“As for the Way of ultimate truth, it is not something that seeks to arouse
enthusiasm through arguments and disputes, nor that uses resounding
oratory to refute heretics. As for the transmission of the buddhas and the
patriarchs, it has no special purpose. Even though there are verbal teachings,
they all fall into [the category of] such formulas for salvation as the Three
Vehicles, the ﬁve natures, and the cause-and-eﬀect that leads to [rebirth as]
men or gods. But in the case of the teaching of the complete and immedi-

d i s c o u r s e s | 33

ate enlightenment this isn’t so; Sudhana did not go around seeking any of
these.
“Virtuous monks, don’t use your minds mistakenly. The great sea does
not detain dead bodies, but all you do is rush about the world carrying them
on your shoulders. You yourselves raise the obstructions that impede your
minds. When the sun above has no clouds, the bright heavens shine everywhere. When there is no cataract on the eye, there are no [imaginary] ﬂowers
in the sky.
“Followers of the Way, if you wish to be dharma as is, just have no doubts.
‘Spread out, it ﬁlls the entire dharma realm; gathered in, the smallest hair
cannot stand upon it.’ Distinctly and radiantly shining alone, it has never
lacked anything. No eye can see it, no ear can hear it—then by what name
can it be called? A man of old said, ‘To speak about a thing is to miss the
mark.’
“Just see for yourselves—what is there? I can keep on talking forever.
Each one of you must strive individually. Take care of yourselves.”

286

287

critical examinations
i
289

290

One day when Huangbo entered the kitchen he asked the head rice-cook,
“What are you doing?”
The cook said, “I’m picking over the rice for the monks.”
“How much do they eat in a day?” asked Huangbo.
“Two and a half shi,” said the cook.
“Isn’t that too much?” asked Huangbo.
“I’m afraid it isn’t enough,” replied the cook.
Huangbo struck him. Later the cook mentioned this to Linji. Linji said,
“I’ll test the old fellow for you.” As soon as Linji came to attend Huangbo,
Huangbo told him the story.
“The cook didn’t understand—Venerable Priest, kindly give a turningword in place of the cook,” said Linji, who then asked, “Isn’t that too much?”
Huangbo said, “Well, why not say, ‘We’ll eat a meal again tomorrow!’”
“Why talk about tomorrow—eat it right now!” said Linji, slapping
Huangbo in the face.
“This lunatic has come here again to pull the tiger’s whiskers,” said
Huangbo. Linji shouted and went out.
Later, Guishan asked Yangshan, “What did these two worthies have in
mind?”
“What do you think, Venerable Priest?” asked Yangshan.
“Only when you have a child do you understand fatherly love,” Guishan
answered.
“Not at all!” said Yangshan.
“Then what do you think?” asked Guishan.
“It’s more like, ‘To bring in a thief and ruin the house’,” replied Yangshan.

ii
291

The master asked a monk, “Where do you come from?” The monk
shouted. The master saluted him and motioned him to sit down. The monk
hesitated. The master hit him. Seeing another monk coming, the master
raised his whisk. The monk bowed low. The master hit him. Seeing still
another monk coming, the master again raised his whisk. The monk paid no
attention. The master hit him, too.
34

c r i t i c a l e x a m i n at i o n s | 35

iii
One day when the master and Puhua were attending a dinner at a patron’s
house, the master asked, “‘A hair swallows up the great sea and a mustard
seed contains Mount Sumeru.’ Is this the marvelous activity of supernatural
power or is it original substance as it is?” Puhua kicked over the dinner table.
“How coarse!” exclaimed the master.
“What place do you think this is—talking about coarse and ﬁne!” said
Puhua.
The next day the master and Puhua again attended a dinner. The master
asked, “How does today’s feast compare with yesterday’s?” Puhua kicked
over the dinner table as before. “Good enough,” said the master, “but how
coarse!”
“Blind man!” said Puhua. “What’s buddhadharma got to do with coarse
and ﬁne?”
The master stuck out his tongue.

292

293

iv
One day when the master and the venerable old priests Heyang and Muta
were sitting together around the ﬁre-pit in the Monks’ Hall, the master said,
“Every day Puhua goes through the streets acting like a lunatic. Who knows
whether he’s an ordinary person or a sage?” Before he had ﬁnished speaking
Puhua came in. “Are you a commoner or a sage?” the master asked.
“Now, you tell me whether I’m a commoner or a sage,” answered Puhua.
The master shouted. Pointing his ﬁnger at them, Puhua said, “Heyang is a
new bride, Muta is a Chan granny, and Linji is a young menial, but he has
the eye.”
“You thief!” cried the master.
“Thief, thief!” cried Puhua, and went out.

294

v
One day Puhua was eating raw vegetables in front of the Monks’ Hall. The
master saw him and said, “Just like an ass!”
“Heehaw, heehaw!” brayed Puhua.
“You thief!” said the master.
“Thief, thief!” cried Puhua, and went oﬀ.

vi
Puhua was always going around the streets ringing a little bell and calling
out:

295

36 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

296

Coming as brightness, I hit the brightness;
Coming as darkness, I hit the darkness;
Coming from the four quarters and eight directions, I hit like a
whirlwind;
Coming from empty sky, I lash like a ﬂail.
The master told his attendant to go and, the moment he heard Puhua say
these words, to grab him and ask, “If coming is not at all thus, what then?”
[The attendant went and did so.]
Puhua pushed him away, saying, “There’ll be a feast tomorrow at Dabei
yuan.”
The attendant returned and told this to the master. The master said, “I’ve
always held wonder for that fellow.”

vii

297

An old worthy came to see the master. Before presenting the customary
gift, he asked, “Is it proper to bow, or is it proper not to bow?”
The master shouted. The old worthy bowed low. “A ﬁne thief in the grass
you are!” said the master.
“Thief, thief!” cried the old worthy and started to go out.
The master said, “Better not think you can get away with that.” [Later]
when the head monk was attending the master, the master asked, “Was there
any fault?”
The head monk said, “There was.”
“Whose fault was it, the guest’s or the host’s?” asked the master.
“Both were at fault,” answered the head monk.
“Where was the fault?” asked the master. The head monk started to go
out. The master said, “Better not think you can get away with that.”
Later a monk told the story to Nanquan. Nanquan said, “Fine horses
trampling one another.”

viii
298

One day the master entered an army camp to attend a feast. At the gate
he saw a staﬀ oﬃcer. Pointing to a pillar, he asked, “Is this secular or sacred?”
The oﬃcer had no reply. Striking the pillar, the master said, “Even if you
could speak, this is still only a wooden post.” Then he went in.

ix
The master said to the steward of the temple, “Where have you come
from?”

c r i t i c a l e x a m i n at i o n s | 37

“I’ve been to the provincial capital to sell the millet,” answered the
steward.
“Did you sell all of it?” asked the master.
“Yes, I sold all of it,” replied the steward.
The master drew a line in front of him with his staﬀ and said, “But can
you sell this?” The steward gave a shout. The master hit him. The chief cook
came in. The master told him about the previous conversation.
The chief cook said, “The steward didn’t understand you.”
“How about you?” asked the master. The chief cook bowed low. The master hit him, too.

299

x
When a certain lecture master came to have an interview with Linji, the
master said to him, “What sutras and śāstras do you expound?”
“Insofar as my miserable abilities allow, I have made a cursory study of
the Baifa lun,” replied the lecture master.
The master said, “Suppose there was a man who had attained comprehension of the Three Vehicles’ twelve divisions of the teachings, and there was
another man who had not comprehended it, would there be any diﬀerence
or not?”
“For the one who had attained comprehension, it would be the same; for
the one who had not attained comprehension, it would be diﬀerent,” replied
the lecture master.
Lepu, who was standing behind the master attending him, said, “Lecture
master, where do you think you are, talking about ‘same’ and ‘diﬀerent’!”
Turning his head, the master asked Lepu, “Well, how about you?”
The attendant gave a shout. When the master returned from seeing the
lecture master oﬀ, he said to the attendant, “Was it to me that you shouted
just now?”
“Yes,” said the attendant.
The master hit him.

300

xi
The master heard that Deshan of the second generation said, “Thirty
blows if you can speak; thirty blows if you can’t.” The master told Lepu to go
and ask Deshan, “‘Why thirty blows to one who can speak?’ Wait until he hits
at you, then grab his stick and give him a jab. See what he does then.”
When Lepu reached Deshan’s place he questioned him as instructed.
Deshan hit at him. Lepu seized the stick and gave Deshan a jab with it.
Deshan went back to his quarters.

301

38 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

Lepu returned and told Linji what had taken place. “I’ve always held wonder for that fellow,” the master said. “Be that as it may, did you understand
Deshan?” Lepu hesitated. The master hit him.

xii
One day the Councilor Wang visited the master. When he met the master in front of the Monks’ Hall, he asked, “Do the monks of this monastery
read the sutras?”
“No, they don’t read sutras,” said the master.
“Then do they learn meditation?” asked the councilor.
“No, they don’t learn meditation,” answered the master.
“If they neither read sutras nor learn meditation, what in the world are
they doing?” asked the councilor.
“All I do is make them become buddhas and patriarchs,” said the master.
The councilor said, “‘Though gold dust is valuable, in the eyes it causes
cataracts.’”
“I always used to think you were just a common fellow,” said the master.

xiii
302

The master asked Xingshan, “What is the white ox on the bare ground?”
“Moo, moo!” said Xingshan.
“A mute, eh?” said the master.
“Venerable sir, how about you?” said Xingshan.
“You beast!” said the master.

xiv
304

The master asked Lepu, “Up to now it has been the custom for some
people to use the stick and others to give a shout. Which comes closer?”
“Neither,” replied Lepu.
“What does come close?” asked the master.
Lepu shouted. The master hit him.

xv
The master, seeing a monk coming, spread his arms out wide. The monk
said nothing. “Do you understand?” the master asked.
“No, I don’t,” replied the monk.
“It’s impossible to break open Hunlun,” said the master. “I’ll give you a
couple of coins.”

c r i t i c a l e x a m i n at i o n s | 39

xvi
Dajue came to see Linji. The master raised his whisk. Dajue spread his sitting cloth. The master threw down the whisk. Dajue folded up the cloth and
went into the Monks’ Hall.
“That monk must be related to the Venerable Priest. He didn’t bow and
didn’t get hit,” said the monks.
Hearing of this, the master sent for Dajue. When Dajue came out, the
master said, “The monks are saying that you haven’t yet paid your respects
to the master.”
“How are you?” said Dajue and rejoined the monks.

305

xvii
Zhaozhou while on a pilgrimage came to see Linji. The master happened
to be washing his feet when they met.
Zhaozhou asked, “What is the purpose of the Patriarch’s coming from
the West?”
“I just happen to be washing my feet,” replied the master.
Zhaozhou came closer and, cocking his ear, gave the appearance of listening. The master said, “I’m going to pour out a second dipper of dirty water.”
Zhaozhou departed.

xviii
When Elder Ding came to see Linji he asked, “What is the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?”
The master got down from his rope-bottomed chair. Seizing Ding, he
gave him a slap and pushed him away. Ding stood still.
A monk standing by said, “Elder Ding, why don’t you bow?” Just as he
bowed, Ding attained great enlightenment.

306

xix
Mayu came to see Linji. Spreading his mat, he asked, “Which is the true
face of the Twelve-faced Guanyin?”
Getting down from the rope-bottomed chair, the master seized the mat
with one hand and with the other grabbed hold of Mayu. “Where has the
Twelve-faced Guanyin gone?” he asked.
Mayu jerked himself free and tried to sit on the chair. The master picked
up his stick and hit at him. Mayu grabbed the stick; holding it between them,
they entered the master’s quarters.

307

40 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xx
308

The master asked a monk, “Sometimes a shout is like the Diamond Sword
of the Vajra King; sometimes a shout is like the golden-haired lion crouching
on the ground; sometimes a shout is like a weed-tipped ﬁshing pole; sometimes a shout doesn’t function as a shout. How do you understand this?”
The monk hesitated. The master gave a shout.

xxi
The master asked a nun, “Well-come or ill-come?” The nun shouted.
“Go on, go on, speak!” cried the master, taking up his stick.
Again the nun shouted. The master hit her.

xxii
309

310

Longya asked Linji, “What is the purpose of the Patriarch’s coming from
the West?”
Linji said, “Hand me the backrest.” Longya handed the backrest to the
master. The master took it and hit him with it.
Longya said, “It’s all right that you hit me, but there still isn’t any purpose
in the Patriarch’s coming from the West.”
Later Longya went to see Cuiwei and asked him, “What is the purpose of
the Patriarch’s coming from the West?”
Cuiwei said, “Hand me the rush mat.” Longya handed the mat to Cuiwei.
Cuiwei took it and hit him with it.
Longya said, “It’s all right that you hit me, but there still isn’t any purpose
in the Patriarch’s coming from the West.”
After Longya had become the master of a temple, a monk entered his
room to receive instruction. “I have heard,” the monk said, “that when you
were on pilgrimage, Venerable Priest, you had the opportunity to interview
two eminent elders. Did you acknowledge them?”
“I acknowledged them profoundly all right, but there still isn’t any purpose in the Patriarch’s coming from the West.”

xxiii

311

Five hundred monks were assembled at the monastery at Mount Jing, but
few asked the master for instruction. Huangbo ordered Linji to go to Mount
Jing, then asked, “What will you do when you get there?”
“When I get there I’ll know what to do,” said Linji. Upon arriving at
Mount Jing he went to the Dharma Hall, still in his traveling clothes, to see

c r i t i c a l e x a m i n at i o n s | 41

the master. As the master raised his head, Linji shouted, and when the master
started to open his mouth, Linji swung his sleeves [as he turned] and left.
Shortly afterwards a monk asked the master, “What did you say just now
that made that monk shout at you, Venerable Priest?”
The master replied, “That monk came from Huangbo’s assembly. If you
want to know, go ask him.”
Of the ﬁve hundred monks at Mount Jing, the greater part drifted away.

xxiv
One day Puhua went about the streets asking people he met for a onepiece gown. They all oﬀered him one, but Puhua declined them all.
Linji had the steward of the temple buy a coﬃn, and when Puhua came
back the master said, “I’ve ﬁxed up a one-piece gown for you.”
Puhua put the coﬃn on his shoulders and went around the streets calling
out, “Linji ﬁxed me up a one-piece gown. I’m going to the East Gate to depart
this life.” All the townspeople scrambled after him to watch.
“No, not today,” said Puhua, “but tomorrow I’ll go to the South Gate to
depart this life.”
After he had done the same thing for three days no one believed him
anymore.
On the fourth day not a single person followed him to watch. He went
outside the town walls all by himself, got into the coﬃn, and asked a passerby
to nail it up. The news immediately got about. The townspeople all came
scrambling; upon opening the coﬃn, they saw he had vanished, body and all.
Only the sound of his bell could be heard in the sky, receding away: tinkle...
tinkle... tinkle....

record of pilgrimages
i
312

313

314

315

When Linji was one of the assembly of monks under Huangbo, he was
plain and direct in his behavior. The head monk praised him saying, “Though
he’s a youngster, he’s diﬀerent from the other monks.” So he asked, “Honorable monk, how long have you been here?”
“Three years,” replied Linji.
“Have you ever asked for instruction?”
“No, I’ve never asked for instruction. I don’t know what to ask,” replied
Linji.
“Why don’t you go ask the head priest of this temple just what the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma is,” said the head monk.
Linji went and asked. Before he had ﬁnished speaking Huangbo hit him.
Linji came back. “How did your question go?” asked the head monk.
“Before I had ﬁnished speaking the master hit me. I don’t understand,”
said Linji.
“Then go and ask him again,” said the head monk.
So Linji went back and asked, and again Huangbo hit him. Thus Linji
asked the same question three times and was hit three times.
Linji came back and said to the head monk, “It was so kind of you to send
me to question the master. Three times I asked him and three times I was hit
by him. I regret that some obstruction caused by my own past karma prevents me from grasping his profound meaning. I’m going away for awhile.”
The head monk said, “If you are going away, you should go take your leave
of the master.” Linji bowed low and withdrew.
The head monk went to the master’s quarters before Linji and said, “The
young man who has been questioning you is a man of dharma. If he comes
to take his leave, please handle him expediently. In the future, with training,
he is sure to become a great tree which will provide cool shade for the people
of the world.”
Linji came to take his leave. Huangbo said, “You mustn’t go anywhere
else but to Dayu’s place by the river in Gao’an. He’s sure to explain things for
you.”
Linji arrived at Dayu’s temple. Dayu said, “Where have you come from?”
“I have come from Huangbo’s place,” replied Linji.
“What did Huangbo have to say?” asked Dayu.
“Three times I asked him just what the cardinal principle of the bud42

r e c o r d o f p i l g r i m a g e s | 43

dhadharma is and three times he hit me. I don’t know whether I was at fault
or not.”
“Huangbo is such a grandmother that he utterly exhausted himself with
your troubles!” said Dayu. “And now you come here asking whether you were
at fault or not!”
At these words Linji attained great enlightenment. “Ah, there isn’t so
much to Huangbo’s buddhadharma!” he cried.
Dayu grabbed hold of Linji and said, “You bed-wetting little devil! You
just asked whether you were at fault or not, and now you say, ‘There isn’t so
much to Huangbo’s buddhadharma.’ What did you just see? Speak, speak!”
Linji jabbed Dayu in the side three times. Shoving him away, Dayu said,
“You have Huangbo for a teacher. It’s not my business.”
Linji left Dayu and returned to Huangbo. Huangbo saw him coming and
said, “What a fellow! Coming and going, coming and going—when will it
end?”
“It’s all due to your grandmotherly kindness,” Linji said, and then presented the customary gift and stood waiting.
“Where have you been?” asked Huangbo.
“Recently you deigned to favor me by sending me to see Dayu,” said
Linji.
“What did Dayu have to say?” asked Huangbo. Linji then related what
had happened. Huangbo said, “How I’d like to catch that fellow and give him
a good dose of the stick!”
“Why say you’d ‘like to’? Take it right now!” said Linji and immediately
gave Huangbo a slap.
“You lunatic!” cried Huangbo. “Coming back here and pulling the tiger’s
whiskers.” Linji gave a shout. “Attendant, get this lunatic out of here and take
him to the Monks’ Hall,” said Huangbo.
Later Guishan, telling the story to Yangshan, asked, “On that occasion did
Linji get help from Dayu, or Huangbo?”
“He not only rode on the tiger’s head but also seized its tail,” replied
Yangshan.

ii
When Linji was planting pine trees, Huangbo asked, “What’s the good of
planting so many trees in the deep mountains?”
“First, I want to make a natural setting for the main gate. Second, I want
to make a landmark for later generations,” said Linji, thumping the ground
with his mattock three times.
“Be that as it may, you’ve already tasted thirty blows of my stick,” replied
Huangbo.

316

317

44 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

318

Again Linji thumped the ground with his mattock three times and
breathed out a great breath.
“Under you my line will ﬂourish throughout the world,” said Huangbo.
Later Guishan related these words to Yangshan. “On that occasion did
Huangbo put his trust only in Linji, or will there also be someone else?” he
asked.
“There will be,” replied Yangshan. “But he’ll come so far in the future that
I don’t want to tell you about him, Venerable Priest.”
“Be that as it may, I’d like to know. Come on, try and tell me,” said Guishan.
Yangshan said, “One man heading south: Wu and Yue well-governed.
When one meets the Great Wind he stops.” (Prophesying Venerable
Fengxue)

iii
When Linji was attending Deshan, Deshan said, “I’m tired today.”
“Old man,” said Linji, “what’s the good of talking in your sleep?”
Deshan hit him. Linji overturned the rope-bottomed chair. Deshan
desisted.

iv
320

321

Once, during group work, Linji was hoeing the ground. Seeing Huangbo
coming, he stopped and stood leaning on his mattock.
“Is this guy tired already?” said Huangbo.
“I haven’t even lifted my mattock yet. How could I be tired?” answered
Linji.
Huangbo hit at him. Linji seized Huangbo’s stick, jabbed him with it, and
knocked him down.
Huangbo called to the duty-monk, “Duty-monk! Help me up!”
The duty-monk came running and helped him up. “Venerable Priest, how
can you let this lunatic get away with such rudeness?” he said.
Huangbo no sooner got to his feet than he hit the duty-monk.
Hoeing the ground, Linji said, “Everywhere else the dead are cremated,
but here I immediately bury them alive.”
Later Guishan asked Yangshan, “What did Huangbo have in mind when
he hit the duty-monk?”
“The real thief escapes, and his pursuer gets the stick,” answered Yangshan.

r e c o r d o f p i l g r i m a g e s | 45

v
One day Linji was sitting in front of the Monks’ Hall. Seeing Huangbo
coming, he closed his eyes. Giving the appearance of being frightened,
Huangbo returned to his quarters. Linji followed him there and bowed low.
The head monk was attending Huangbo. Huangbo said to him, “Though
he’s a youngster, he knows about this matter.”
“Venerable Priest, your own feet aren’t on solid ground, yet you give recognition to this youngster,” said the head monk.
Huangbo gave himself a slap on the mouth.
“It’s all right as long as you know it,” said the head monk.

vi
Linji was sleeping in the [Monks’] Hall. Huangbo came in, and, seeing
him, struck the front plank [of the sitting platform] once with his staﬀ. Linji
lifted his head, and seeing it was Huangbo, went back to sleep.
Huangbo again struck the front plank, and went to the upper part of the
hall. Seeing the head monk sitting in meditation, he said, “That youngster
down in the lower part of the hall is sitting in meditation; what’re you doing
here, cooking up wild fancies?”
“What’s this old man up to?” said the head monk.
Huangbo struck the front plank once more and left.
Later Guishan asked Yangshan, “What do you make of Huangbo in the
Monks’ Hall?”
“Two wins, one match,” replied Yangshan.

322

vii
One day during the group work, Linji was going along behind the others.
Huangbo looked around, and, seeing that Linji was empty-handed, asked,
“Where is your mattock?”
“Somebody took it away from me,” said Linji.
“Come here,” said Huangbo. “I want to talk the matter over with you.”
Linji stepped forward. Huangbo lifted up his mattock and said, “Just this
people on the earth cannot hold up.”
Linji snatched the mattock from Huangbo’s grasp and held it high. “Then
why is this in my hand now?” he asked.
“Today there’s a man who really is working,” said Huangbo, and returned
to the temple.
Sometime later Guishan asked Yangshan, “The mattock was in Huangbo’s
hand. How could it have been taken away by Linji?”

323

324

46 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

“The thief is an inferior fellow, but in cleverness he surpasses his superiors,” answered Yangshan.

viii

325

Linji went to Guishan bearing a letter from Huangbo. Yangshan, who at
that time was in charge of receiving guests, took the letter and said, “This is
Huangbo’s; where’s the messenger’s?”
Linji slapped at him.
Yangshan seized Linji and said, “Brother, since you know this much, that’s
enough.” Then they went together to see Guishan.
Guishan asked, “How many students has my brother Huangbo?”
“Seven hundred,” answered Linji.
“Who is their leader?” asked Guishan.
“He has just delivered a letter to you,” replied Linji. Then Linji, in his turn,
asked Guishan, “Venerable Priest, how many students do you have here?”
“Fifteen hundred,” answered Guishan.
“That’s a lot!” said Linji.
“My brother Huangbo also has no small number,” said Guishan.
Linji took his leave of Guishan. As Yangshan was seeing him oﬀ, he said
“Later on you’ll go to the north and there’ll be a place for you to stay.”
“How can that be?” said Linji.
“Just go,” replied Yangshan. “Afterwards there’ll be a man to help you, my
venerable brother. He’ll have a head but no tail, a beginning but no end.”
Later Linji arrived in Zhenzhou; Puhua was already there. When Linji
became head of a temple, Puhua was of help to him. But the master had not
been there very long when Puhua just vanished, body and all.

ix
326

327

Linji came up to Mount Huangbo in the middle of the summer session.
Seeing Huangbo reading a sutra, he said, “I always used to think you were a
man. Now I see you’re just a black-bean-eating old priest!”
Linji stayed a few days and then tried to take his leave. Huangbo said,
“You came in violation of the rules of the summer session, and now you’re
leaving before it’s over.”
“I came for a little while to pay my respects to you, Venerable Priest,” said
Linji.
Huangbo hit him and chased him out. After he had gone a few li, Linji,
thinking the matter over, returned to the temple and ﬁnished the summer
session.

r e c o r d o f p i l g r i m a g e s | 47

One day he took his leave of Huangbo. Huangbo asked, “Where are you
going?”
“If I don’t go to Henan, I’ll return to Hebei,” replied Linji.
Huangbo hit at him. Linji seized Huangbo and gave him a slap. Laughing
heartily, Huangbo called to his attendant, “Bring me the backrest and armrest
that belonged to my late teacher Baizhang.”
“Attendant, bring me some ﬁre!” cried Linji.
“Be that as it may, just take them with you. In the future you’ll cut oﬀ the
tongues of every man on earth,” said Huangbo.
Later, Guishan asked Yangshan, “Didn’t Linji abuse Huangbo’s trust?”
“Not at all!” said Yangshan.
“Well then, what do you think?”
“Only one who recognizes beneﬁcence can requite it,” said Yangshan.
“From ancient times to the present, has there been anyone like him?”
asked Guishan.
“Yes there has, but he lived so long ago I don’t want to tell you about him,
Venerable Priest,” replied Yangshan.
“Be that as it may, I’d like to know. Come on, try and tell me,” said Guishan.
Yangshan said, “At the Śūraṅgama assembly, Ānanda, in praising the
Buddha, said, ‘With my whole heart I shall serve all beings throughout the
myriad worlds. This is called “requiting the Buddha’s beneﬁcence”.’ Isn’t this
[also] an example of requiting beneﬁcence?”
“Just so, just so!” replied Guishan. “One whose insight is the same as his
teacher’s lacks half of his teacher’s power. Only one whose insight surpasses
his teacher’s is worthy to be his heir.”

328

329

x
Linji arrived at Bodhidharma’s memorial tower. The master of the tower
said to him, “Venerable sir, will you pay homage ﬁrst to the Buddha or to
Bodhidharma?”
“I don’t pay homage to either the Buddha or to Bodhidharma,” said
Linji.
“Venerable sir, why are the Buddha and Bodhidharma your enemies?”
asked the master of the tower.
Linji swung his sleeves and left.

xi
Linji, while on a pilgrimage, arrived at the place of Longguang. Longguang had already ascended the high seat [to give a discourse] when Linji

330

48 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

advanced and asked, “Without unsheathing the point of a weapon, how can
one win a battle?”
Longguang straightened up in his seat.
“Has the venerable teacher no expedient [means]?” asked Linji.
Staring ﬁxedly at Linji, Longguang exhaled loudly.
Linji pointed his finger at Longguang and said, “Today you lose, old
man.”

xii
Linji arrived at Sanfeng. Venerable Ping asked him, “Where did you come
from?”
“I came from Huangbo,” replied Linji.
“What does Huangbo have to say?” asked Ping.
Linji said:
The golden ox met with disaster last night,
And no one has seen a trace of it since.
Ping said:
The autumn wind blows a ﬂute of jade;
Who is he who knows the tune?
Linji said:
He goes right through the manifold barrier,
And stays not even within the clear sky.
“Your question is much too lofty,” said Ping.
Linji said:
The dragon’s given birth to a golden phoenix
Who breaks through the azure dome of heaven.
“Do sit down and have some tea,” said Ping. Then he asked, “Where have
you been recently?”
“At Longguang,” said Linji.
“How is Longguang these days?” asked Ping.
At that Linji went oﬀ.

xiii
332

Linji arrived at the place of Daci. Daci was sitting in his quarters. Linji
asked, “How is it with you when you’re sitting erect in your quarters?” Daci
replied:
The green of the winter pines endures a thousand years.
An aged rustic picks a ﬂower and in myriad lands it’s spring.

r e c o r d o f p i l g r i m a g e s | 49

Linji answered:
Forever transcending past and present is the body of perfect
wisdom.
Blocking the way to the Three Mountains there is a manifold
barrier.
Daci gave a shout. Linji also shouted.
“Well?” said Daci. Linji swung his sleeves and left.

xiv
Linji arrived at the temple of Huayan in Xiangzhou. Huayan was leaning on his staﬀ, giving the appearance of being asleep. Linji said, “Venerable
Priest, what’s the good of dozing?”
“A true Chan adept is clearly diﬀerent!” said Huayan.
“Attendant, make some tea and serve it to the Venerable Priest to drink,”
said Linji. Huayan called the duty-monk and said, “Place this honorable
monk in the third seat.”

333

xv
When Linji reached Cuifeng’s place, Cuifeng asked, “Where did you come
from?”
“I came from Huangbo,” said Linji.
“What words does Huangbo use to instruct people?” asked Cuifeng.
“Huangbo has no words,” said Linji.
“Why not?” asked Cuifeng.
“Even if he had any, I wouldn’t know how to state them,” answered Linji.
“Come on, try and tell me,” said Cuifeng.
“The arrow has ﬂown oﬀ to the Western Heaven,” said Linji.

334

xvi
Linji visited Xiangtian and said to him, “[It’s] neither secular nor sacred—
please, master, speak!”
“I’m just this way,” Xiangtian replied.
Linji shouted and said, “What kind of vittles are all these baldpates looking for here!”

xvii
Linji arrived at Minghua’s place. Minghua asked, “What’s the good of all
this coming and going!”
“I’m just trying to wear out my straw sandals,” said Linji.

335

50 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

“What for, then?” asked Minghua.
“Old man, you don’t even know the subject of the conversation!” replied
Linji.

xviii
336

When Linji was going to Fenglin’s place, he met an old woman on the
road. “Where are you going?” she asked.
“I’m going to Fenglin’s place,” replied Linji.
“Fenglin happens to be away just now,” said the old woman.
“Where did he go?” asked Linji.
At that the old woman walked away.
Linji called to her. The old woman turned her head. Linji hit her.

xix
337

338

Linji arrived at Fenglin’s place. Fenglin said, “There is something I wish
to ask you. May I?”
“Why gouge out [good] ﬂesh and make a wound?” replied Linji. Fenglin
said:
The moon shines on the sea, there are no shadows;
Yet the gamboling ﬁsh get lost.
Linji replied:
Since shadowless is the moon over the sea,
How can the gamboling ﬁsh get lost?
Fenglin said:
Watching the wind I know the arising of waves;
[And see boats] asport on the water with ﬂuttering sails.
Linji replied:
The solitary moon alone does shine—rivers and mountains are still;
One laugh from me startles both heaven and earth.
Fenglin said:
Your tongue may illumine heaven and earth, but
Try speaking a word apropos of the moment.
Linji replied:
If on the road you meet a swordsman, oﬀer him your sword;
To a man who’s not a poet, don’t present a poem.
Fenglin desisted. Linji then recited this verse:
The Great Way deﬁes comparison—one goes east or west at will.
No spark from ﬂint can go so fast, nor lightning ﬂash pass by.

r e c o r d o f p i l g r i m a g e s | 51

Guishan asked Yangshan, “If no spark from ﬂint can go so fast, nor lightning ﬂash pass by, how did the old-time sages save men?”
“What do you think, Venerable Priest?” asked Yangshan.
Guishan said, “No words have actual signiﬁcance.”
“Not so,” disagreed Yangshan.
“Then what do you think?” asked Guishan.
“Oﬃcially, a needle is not permitted to enter; privately, carriages can get
through.”

xx
Linji arrived at Jinniu’s place. Jinniu saw him coming and, holding a stick
crosswise, sat down at the gate. Linji struck the stick three times with his
hand, then entered the [Monks’] Hall and seated himself in the ﬁrst seat.
Jinniu came in, saw him, and said, “In an interview between host and
guest, each should conform to the prescribed formalities. Where do you
come from, Elder Monk, that you are so rude?”
“What are you talking about, Old Priest?” replied Linji.
Jinniu started to open his mouth, and Linji hit him. Jinniu gave the
appearance of falling down. Linji hit him again. Jinniu said, “I’m not doing
so well today.”
Guishan asked Yangshan, “In the case of these two venerable ones, was
there a winner or a loser?”
“Call it a victory, then both won; call it a loss, then both lost,” replied
Yangshan.

339

xxi
When the master was about to pass away, he seated himself and said,
“After I am extinguished, do not let my True Dharma Eye be extinguished.”
Sansheng came forward and said, “How could I let your True Dharma
Eye be extinguished!”
“Later on, when somebody asks you about it, what will you say to him?”
asked the master.
Sansheng gave a shout.
“Who would have thought that my True Dharma Eye would be extinguished upon reaching this blind ass!” said the master. Having spoken these
words, sitting erect, the master revealed his nirvana.

340

xxii
The master’s name as a monk was Yixuan. He was a native of the prefecture of Nanhua in the province of Cao. His family name was Xing. As a child

341

52 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

342

343

344

he was exceptionally brilliant, and when he became older he was known for
his ﬁlial piety. After shaving his head and receiving the full precepts, he frequented lecture halls; he mastered the vinaya and made a thorough study of
the sutras and śāstras.
Suddenly [one day] he said with a sigh, “These are prescriptions for helping the world, not the principle of the transmission outside the scriptures.”
Then he changed his robe and traveled on a pilgrimage. First he studied
under Huangbo. Then he visited Dayu. What was said on those occasions has
been set down in the “Record of Pilgrimages.”
After receiving the seal of dharma from Huangbo, the master went to
Hebei and became priest of a small temple on the banks of the Hutuo River,
outside the southeast corner of the capital of Zhenzhou. Because of its location the temple was called “Linji” (“Overlooking the Ford”). By that time
Puhua was already there. Pretending to be crazy, Puhua mixed with the
people and no one could tell whether he was a sage or a commoner. When
the master arrived there Puhua was of help to him. When the master’s teaching began to ﬂourish, Puhua vanished, body and all. This agreed with the
prediction made by Yangshan, the “Little Śākya.”
It happened that local ﬁghting broke out, and Linji abandoned the temple. The Grand Marshal, Mo Junhe, donated his house inside the town walls
and made it into a temple. Hanging up a plaque there, inscribed with the old
name “Linji,” he had the master make it his residence.
Later the master tucked up his robes and went south to the prefecture of
He. The governor of the prefecture, Councilor Wang, extended to him the
honors due a master. After staying for a short while, the master went to Xinghua temple in Daming Prefecture, where he lived in the Eastern Hall.
Suddenly one day the master, although not ill, adjusted his robes, sat
erect, and when his exchange with Sansheng was ﬁnished, quietly passed
away. It was on the tenth day of the ﬁrst month in the eighth year of Xiantong
of the Tang dynasty.
His disciples built a memorial tower for the master’s body in the northwest corner of the capital of Daming Prefecture. The emperor decreed
that the master be given the posthumous title Meditation Master Huizhao
[“Illuminating Wisdom”] and his stupa be called Chengling [“Translucent
Spirit”]. Joining my hands with palms together and bowing low my head, I
have recorded in summary the life of the master.

r e c o r d o f p i l g r i m a g e s | 53

Respectfully inscribed by the humble heir Yanzhao of Baoshou in
Zhenzhou.
Here ends the Recorded Sayings of Chan Master Linji Huizhao of
Zhenzhou.
Collated by the humble heir Cunjiang of Xinghua in Daming
Prefecture.

Preface to the Recorded Sayings of
Chan Master Linji Huizhao of Zhenzhou
Compiled by Ma Fang, Scholar of the Yankang Hall; Gentleman of the
Gold and Purple Rank in attendance at Imperial Banquets; Emissary in
Charge of Keeping Order in Zhending Circuit; concurrently Chief Commandant of Cavalry and Infantry Forces; concurrently Administrator of
Chengde Military Prefecture.
On top of Mount Huangbo he met the painful stick.
On Dayu’s ribs he could use his ﬁst.
“Garrulous grandmother!” “Bed-wetting little devil!”
“This lunatic, twice pulling the tiger’s whiskers!”
In a rocky gorge he planted pines, a landmark for later generations.
He dug the ground with his mattock; the others were nearly buried
alive.
Having approved the youngster, Huangbo slapped himself right on
the mouth.
On leaving, Linji wanted to burn the armrest; he’ll cut oﬀ the
tongues [of everyone].
If he didn’t go to Henan, he’d return to Hebei.
His temple overlooked the old ferry landing—he carried travelers
across the stream.
He guarded the vital ford like an escarpment ten thousand spans
high.
Snatching away the man or the surroundings, he shaped and
fashioned superlative students.
With his Three States and Three Fundamentals, he forged and
tempered black-robed monks.
He’s always at home, yet forever on the way.
The true man without rank went in and out the face.
The monks of the two halls gave equal shouts, but guest and host
were obvious.
Illumination and action are simultaneous, fundamentally without
front or back.
A mirror confronting a form, an empty valley echoing a sound.
Marvelously responding in any direction, he left not a trace behind.
Tucking up his robe, he journeyed southward, then went to stay in
Daming.
54

p r e f a c e t o t h e r e c o r d e d s ay i n g s | 55

Xinghua took him as his teacher and attended him in the Eastern
Hall.
Still using the copper pitcher and iron bowl, he closed his room and
stopped his words.
As the pines grew old and the clouds idled, he found boundless
contentment within himself.
He had not long sat facing the wall when the secret transmission
neared its end.
To whom was the true dharma transmitted? It was extinguished
upon reaching the blind ass!
Old Yan of Yuanjue has now undertaken to circulate this text.
It has been examined and corrected, therefore it contains no error
or confusion.
There is still one more shout coming; it needs further consideration:
Chan students who have the eye [to see], I entreat you not to exploit
this text.
Preface respectfully composed on the day of the midautumn
festival, the year Gengzi of the Xuanhe era [1120].

Historical Introduction
and Commentary

Historical Introduction
to The Record of Linji
Yanagida Seizan 柳田聖山

The Linji lu (Record of Linji), a compilation of the recorded
sermons, statements, and actions of the Tang-dynasty Chan priest Linji
Yixuan (d. 866),1 forms the central text of the Linji school of Chan. This
school rose to prominence within a century of Linji’s death, owing not only
to the stature of Linji himself but also to the contributions of the master’s
many eminent successors. In the ensuing centuries the school’s increasing
importance throughout East Asia brought a widespread acclaim to the Linji
lu, by then accepted as an authoritative statement of the Linji school’s basic
spirit and as one of the most important early records of Chan thought.
Scholars have always regarded the Linji lu not only as an essential source
for the Linji school but also as a vital document in the history of both Buddhist doctrine and East Asian thought in general. Few works in the Buddhist
canon match it in simplicity, directness, and force of expression, and few
retain such immediate appeal for the reader of today.
Before proceeding to a discussion of the text itself, let us brieﬂy describe
Editor’s note: As noted in the Editor’s Prologue, this Introduction was written by Prof.
Yanagida for the original 1975 edition of The Record of Linji. Although the scholarship is thus
considerably dated, Yanagida decided to leave it unrevised for the present edition, as an indication of the state of Zen scholarship at that time, and for its value in understanding historical
views that still prevail in traditional Zen Buddhism. Much of Yanagida’s original note material,
which had to be abridged for the Eastern Buddhist article (Yanagida 1972), is included in the
present Introduction, with some additions and alterations by the editor. For recent scholarly
studies on the background and development of the Linji lu and other Zen literature, see, for
example, Yanagida 1967, 1977; Yampolsky 1967; Iriya 1989; McRae 1986, 2003; Wright
2000; and Welter 2008.

59

60 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

the historical circumstances that helped produce this work, and examine
what is known of the life of the man whose teachings it embodies.
historical background
Buddhism ﬁrst entered China toward the end of the ﬁrst century bce, from
the south by sea and from the west by the overland trade routes of Central
Asia, but it was not until the latter part of the Eastern Han dynasty (25–220
ce) that this religion began to take root in a land whose climate, customs,
and ways of thought diﬀered so markedly from those of its native India. Over
the early centuries of the ﬁrst millennium Buddhism became increasingly
inﬂuential in the Middle Kingdom, and itself underwent profound changes
in both form and content.2
Religions develop in the context of a certain culture, and thus inevitably
encounter diﬃculties when introduced to new lands. Buddhism, however,
has shown itself throughout history to be remarkably adaptable in the face of
such diﬃculties, and from the beginning its missionaries have not hesitated
to adopt expedient ways of meeting them.
During its early years in China, Buddhism remained a largely alien cult,
conﬁned to the communities of foreigners settled on Chinese soil. Indian
and Central Asian monks, who generally traveled to China in the company
of merchants, established temples in the scattered towns and cities along
the trade routes, often with the merchants’ assistance. These temples not
only functioned as centers of religious activity, but, fortiﬁed as they were
against the attacks prevalent in those turbulent times, also served as inns,
warehouses, and ﬁnancial centers. In the ensuing centuries, through the
gradual expansion of their commercial activities and the acquisition of large
holdings of land, the Buddhist monasteries became important forces in the
Chinese economy.
The decline of the Han dynasty and, with it, the ﬁnal dissolution of
the political and social structure of the empire gave rise to frequent shifts
in power, particularly during the troubled years of the Three Kingdoms
(221–265) and Six Dynasties (265–580). These shifts, however, oﬀered the
Buddhist missionaries from India and Central Asia greater opportunities to
serve in advisory capacities to the new regimes that rose to power, and thus
to disseminate in China both the doctrines of Buddhism and the hitherto
little-known culture, art, and secular knowledge of their homelands.
Needless to say, the China into which this new religion was being introduced already possessed a long and highly developed cultural tradition of its
own. This native tradition immediately began to act upon and mold the foreign religion, at the same time that it drew inspiration from the new elements

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 61

of philosophy, ritual, and iconography that were being introduced from the
Buddhist side. As a result the Chinese ﬁne arts, particularly sculpture, were
infused with a new spirit and vigor, a development that in time inspired the
superb Buddhist images seen in the caves of Datong 大同 and Longmen 龍
門 in northern China. Literature, too, felt the inﬂuence of Buddhism as the
foreign-born missionaries and their Chinese assistants produced a growing
body of skillfully translated, and retranslated, sutras and śāstras, augmented
by original works of exegesis by native Buddhist scholars. The resulting corpus of Chinese Buddhist writings, which eventually came to form the Chinese
Tripiṭaka,3 gave the religion an authoritative collection of sacred texts equal to
that of the native Confucian tradition, with its Five Classics and their extensive commentaries.
The large-scale literary and ritual activities of Chinese Buddhism, plus
the rigors of China’s northerly climate, required the monks to adopt a more
sedentary way of life than had been the case in India. Mendicancy and many
of the austerities that had characterized the Buddhist lifestyle in its native
land were thus curtailed or modiﬁed. Residing in temples that were virtually government oﬃces and receiving the patronage of the rulers, nobility,
and wealthy merchants, the Buddhist clergy came in many ways to resemble
a branch of the bureaucracy.4 There were, of course, monks who strongly
opposed this tendency and continued to observe the traditional vinaya, but
they were in the minority. Most of the clergy seemed content to ally themselves with the system of state-sponsored Buddhism devoted, at least in part,
to the service of the government.
Supported by the governing and mercantile classes and infused with
fresh intellectual vigor from the Chinese literati (many of whom were fascinated with the philosophy of this new religion), the various schools of Buddhism achieved dazzling heights in metaphysics and the arts—and material
prosperity to match—during the years of the Six Dynasties (220–589), the
Sui 隋 (581–618), and the ﬁrst century and a half of the Tang (618–907). The
foundations of this cultural and material prosperity were weak, however,
since they rested not upon any kind of genuine popular understanding and
support but upon the political and economic power of the rulers.
Therefore, when in 755 the military adventurer An Lushan 安祿山 (d.
757) rebelled against the authority of the Tang court and plunged the empire
into confusion, many of what had been until that time the most ﬂourishing
of the Chinese Buddhist traditions—the Tiantai 天台, Lü 律, Faxiang 法相,
Huayan 華嚴, and Zhenyan 眞言schools—entered a period of steady decline.
Centered as they were in the two Tang capitals of Chang’an 長安 and Luoyang 洛陽, they inevitably shared the same fate as the ruling classes that had
supported them. The clergy of these schools either struggled to continue

62 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

their activities on a much-reduced scale in the cities and provinces, or, as
with the Tiantai school, withdrew to the mountain retreats associated with
their founders.
However, the same circumstances that so weakened the capital-centered,
state-supported sects worked to the advantage of what was at the time a
lesser, newer tradition, the school known as Chan 禪 . Chan, which had
arisen during the sixth and seventh centuries through the activities of Indian
dhyāna (meditation) masters and their Chinese disciples, was most active in
the southern and other outlying regions of the Chinese empire. Distancing
itself from the aristocratic and scholastic tendencies of the older, established
sects, the Chan tradition proclaimed itself based on “the transmission of
mind by mind,” with “no dependence upon words and letters.”5 In this the
Chan tradition saw itself as a return to the spirit of Śākyamuni Buddha, who
had taught his disciples a practical path to liberation from suﬀering and the
realization of nirvana.
Despite its teaching of “no dependence upon words and letters,” Chan
did not reject the scriptures of the Buddhist canon, but simply warned of
the futility of relying on them for the attainment of emancipating insight.
The sacred texts—and much more so the huge exegetical apparatus that had
grown up around them in the older scholastic schools—were regarded as no
more than signposts pointing the way to liberation. Valuable though they
were as guides, they needed to be transcended in order for one to awaken to
the true intent of Śākyamuni’s teachings.
In place of scriptural study, Chan Buddhism emphasized the integration of dhyāna and the moment-to-moment activities of everyday life. In
line with this practice-centered approach, the early Chan monks rejected
the subsidized life of the city temples, returning to the earlier Buddhist ideal
of wandering mendicancy, or, more commonly, gathered around eminent
masters like Baizhang Huaihai6 in remote monastic communities where
manual labor and a self-suﬃcient lifestyle were part of the rule. In this they
exempliﬁed in their lives the Lotus Sutra teaching that all walks of life and
modes of livelihood are in accord with the buddhadharma. The result was a
practical, vital teaching easily able to adapt to the rapid changes taking place
in Chinese society. Chan was thus far less aﬀected by the weakening of the
old order than was the established Buddhism of the cities.
Chan gradually penetrated all layers of Chinese society and spread over
the entire territory of the empire, bringing to the populace a teaching that
hitherto had been largely conﬁned to the elite. In place of the academic study
that had occupied so much of the time and energy of the older established
schools, the masters of the Chan school substituted sermons and mondōs
(question-and-answer exchanges) conducted in the colloquial language of

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 63

the time. This, as well as Chan’s practical, work-oriented lifestyle, accorded
well with the traditional outlook of the Chinese, which rejected appeals to
abstract speculation and instead put its faith in human goodwill and mankind’s ability to create happiness and order through its own eﬀorts.
Although historians often regard the late Tang and Five Dynasties
(907–960) as a period of social confusion and turmoil, it was also a period
of positive change. A new class of bureaucrats, distinguished more by merit
than by family connections, together with a new group of provincial clans,
rose to positions of power in the outlying areas, taking advantage of the
weaknesses of the central government and the old aristocracy that had supported it. Among these new elites the Chan monks were readily accepted,
even welcomed, so that during the Five Dynasties period it was in the outlying regions that Chan activity tended to ﬂourish. Such frontier areas included
the autonomously ruled Ten States (Nantang 南唐 in modern Jiangxi, Wuyue
吳越 in Zhejiang, Minyue 閩越 in Fujian, Shu 蜀 in Sichuan, and others) and
Zhenzhou 鎮州 in modern Hebei, where the Linji branch of Chan arose.
From middle Tang times on, Zhenzhou and its two neighboring domains,
Youzhou 幽州 and Weizhou 魏州, were known as the “three strongholds” 三鎮
of Hebei. This region, north of the Yellow River and in the extreme northeast
corner of the empire, constituted a key area in the Tang system of provincial administration. Situated as they were on the northernmost border, the
“three strongholds” were the regions closest to the lands of the nomadic
peoples, and thus of vital importance to the military defence of the empire
as a whole.
After the rebellion of An Lushan in 755, both military and civil authority over the administrative districts forming the northeastern frontier were
placed in the hands of the imperially appointed regional commissioners 節
度使 , who almost always concurrently held the imperial appointment of
regional supervisor 觀察使. These oﬃcials were accorded practically unlimited control over the military and economic aﬀairs of the region. As the
authority of the court over the regional governments in the north grew ever
more tenuous, the strength of the regional commissioners increased. Though
still theoretically appointed by the central government and under its jurisdiction, the commissioners came to exercise all the powers of independent
sovereigns, even that of designating their own successors.
The relative independence of these regions was important in the history
of the Chan school, not least of all at the time of the great Chinese persecution of Buddhism in the year Huichang 會昌 5 (845). At that time the reigning
emperor, Wuzong 武宗 (814–846), hoping to mobilize the entire strength of
the empire behind his struggle with Tibet, and encouraged by Taoist advi-

64 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

sors at court, issued an edict calling for the abolition of Buddhism and the
destruction of its institutions.
At precisely this time the Japanese Tendai monk Ennin7 was staying in
a Korean monastery in Shandong awaiting a ship for Japan. In his diary, the
Nittō guhō junrei kōki 入唐求法巡禮行記 (Record of a pilgrimage to the Tang
in search of the dharma), under an entry dated the third day of the eleventh
month of the year Huichang 5 (845), Ennin describes the eﬀects of this persecution:
In the last three or four years, in accordance with imperial edicts, the prefectures and subprefectures of the land have regulated the monks and nuns, and
their return to lay life has been completed. Moreover, throughout the land the
Buddha Halls, monasteries, and temples have all been destroyed; throughout
the land the gold on the ﬁgures of the Buddhas has been peeled oﬀ; throughout the land the bronze and iron buddhas have been smashed, weighed, and
conﬁscated; and the prefectures and subprefectures of the land have gathered
in the money and estates of the monasteries and have taken their retainers and
slaves.

After describing the eﬀects of the actions, however, Ennin adds:
Only in the four regional commanderies north of the Yellow River—Zhen, You,
Wei, and Lu—where Buddhism has always been honored, have the monasteries
not been destroyed, the monks and nuns not been regulated, and Buddhism
not been in the least disturbed. There have repeatedly been sent imperial commissioners to investigate and punish them, but they say, “If the emperor himself
were to come to destroy [the monasteries] and burn [the scriptures] it could be
done, but we are unable to do it.” (Reischauer 1955a, 388)

Thus, for all the threats and shows of authority that accompanied
Emperor Wuzong’s attempt to do away with Buddhism, the edicts had no
eﬀect on the Hebei area. It was in this region that Linji lived his mature life,
and in this atmosphere of political independence that he worked to propagate the teachings of Chan.
the life of linji yixuan
Accounts of the life of Linji Yixuan are found in many of the standard Chan
biographical collections, such as the Zutang ji 祖堂集 (Annals of the ancestral
hall), Jingde chuandeng lu 景德傳燈錄 (Jingde-era Record of the transmission
of the lamp), Song gaoseng zhuan 宋高僧傳 (Song-dynasty Biographies of
eminent monks), Tiansheng guangdeng lu 天聖廣燈錄 (Tiansheng-era Extensive record of the transmission), Chuanfa zhenzong ji 傳法正宗記 (Record of the
transmission of the dharma in the true school)), and the Wudeng huiyuan 五燈
會元 (Compendium of the ﬁve lamps). However, with the possible exception

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 65

of the account in the Song gaoseng zhuan—which, although biographical in
nature, is disappointingly terse—all of these are less concerned with the facts
of Linji’s life than with his sermons and mondōs, anecdotes associated with
him, the lineage of the Linji school, and the transmission of its teachings
and practices. Actually the only date appearing in any of the biographies
is that of Linji’s death, and there is some disagreement on this point, as we
shall later see. If we construct a chronology of the master’s life it must be a
tentative one only, based for the most part upon traditional material rather
than upon facts that can be substantiated with historical accuracy. Aside
from the various biographical collections, the principal source for the life
of Linji is the Linji lu itself, of which the third and last section, the “Xing lu”
行錄 (“The Record of Pilgrimages”), concludes with a brief summary of the
master’s life.
The fact that in the Guzunsu yulu 古尊宿語錄 (Recorded sayings of the
ancient worthies) the same summary is preceded by the title Linji Huizhao
Chanshi taji 臨濟慧照禪師塔記, “Memorial Tower Inscription of Linji Huizhao Chanshi” (x 68, no. 1315, 35a), has led to the traditional assumption
that it was taken from an actual inscription prepared by Linji’s disciples for
his memorial tower. However, the summary—hereafter referred to as the
Memorial Inscription—varies in a number of ways from other accounts of
the master’s life. It is therefore questionable that the Memorial Inscription as
we have it today was actually composed by Linji’s immediate disciples, and it
would seem well not to place too much conﬁdence in statements found there
that are not veriﬁed elsewhere.8
A more reliable and certainly older source for Linji’s biography is to be
found in the reminiscences of earlier days that the master occasionally permitted himself during sermons and talks delivered in the latter part of his life
and recorded in the Linji lu. These, together with the biographical account
contained in the Zutang ji, the earliest account devoted to him, would seem
to constitute the most trustworthy materials for reconstructing the story of
his life.
All the sources agree that Linji’s family name was Xing 邢, although they
do not mention his personal name. The accounts also say that he was a native
of Nanhua 南華 in Cao 曹 Prefecture (or of Caonan 曹南, as the Zutang ji
puts it, combining the two names). This region, corresponding to modern
Yanzhou 兖州 in Shandong Province, was situated just south of the Yellow
River. In Linji’s time it was part of the Henandao 河南道, “South of the River
March.” No exact date for Linji’s birth is known, but from other facts we can
surmise that it took place during the Yuanhe 元和 era (806–820) of the Tang,
probably as early as 810, and certainly not later than 815.
The biographies provide us with no information about Linji’s earliest

66 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

years. The Memorial Inscription, using the stereotyped phraseology characteristic of this style of writing, states only, “As a child he was exceptionally
brilliant, and when he became older he was known for his ﬁlial piety.” The
Chuandeng lu, in the same fashion, says merely, “In his childhood he had
the desire to leave the dusts of the world.” Nor do we know at what age or
under what circumstances Linji became a monk, for the Memorial Inscription immediately continues, “After shaving his head and receiving the full
precepts, he frequented the lecture halls; he mastered the vinaya and made
a thorough study of the sutras and śāstras.” We may assume, however, that
Linji entered the religious life at about twenty, the usual age at that time, and
that for perhaps ﬁve or six years thereafter he studied the standard Buddhist
texts and doctrines. In sermon 18 Linji states, “I started out devoting myself
to the vinaya and also delved into the sutras and śāstras”—a passage with
which the author of the Memorial Inscription obviously was familiar. How
thoroughly grounded Linji was in this teaching is clear from the fact that in
his sermons he frequently quotes various Buddhist texts. Furthermore, his
teachings show the inﬂuence of works of the Huayan 華嚴 (Avataṃsaka)
and Weishi 唯識 (“Consciousness-only”; Yogācāra) schools. In fact, from the
Zutang ji account of his life, it would seem that he may have regarded himself
as something of an expert on the doctrines of the latter school, since we are
told that, on his ﬁrst visit to the Chan monk Dayu,9 “when night came he
sat before Dayu talking about the Yuqie lun 瑜伽論 (Treatise on the stages of
Yogācāra practice), speaking of Weishi thought, and raising diﬃcult questions” (zj 19).
However, in sermon 18, Linji, after mentioning his early study of the scriptures, goes on to say, “But later, when I realized that they were only remedies to
help the world and displays of opinion, I threw them all away, and, searching
for the Way, I practiced meditation.” The Memorial Inscription, paraphrasing
the master’s words, says of this momentous decision, “Suddenly [one day] he
said with a sigh, ‘These are prescriptions for helping the world, not the principle of the transmission outside the scriptures.’ Then he changed his robe and
traveled on a pilgrimage.”
Such a sudden and dramatic shift in interest from the texts and doctrines
of earlier Buddhism to the newer teachings of Chan seems to have characterized the careers of many who later became famous Chan masters. Thus we
have similar accounts telling how the young Deshan Xuanjian,10 when his
interest turned to Chan, burned his collection of commentaries on the Jingang jing 金剛經 (Diamond Sutra), and how Xiangyan Zhixian,11 in a similar
gesture, threw away the huge mass of exegetical material on the sutras that
he had painstakingly gathered together.
Leaving his birthplace in the district of Henan and traveling southward,

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 67

Linji eventually came to Jiangnan 江南, the region “South of the Yangzi”
where the Chan master Huangbo Xiyun12 was already attracting students
from all over the empire. If we follow our tentative chronology, the meeting of master and disciple must have occurred between 836 and 841, when
Linji was perhaps in his twenty-sixth year. Xiyun was then living at Da’an si,
a temple in the capital of Hongzhou, where he had taken up his residence
about 833. It was only in 842 that Xiyun met the eminent oﬃcial and ardent
lay Buddhist Pei Xiu,13 then the newly appointed governor of Zhongling
(present Jiangxi Province). A year or two later Pei, now Xiyun’s devoted disciple, had installed the master in the temple that he had constructed for him
on Mount Huangbo. From this mountain derived the name by which Xiyun
was thereafter generally known and by which we shall from now on refer to
him.
For the ﬁrst few years after he had joined Huangbo’s assembly, Linji
seems to have attracted little attention. During this time, therefore, we may
imagine him devoting himself diligently and wholeheartedly to meditation
and other such activities as were participated in by the students surrounding
Huangbo. This period of preparation, which “The Record of Pilgrimages”
in the Linji lu speciﬁcally states to have lasted three years, was brought to
a close by Linji’s great enlightenment. The account of this event as given in
“The Record of Pilgrimages” is repeated in most of the biographies of Linji
contained in other works. Only the Zutang ji, of which we shall speak in a
moment, oﬀers a diﬀerent version.
According to “The Record of Pilgrimages,” at the suggestion of the head
monk14 of Huangbo’s temple, Linji three times questioned Huangbo on the
cardinal meaning of the buddhadharma and three times was struck by him.
Apologizing for his inability to grasp the meaning of the master’s blows, Linji
prepared to leave the temple. The master then urged him to visit a monk
named Dayu who, he said, would explain everything to him. Accordingly Linji
went to see Dayu, and, after an exchange of a few words, attained enlightenment. Returning to Huangbo, he recounted what had taken place. In a spirited
encounter with the master, Linji slapped Huangbo’s face. “You lunatic, coming
back here and pulling the tiger’s whiskers!” cried the master. To which Linji
responded with a roaring shout, which from that time on was associated with
his name and style of Chan. After this he resumed his place in Huangbo’s
assembly.
In the Zutang ji version Linji went to visit Dayu, who lived in a hermitage not far away, after hearing Huangbo mention that he and Dayu had been
fellow disciples under Mazu Daoyi.15 On his ﬁrst meeting with Dayu, Linji
attempted to impress the old monk by discoursing all night on various Buddhist scriptures and doctrines. At dawn Dayu, who had listened in silence

68 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

throughout the night, berated the young monk and pushed him out the
door. When Linji returned and reported to Huangbo on his visit, he was reprimanded for not having made better use of the opportunity. He then set oﬀ
to visit Dayu again. Again he was scolded and driven out of the door, but this
time he returned to Huangbo convinced that he had achieved understanding. When some ten days later he went once more to see Dayu, he anticipated
the old monk’s eﬀorts to drive him away by knocking him down and beating
him. Thereupon Dayu acknowledged Linji as his disciple.
Which of these versions is nearer the truth is, of course, impossible to
determine at this date. The master himself in his later years, in the sermon
already quoted above, recalled his period of study under Huangbo as follows:
Still later I met a great teacher. Then, indeed, my dharma-eye became clear and for
the ﬁrst time I was able to understand all the old teachers of the world and to tell
the true from the false. It is not that I understood from the moment I was born of
my mother, but that, after exhaustive investigation and grinding practice, in one
instant I knew for myself.

And in another sermon he says:
Twenty years ago, when I was with my late master Huangbo, three times I asked
him speciﬁcally about the cardinal meaning of the buddhadharma, and three
times he favored me with blows from his stick. But it was as though he were
patting me with a branch of mugwort.

Several anecdotes relating to Linji’s life in Huangbo’s community after
his enlightenment are related in the succeeding portions of “The Record of
Pilgrimages,” and two appear in the section preceding it, entitled “Critical
Examinations.” These anecdotes suggest that for some years after his enlightenment Linji pursued his practice continuously under Huangbo. However,
the Zutang ji account, which we cannot discount, tells us that after this event
Linji served Dayu until the old monk’s death ten years later. The probability
is that during the ten years following his enlightenment Linji journeyed back
and forth between Huangbo’s temple and Dayu’s hermitage, with occasional
trips—at Huangbo’s request, as suggested by the anecdotes above—to see
Deshan Xuanjian in Langzhou and Guishan Lingyou16 in Tanzhou, and to
visit the monastery on Mount Jing in Hangzhou.17
Since it was during this period that Emperor Wuzong’s great suppression
of Buddhism occurred, it would be natural to suppose that Linji was aﬀected.
No account of his life, however, mentions the proscription or suggests any
inﬂuence upon his activities. In view of the statements in the Zutang ji, we
may, perhaps, surmise that, during the worst of the persecution at least, Linji

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 69

was staying in the mountain hut of his mentor, Dayu, undisturbed by the
events taking place in the outside world.
The ﬁrst part of “The Record of Pilgrimages” indicates that after Dayu’s
death Linji stayed for a time with Huangbo’s community at Mount Huangbo,
where Huangbo had returned when the proscription was lifted. In perhaps
849 or 850 Linji left and set out on a pilgrimage. Ten or twelve years had
passed since his enlightenment, and he was now a mature man of forty.
The leave-taking between master and disciple is described in some
detail in both the “The Record of Pilgrimages” section of the Linji lu and the
Chuandeng lu biography. Two men, now of equal attainment, stand face to
face. The older, mellowed with years, receives the blow given by the younger
with a laugh in which pride and regard undoubtedly mingle. He oﬀers his
disciple mementos received from his own teacher Baizhang, material signs
of the transmission of the dharma; the disciple, in the full ﬂush of his powers and conﬁdent that one who has become the living dharma has no need
of such things, orders them burned. “Take them along anyway,” urges the old
master, “in the future you’ll cut oﬀ the tongue of every man in the world.”
The Zutang ji and the Song gaoseng zhuan tell us nothing regarding
Linji’s subsequent pilgrimage.18 In the Chuandeng lu, however, his departure
from Huangbo is immediately followed by the story of his visit to Bodhidharma’s memorial tower in Henan; “The Record of Pilgrimages” also records
this and other incidents obviously related to the journey. This long pilgrimage, which Linji must have made on foot, was for him a period of testing his
own understanding against that of other masters. The anecdotes make very
clear that he reached the north certain that few men, if any, could match him,
and that none could surpass him.
Linji’s pilgrimage came to an end, perhaps a year later, with his arrival in
Zhenzhou,19 in the Hebei area. There, according to the Memorial Inscription,
he became the master of a small temple that stood near the southeast corner
of the walls of the city of Zhenzhou, the capital of Zhenzhou. Because of
its location on the banks of the Hutuo 滹沱 River, the temple was called the
Linji yuan 臨濟院, or “Temple Overlooking the Ford.” The statements in the
Chuandeng lu and the Song gaoseng zhuan, though more brief, are virtually
the same, but both introduce one interesting fact not found in the Memorial
Inscription, namely that it was at the invitation of a “man of Zhao” 趙人 that
Linji settled in Zhenzhou.
Who this “man of Zhao” actually was we do not know. During the Warring States period (403–221 bce) Zhao 趙 was the name of the entire area of
which the prefectures of Zhaozhou and Zhenzhou were later a part. In view
of the tendency in China to continue using old names for places to which
succeeding dynasties had given new designations, it is possible that “Zhao”

70 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

may here have been used in its ancient meaning, and thus might refer to
the Zhenzhou of Linji’s time. If we accept this possibility, the “man of Zhao”
must have been a contemporary of Linji living in the Zhenzhou district. Furthermore, whoever he was, he must have been a person of eminence, since
it is unlikely that anyone but an important oﬃcial would have issued such
an invitation. Although the “man of Zhao” is not again referred to in the two
above-mentioned biographies, or anywhere else, the ﬁrst sermon in the Linji
lu opens with the words, “The Prefectural Governor, Councilor Wang [Fuzhu
Wang Changshi 府主王常侍],20 along with the other oﬃcials, requested the
master to take the high seat and address them.” The second sermon, too, was
given at the request of this same oﬃcial, and there is a friendly conversation
between him and the master recorded in the “Critical Examinations” section. Is it possible that the “man of Zhao” and the governor of the prefecture,
Wang, were one and the same person? Let us see what is known of the Wang
family of Zhen.
As discussed above, from middle Tang times the region of which Zhenzhou was part had constituted a virtually independent political unit. All
actual power was in the hands of the Wang family, who, as with all regional
commissioners in that area, wielded it much as they pleased in deﬁance of
the orders of the central government.21 In 834 Wang Tingcou 王庭湊 (d. 834),
then regional commissioner of Chengde Prefecture, within whose jurisdiction Zhenzhou was included, was succeeded in his post by his son Wang
Yuankui 王元逵 (d. 855). Wang Yuankui is said to have “reformed the ways
of his father and carried out his duties to the central court with the greatest
propriety” (Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑑 245). Because of his respectful attitude,
Wang was rewarded by Emperor Wenzong 文宗 (r. 826–840) with the gift in
marriage of an imperial princess, Shouan 壽安 (Jiu Tang shu 舊唐書 408). No
doubt the emperor hoped in this way to regain a measure of control over the
independent-minded Wang family.
The eldest son of this union, Wang Shaoding 王紹鼎 (d. 857), succeeded
his father as regional commissioner in 855, only to die two years later. Shaoding was succeeded by his youngest brother, Wang Shaoyi 王紹懿 , who
served as regional commissioner until his death in 866, the probable year of
Linji’s death.
On the basis of these dates it is possible, of course, for Linji’s patron to
have been either Wang Yuankui or one of the two sons who succeeded him.
But since only the life of the youngest son, Wang Shaoyi, spanned the length
of Linji’s stay in Zhenzhou, and since the statements in the text mentioning
Wang Changshi all clearly refer to the same person, it seems reasonable to
suppose that it was Wang Shaoyi who was the patron and friend of Linji,
and who may even have been the “man of Zhao” who originally invited him

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 71

to take up residence at the temple Linji yuan.22 But whoever he might have
been, Councilor Wang was obviously of great assistance to Linji in his eﬀorts
to propagate the doctrines of Chan in Zhenzhou.
Another person of apparent importance to Linji was the monk Puhua,23
one of Chan’s fascinating eccentrics. The eighth anecdote in “The Record
of Pilgrimages” mentions a prophecy made to Linji by Yangshan Huiji 24 on
the occasion of Linji’s taking a letter from Huangbo to Yangshan’s teacher
Guishan: “Later on you’ll go to the north and there’ll…be a man to help
you.”
Whether this story has any basis in fact, the man referred to has traditionally been regarded as Puhua. The Memorial Inscription states only that
Puhua was already in Zhenzhou when Linji reached there, that he was of
help to the master, and that he disappeared after the latter’s teaching began
to ﬂourish. However, the several anecdotes centering on Puhua in the “Critical Examinations” section support the statements in the Memorial Inscription, and these statements are further substantiated by the accounts, meager
though they are, under Puhua’s name in other biographical collections.
Though the dates and, indeed, even the historicity of a ﬁgure as shadowy as
Puhua remain a matter of doubt, the anecdotes connected with him nevertheless sum up some of the important characteristics of the Hebei style
of Chan, and he is therefore an important ﬁgure in the history of the Linji
school.
After mentioning Puhua’s assistance to Linji, the Memorial Inscription
continues:
It happened that local ﬁghting broke out, and Linji abandoned the temple. The
Grand Marshal, Mo Junhe, donated his house inside the town walls and made
it into a temple. Hanging up a plaque there, inscribed with the old name “Linji,”
he had the master make it his residence.

Tradition has accepted this statement unconditionally, even though the facts
recounted in it are not corroborated by any of the other sources for Linji’s
life. Recent scholarship, however, has rediscovered what seems already to
have been recognized in Song times, namely that the “Grand Marshal, Mo
Junhe” of the Memorial Inscription was undoubtedly the man known to history as Mo Junhe, a butcher who, according to the Jiu Wudai shi, saved the
life of Wang Rong, the young regional commissioner of Zhenzhou. Further
research has established that Mo was about twenty-six when the rescue
occurred in 893. Thus Mo Junhe was born about the year that Linji died,
making any connection between the two men impossible.25
Mo Junhe’s daring exploit and subsequent rise to fame and riches made
him a popular, even fabulous, hero in the region, his renown augmented

72 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

by his connection with Wang Rong, often called Zhao Wang, the “King of
Zhao.”26 Although there are several possible reasons for including this statement in the Memorial Inscription, no tangible evidence exists to substantiate
them. The simplest explanation, and perhaps the most likely, is that the writers of the Inscription, disregarding historical fact, inserted the statement into
their summary of the founder’s life with the deliberate intention of enhancing the prestige of the Linji school in Hebei through linking the master’s
name with that of a popular local hero, and thus, by implication, with that
of Mo’s powerful patron, the King of Zhao. Therefore, unless other concrete
evidence appears, we must content ourselves with the probability that it was
at the little temple on the river bank that the master spent the years of his
sojourn in Zhenzhou, and that there he “carried on his work of conversion
in Hebei” (zj 19).
Linji Yixuan’s career as a teacher was relatively short, probably not more
than ten or eleven years at the most. Twenty-two sermons attributed to this
period form the body of the Linji lu. Though they must represent but a small
portion of those the master actually gave during these years, and though
they have certainly been subjected to the hands of more than one notetaking disciple and compiler, yet they provide us with an account of the man
and his teaching unparalleled in Chan literature for its vividness and force.
These sermons were delivered during the middle years of the master’s life,
while he was at the height of his powers. The touch of arrogance evident in
his leave-taking of Huangbo and still apparent in his exchanges during his
pilgrimage had now been replaced by an unshakable self-conﬁdence based
upon complete faith in the truth and profundity of his personal religious
experience. But beneath his outspoken, abrasive, and, at times, even crude
manner of expression may be sensed a compassionate urgency to convince
his listeners of the necessity of their ﬁnding within themselves the “true man
of no rank.”
Linji’s familiarity with the essentials of Mahayana and Chan is apparent on every page of the Linji lu, but his free and creative mind constantly
illumines them with insights and invents new, if enigmatic, formulas for conveying their inner meaning. The Zutang ji says of him, “His demonstration
of the main principle was swift, his presentation of the teaching profound;
as for the innermost meaning of these, it is inexpressible and ineﬀable” (zj
19). But before whom were these sermons delivered? We have seen that on
at least two occasions the governor of the prefecture and oﬃcials of his staﬀ
were present; perhaps some of the townspeople also came to listen. From
time to time a traveling Chan monk, a lecture master of another school, or a
pilgrim on his or her way to Mount Wutai to worship Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī27
seems to have visited Linji’s insigniﬁcant temple. And Puhua was there, dur-

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 73

ing the early years at least. But for the most part the audience must have been
made up of the assembly of monks who had come to study under the master.
That this group was never very large is clear from the fact that nowhere do
we read, as in the case of many other famous Chan masters, of “clouds of
students” or of an assembly “numbering never less than several hundreds of
disciples.”
Among the most prominent monks to call upon Linji was Zhaozhou
Congshen,28 who is mentioned brieﬂy in an anecdote in the Critical Examinations section of the Linji lu.29 Also mentioned are visits from Mayu,30
Longya Judun,31 Dajue,32 and Xingshan Jianhong.33 Another episode in this
section speaks of the elders Heyang 河陽 and Muta 木塔; since there is no
mention whatsoever of them elsewhere, we can only surmise that they were
two old monks from the neighborhood with whom the master was on familiar terms.
As to whether Linji continued to have any relations with other Chan
masters of his time, masters whom he had met while under Huangbo or
later, the Linji lu is silent, except in the case of Deshan Xuanjian. Linji himself had once visited Deshan, probably on Huangbo’s orders, and in the later
years of his stay in Zhen he sent his own young attendant Lepu Yuan’an34 to
Hunan to observe and question Deshan. Still, the fact that from early times
the names of the two masters were often linked deserves particular notice.
They belonged to two diﬀerent streams of teaching, Deshan being in the
ﬁfth generation of the Qingyuan 淸原 line and Linji in the ﬁfth generation
of the Nanyue 南嶽 line; one lived south of the Yangzi and the other on the
northern borders of the empire. Yet the Song gaoseng zhuan, speaking of
Linji, could still say, “In showing the essentials of mind, his methods were
much like those of Deshan” (t 50: 779b). Furthermore, the Zhengfayan zang
and the Zongmen liandeng huiyao both record a sermon by Deshan that is
strikingly similar to the sermons of Linji.35 Indeed, so close are the sermons
of the two men in thought and wording that it would almost seem that one
was inﬂuenced by the other. However that may be, it was certainly recognized from early times that their teachings and training methods were very
much alike, and it became customary to refer to “the stick of Deshan and the
shout of Linji.”
As for the master’s disciples, the Linji lu mentions only a few. There is
Sansheng Huiran,36 to whom the master is recorded as addressing his ﬁnal
words. The name Baoshou Yanzhao appears at the end of the text (that is, of
the Memorial Inscription with which it concludes) as the “humble heir” who
inscribed it.37 Baoshou’s name is followed—in most editions after an endtitle—by that of Xinghua Cunjiang,38 who signs himself as the collator of the
text. A young disciple named Lepu is identiﬁed as Linji’s attendant; later this

74 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

monk went to the south and became an heir of Jiashan Shanhui.39 Dajue, who
is merely a visitor in the Critical Examinations anecdote mentioned above
and, in the earlier biographical works, is regarded as an heir of Huangbo, in
later works is listed as one of Linji’s heirs.40 The only other name to appear in
the text is that of Elder Ding (Ding Shangzuo 定上座, lit., “Ding of the Upper
Seat”); who this man was we do not know, but the episode concerning him
in Critical Examinations 18 is repeated in several other texts,41 and in at least
one instance Ding is recorded as having taken part with others in a discussion on Linji’s “true man of no rank.”42 Among the disciples of Linji, the most
important have always been regarded as Sansheng, Xinghua, and Dajue.
The Zutang ji discusses only three of Linji’s heirs: Baoshou, Xinghua,
and a certain Guanxi Zhixian.43 The Chuandeng lu, on the other hand, gives
the names of twenty-two heirs (t 51: 289b), including all the disciples mentioned in the Linji lu and the Zutang ji except Lepu and Ding; for sixteen of
these monks the accounts are less biographies than records of mondōs with
which their names are associated. The Tiansheng guangdeng lu (x 78, no.
1553, 421a) and the Chuanfa zhenzong ji (t 51: 754a) mention all those in the
Chuandeng lu account, but bring the number of heirs up to twenty-four by
adding Elder Ding and an unknown person by the name of Elder Huo 奯
上座. These longer lists seem somewhat contrived, and their existence can
undoubtedly be attributed to the desire of later adherents of the Linji school
to lend the founder as much prestige as possible. Also, with few exceptions,
these men, if they did not come from the Hebei area originally, later settled
in temples there. So, regardless of whether or not they were long subjected
to the master’s severe discipline, at least by propagating his teachings in
the region north of the Yellow River they helped lay the foundations of his
school of Chan.
It is unknown what brought Linji’s period of teaching in Zhenzhou to a
close. The biographies tell us nothing; in fact they do not even mention that
he ever left Linji yuan. The Memorial Inscription says merely:
Later the master tucked up his robes and went south to the prefecture of He.
The governor of the prefecture, the Councilor Wang, extended to him the honors due a master. After staying for a short while, the master went to Xinghua
temple in Daming Prefecture, where he lived in the Eastern Hall.

Again the facts recorded here present several diﬃculties. Before trying to
resolve them, however, let us turn to the stele inscription written for Linji’s
heir Xinghua Cunjiang by the oﬃcial Gongcheng Yi,44 a source that appears
to be of reasonable historical accuracy. According to this inscription, Cunjiang, after ﬁnishing his study under Linji, set forth (probably in late 862 or
early 863) on a pilgrimage to the south. After recounting several incidents of

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 75

this pilgrimage, the inscription goes on to say that, while Cunjiang was visiting Yangshan Huiji in Zhongling,
of a sudden he heard that Great Master Linji had accepted an invitation from
Prime Minister Lord Jiang of Pu.45 He immediately determined to attend [his
former teacher] himself, and hastened to take up his staﬀ. He overtook [Linji]
at Zhongtiao, and from then on could accompany him…. As they were about
to cross [the ford] at Baima they were met on the road by a special messenger
sent to welcome Great Master Linji by Late Grand Marshal and President of
the Grand Imperial Secretariat, Lord He.46 With [Cunjiang] acting as reverent
attendant, they pressed forward without stopping until they arrived at [Wei]fu.
There they took up their residence in the temple Jiangxi chanyuan 江西禪院, of
Guanyin si 觀音寺.

Returning to the diﬃculties presented by the Memorial Inscription, the
ﬁrst is the identity of “the prefecture of He” 河府. Since Linji is described
as having gone south, commentators in the past—none of whom seems to
have taken Cunjiang’s stele inscription into consideration—believed that
the prefecture referred to was Henan 河南, the region south of the Yellow
River where Linji was born. However, Wang Changshi, who according to
the Memorial Inscription received Linji with honor, was, as explained above,
the regional commissioner of Chengde Prefecture, the area that included
Zhenzhou, where Linji had up to this time been residing. To be received by
this dignitary the master had no need to go south to another prefecture. Nor
is the situation remedied by assuming that “the prefecture of He” refers to
Hebei 河北, where Linji, living in Zhenzhou, had been all the time.
Moreover, the order of the narrative here implies that Linji met Wang
Changshi only after he had been preaching in Zhenzhou for ten years or
more. But from the fact that the Linji lu opens with Wang Changshi and his
staﬀ requesting the master to address them, it is clear that the compilers of
this text believed that the master’s meeting with that oﬃcial had taken place
soon after his arrival in Zhenzhou.
The statements in the Memorial Inscription become more acceptable,
however, if read in conjunction with those of Cunjiang’s stele inscription. If
by “the prefecture of He” we understand the prefecture of Hezhong 河中, and
if we regard as untenable the Memorial Inscription’s statement that Linji was
received by Wang Changshi, the problems can be resolved. On the basis of
the stele inscription, and on the supposition that Prime Minister Lord Jiang
of Pu represents the oﬃcial Jiang Shen,47 what took place between the time
the master left Zhenzhou and the time he arrived in the city of Weifu 魏府
may be reconstructed without stretching things too far.
We know from the stele inscription that Cunjiang did not come to study
with Linji until sometime in 861. It seems more than likely that he stayed

76 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

with the master for a year or more before leaving on his pilgrimage, since the
relation between him and Linji was apparently an intimate one. After Cunjiang’s departure Linji received an invitation from Lord Jiang, that is, Jiang
Shen, who in 861 had been appointed regional commissioner of Hezhong,
with his seat in Puzhou 蒲州. Thus in order to accept this invitation Linji
had, of course, to journey to Puzhou, a district in the great bend of the Yellow River in what is today the southwest corner of Shansi, a considerable
distance to the southwest of Zhenzhou.
We do not know when Linji set out on this journey, but we may surmise
that it was sometime in 863 or 864—the spring of 864 seems likely—and
journeyed south, meeting Cunjiang on the road before reaching the city of
Pu itself. Whether Lord Jiang was in Pu and personally received the master, or
whether he had already moved to his next assignment in Kaifeng Prefecture
開封府, Henan, is not known. It seems probable that they did not meet, for,
although the master must have spent a year or more in the Pu area, there
is no indication that he met Lord Jiang or settled down anywhere for any
length of time. And, of course, if Lord Jiang had already gone on to another
post, Linji no longer had an important oﬃcial in Pu to serve as patron and
protector. This may have been the reason that he, together with Cunjiang
and a party, started eastward, probably in the spring or early summer of
865. Whether their goal was the city of Weifu we do not know. But that they
were not far from there when the messenger from Lord He of Wei met them
at what seems to have been the river crossing of Baima 白馬 is clear from
the fact that a day’s forced journey brought them to the city and the temple
where the master was to spend his last days.
The discrepancy between the Memorial Inscription and the stele inscription regarding the location of Linji’s ﬁnal residence oﬀers no diﬃculty. The
Memorial Inscription’s “Damingfu” 大名府 and the stele inscription’s “Weifu”
refer to the same place—Damingfu was the oﬃcial designation for Weifu
after the Tang dynasty, and was apparently in unofficial use from much
earlier. The diﬀerence in the temple names—Xinghua si 興化寺 (Memorial
Inscription) and Jiangxi chanyuan 江西禪院 (stele inscription)—is harder
to account for, but may well have resulted from a simple error. The stele
inscription mentions that in 875, some years after Linji’s death, a splendid
temple was erected for Cunjiang in Wei under the patronage of an uncle of
Lord Han;48 although the name of this temple is nowhere stated, it is usually
assumed to have been Xinghua si, since in later years Cunjiang was called
Xinghua Cunjiang. It seems reasonable to suppose, therefore, that, since Linji
spent his ﬁnal days with Cunjiang, the name of the temple so closely associated with this disciple was confused by the writers of the Memorial Inscription with that of the temple at which the master actually stayed. Nor need the

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 77

mention of the “Eastern Hall” detain us—this was the title customarily given
to the building that served as the residence of the former head of a temple
after his retirement.
Neither the Memorial Inscription nor the biographies tell us of the
events of the last period of Linji’s life. The stele inscription for Cunjiang,
however, says that after the master had settled himself in Wei a continuous
stream of oﬃcials, monks, and laymen came to call upon him. But this was
not for long—before a year had passed the master’s life came to an end. Ma
Fang,49 describing this last period of Linji’s life in his preface to the Linji lu,
writes, “[The master] had not long sat facing the wall when the secret transmission neared its end.”
Speaking of Linji’s death, the Memorial Inscription says:
Suddenly one day the master, although not ill, adjusted his robes, sat erect, and
when his exchange with Sansheng was ﬁnished, quietly passed away. It was on
the tenth day of the ﬁrst month in the eighth year of Xiantong [18 February
867] of the Tang dynasty.

The “exchange with Sansheng” (Sansheng Huiran), which in later times was
regarded as important evidence for establishing the ﬁliation of the Linji
school, is recorded at the end of the “Record of Pilgrimages,” and again in
the Record of Pilgrimages 21 in the Linji lu. It should be noted, however, that
it is mentioned only in these two places. The Zutang ji states simply, “The
master died on the tenth day of the fourth month in the seventh year of the
Xiantong era (27 May 866).” The Chuandeng lu follows the same wording,
adding only a transmission verse that the master composed before passing
away. Not only do these two accounts fail to mention Sansheng, but their
dates for the master’s death diﬀer by about eight months from that given in
the Memorial Inscription. These facts suggest that these texts were written
without any knowledge of the Memorial Inscription, or that the Memorial
Inscription was composed at a later date, and perhaps by a diﬀerent branch
of the Linji lineage from that which provided the materials for the Zutang ji
and the Chuandeng lu.
Therefore, though the date given in the Memorial Inscription has traditionally been accepted for Linji’s death, more sound consideration would
seem to favor that recorded in the Zutang ji and the Chuandeng lu, namely,
27 May 866.
The ﬁnal paragraph of the Memorial Inscription states:
His disciples built a memorial tower for the master’s body in the northwest corner of the capital of Daming Prefecture. The emperor decreed that the master
be given the posthumous title Meditation Master Huizhao, and his memorial
tower be called Chengling.

78 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

All the biographies agree that Linji’s posthumous title was Huizhao Chanshi
慧照禪師, “Meditation Master of Illuminating Wisdom”; the Zutang ji and
the Song gaoseng zhuan, however, give the name of the memorial tower, as
Chengxu 澄虛, “Pure Vacuity,” instead of as Chengling 澄靈, “Pure Spirit.”
In conclusion, the stele inscription for Cunjiang again provides us with a
few more details than are available elsewhere. After the master’s death, it says,
“Cunjiang carried out the mourning observances with heartfelt reverence
and deep feeling. He did not deviate from the rules for constructing the tomb
enclosure, and was able to complete all the rites of cremation” (this would
seem to contradict the Memorial Inscription’s statement that Linji’s body was
entombed). Later, in speaking of Cunjiang’s death, the stele inscription states
that his “memorial tower was erected at Xunfengli in the southern part of the
Guixiang district [of Wei], next to the memorial tower of his former teacher
(Linji),” a ﬁnal small disagreement with the Memorial Inscription, which
placed the master’s tomb in the northwest of the prefecture.
Linji died probably in his early or mid-ﬁfties, and thus did not reach the
advanced age of many of the illustrious masters of his time. Nor did he leave
a large body of notable disciples to disseminate his style of Chan. Among
his few successors, only Xinghua Cunjiang produced a line of transmission
vigorous enough to survive. Of Cunjiang’s heir, Nanyuan Huiyong 南院慧顒
(860–930), third patriarch of the Linji line, nothing is recorded other than
the fact that he lived at the temple Baoying yuan 寶應院 in Ruzhou 汝州, and
a few mondōs in which he took part. Nanyuan’s heir, Fengxue Yanzhao,50
the fourth Linji patriarch, continued to live in the Yellow River region, as
did his successor Shoushan Shengnian,51 and as did Shoushan’s dharma
heir, Fenyang Shanzhao.52 Fenyang’s heir, Shishuang Chuyuan,53 was the
ﬁrst in the line of Linji patriarchs to transmit the Linji school doctrines to
Hunan in the south. Under Shishuang the Linji school achieved a position of
widespread eminence and prosperity. Among his many dharma successors
were Yangqi Fanghui54 and Huanglong Huinan,55 who became the founders,
respectively, of the Yangqi and Huanglong lines, the two principal branches
of the Linji school. It is through later generations of disciples in these two
lineages, some of whom instructed Japanese monks in China and some of
whom themselves went to Japan, that Rinzai masters in Japan today trace
their lineage directly back to Linji Yixuan.
By the late tenth century Chan had divided into the so-called Five
Houses 五家, ﬁve clearly diﬀerentiated schools or lineages of teaching, of
which four—the Linji, Caodong 曹洞 , Yunmen 雲門 , and Guiyang 潙仰
schools—were already mentioned by Fayan Wenyi56 in his Zongmen shigui
lun 宗門十規論 (Treatise on the ten principles of the Chan school); somewhat
later, Fayan’s own distinctive teaching line was acknowledged as the ﬁfth of

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 79

the Five Houses. During the Song dynasty the Yunmen, Guiyang, and Fayan
schools were absorbed into the Linji sect; the Caodong school kept its individuality into Ming times, but only with diﬃculty. Then it too succumbed to
the syncretic movement that produced an all-embracing Chinese Buddhism,
to which the name Chan is generally given, and even at times that of Linji
Chan.
development of the “recorded sayings (yulu)”
The Linji lu is a representative example of the “recorded sayings” 語錄 (C.
yulu, J. goroku) genre of Chinese Buddhist literature. The “recorded sayings”
genre originated within the Chan tradition, and for long was peculiar to
this school. As discussed earlier, Chan stressed its own doctrine of “a separate transmission outside the scriptures” and “the transmission of mind by
mind” over the elaborate exegetical works of the older schools of Buddhism.
In place of stressing the scholastic study of sutras and commentaries, the
earliest masters of Chan taught the integration of dhyāna and prajñā with
manual work and the other activities of daily life. Teaching often took place
in the context of this lifestyle, with masters using the ordinary events of
everyday life as occasions to bring their students to awakening. It would be
quite natural for a student to later note down the teacher’s comments, the
ensuing exchanges of question-and-answer, and the occasional impromptu
sermon, and to circulate such informal records among the other students.
It is possible that such accounts existed even for the ﬁrst Chan patriarch,
Bodhidharma.57
In time it became customary for Chan masters to hold lectures referred
to as “ascending the high seat” 升座 or “going up to the dharma hall” 上堂,
during which the master would sit on a wide, high chair in the temple building known as the dharma hall 法堂 and speak in direct, everyday language
on the main principle of Chan to the assembled monks, nuns, and laypeople.
It seems likely that this custom began around the time of the fourth Chan
patriarch, Daoxin,58 and the ﬁfth Chan patriarch, Hongren.59 Prior to the
time of these two ﬁgures, the monks of the Chan school—if, indeed, Chan
possessed enough individuality or organization at that early date to merit
use of the word “school”—appear to have followed more or less itinerant lifestyles. From the early years of the seventh century, however, these wandering monks began to gather together into organized religious communities,
though, needless to say, the practices of mendicancy and pilgrimage continued to be considered essential religious practices and were never entirely
dispensed with. Under Daoxin and Hongren the size of these communities
increased greatly, and were obliged, in order to function successfully, to

80 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

apportion tasks and lay down rules for the agricultural and other types of
work. It seems reasonable to suppose, therefore, that certain times were set
aside during which the master would conduct lectures for the beneﬁt of the
assembly as a whole.
As noted above, on such occasions the master not only would exchange
questions and answers with individual members of the community, as had
been done on a more casual basis in the past, but would also deliver fairly
long sermons of a more formal nature. These sermons were often recorded,
compiled, and preserved by the masters’ disciples. This appears to have been
the case even with early texts like the Lengqie shizi ji (see note 57), attributed
to Daoxin and Hongren and including numerous excerpts from sermons,
and the Dasheng wusheng fangbian men 大乘無生方便門 (Expedient means
for attaining birthlessness in the Mahayana), recording the teachings of the
Northern-school master Shenxiu60 or his disciples. The latter text depicts the
master striking a wooden block in order to make a point as he expounds in a
direct, straightforward way on the basic meaning of the scriptures.
Sections of the Lengqie shizi ji and all of the Dasheng wusheng fangbian
men are rather heterogeneous and fragmentary in their contents, and cannot be called yulu in the true sense of the word since they are not primarily
records of sermons (although they do contain quotations from sermons).
The earliest extant works to possibly merit the label yulu are the Liuzu tanjing
六僧壇經 (well known in English as The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch),
recording the sermons of the Sixth Patriarch, Huineng;61 and the Nanyang
heshang dunjiao jietuo chanmen zhiliaoxing tanyu 南陽和上頓教解脱禪門直
了性壇語 (The priest of Nanyang’s platform sermon on direct realization of
innate nature according to the Chan doctrine of emancipation through the
teaching of sudden awakening), recording those of the Sixth Patriarch’s student and advocate of the Southern school of Chan, Heze Shenhui.62
The earliest manuscript of the Liuzu tanjing, that recovered from Dunhuang, bears a similarly long title: “Southern school sudden [enlightenment]
doctrine, Supreme Mahayana Great Perfection of Wisdom Sutra: The Platform Sutra preached by the Sixth Patriarch, Huineng, at Dafan si in Shaozhou; one fascicle; compiled by the disciple Fahai, who received both the
commandment of formlessness and [permission] to spread the dharma.”63
This text contains not only the sermons preached by the Sixth Patriarch at
Dafan si but also much additional material on Huineng’s life and teaching.
The title suggests the circumstances under which the sermons were preached
and recorded, and its use of the designation “sutra,” unique in Zen literature,
provides an indication of the extreme reverence in which Huineng must
have been held. The word in eﬀect elevates the Sixth Patriarch to a level

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 81

equal to that of Śākyamuni Buddha and invests his words with an authority
to match.
It is interesting to note that the opening lines of the text state that the
Sixth Patriarch was requested to preach by a group of over ten thousand
monks, nuns, and lay believers, as well as by Wei Ju64 (the prefect of Shaozhou), his subordinate oﬃcials, and a number of Confucian scholars, and that
Wei ordered a disciple named Fahai65 to compile a record of the sermons.
This is obviously in conscious imitation of the introductions to the sermons
of the Buddha as recorded in the sutras, which were said to have been delivered in Rājagṛha and other cities at the request of the rulers and the four
orders of believers (monks, nuns, male believers, and female believers). The
same form is followed by Huangbo’s Chuanxin fayao and the Linji lu.
It may seem odd that Chan monks—who tended to be less associated
with civil authorities than were the representatives of the older Buddhist
schools—would ally themselves in this way with government ﬁgures. It is
important to note, however, that the oﬃcials who patronized masters like
Huineng, Huangbo, and Linji were in all cases not the highest ministers of
the central court, but lower-echelon oﬃcials in provincial administrations.
It is uncertain exactly what is meant by the term “platform” 壇 in the
titles Liuzu tanjing and Shenhui tanyu, but the most likely explanation is
that it refers to the raised platform-like seat or stand from which the master would deliver his sermons. In the Lidai fabao ji we ﬁnd the statement,
“The monk Shenhui of Heze si in the Eastern capital [Luoyang] would each
month construct a platform 壇場 on which to deliver sermons to the people”
(t 51: 185b).
Although, as we have seen, the recording and collecting of the sermons
of the Chan masters had its inception during the Tang, it was not until later
that these compilations came to be generally known as “recorded sayings” 語
錄. Prior to this the most common name for them was “books of sayings” 語
本.66 The Zutang ji mentions other designations for works of this type, such
as “true records”實錄, “separate records” 別錄, “accounts of actions” 行狀, and
“records of pilgrimage” 行錄. Similar terms are “record of words and actions”
言行錄 and “abbreviated biography” 略傳. In the Zongjing lu 宗鏡錄 (Records
of the source-mirror) there is a reference to a work called the Baizhang
guanglu 百丈廣錄 (Extensive record of Baizhang; t 48: 494c).67 The word
語錄 came into general use as a designation for collections of sermons and
records only during the early years of the Song, the ﬁrst known occurrence
of the word being in the title of the biography of Zhaozhou Congshen given
in the Song gaoseng zhuan (t 50: 775c).
From that time on the records of the sermons of its masters, now generally titled “recorded sayings,” became increasingly popular as the Chan

82 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

school ﬂourished. The old Tang texts that had not borne this designation—
including, of course, the Linji lu—were gradually recompiled and given
new titles that included the term. At the same time there was an extensive
compilation of recorded sayings for Song-dynasty masters, far surpassing
any similar literary activity in other Buddhist traditions of the time. The
compilation of these records increased still further during the Yuan 元
(1280–1368), Ming 明 (1368–1644), and Qing 淸 (1644–1912) dynasties. Similarly, following the transmission to Japan of the Chinese “recorded sayings”
literature during the Kamakura era (1185–1333), there began the compilation
of the records of the Japanese Zen masters, a custom that is still followed in
Japan today.
It should also be mentioned that during the Song dynasty the use of
“recorded sayings” was not limited to the Chan tradition but was employed also
by Confucians and Taoists to refer to the collected records of teacher-student
dialogues and lectures delivered in colloquial language.68
the linji lu in china
The compiler of the Linji lu is traditionally assumed to be Linji’s disciple
Sansheng Huiran, since the extant texts of the Linji lu all contain, after
the title, the notation “Compiled by his humble heir Huiran of Sansheng.”
Whether Huiran himself actually recorded the sermons that make up the
body of the text is impossible to say. The long history of the tradition that he
is connected with the work suggests, though, that he was in some way part
of the process of compiling them and putting them into something like their
present form.
We have no way of determining exactly what the earliest version of the
Linji lu was like or when it was compiled. The earliest extant passages from
Linji’s sermons are found in the Zutang ji, the Zongjing lu, and the Chuandeng lu, all of which were compiled before the eleventh century. A comparison of these passages with the parallel passages in the later Tiansheng
guangdeng lu version of the Linji lu reveals minor diﬀerences in the wording
and the ordering of ideas, indicating that the Linji lu sermons have at various times undergone some editing and polishing. Given that the texts of the
sermons were handed down from one generation of disciples to another,
it is reasonable to assume that the wording was gradually smoothed, the
progression of ideas put into better order, and slight changes and additions
made from time to time, until the text arrived at the form in which we have
it today.
The section on Linji in the Zutang ji is followed by the statement, “Other
teaching devices and answers to questions by the master are recorded in

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 83

much greater depth and detail in other records.” The Linji sermon in the
section of the Chuandeng lu entitled “Zhufang guangyu” 諸方廣語 (t 51:
446c–447a), while diﬀering slightly from the parallel passage in the Linji
lu as we presently have it, is nearly identical to a passage from a sermon of
Linji contained in the earlier Zongjing lu (t 48: 943c). This suggests that at
the time of the compilation of the Zutang ji in 952 down through that of the
Chuandeng lu in 1004 there was already a version, or versions, of the Linji lu
circulating among members of the Chan school.
The ﬁnal revision of the Linji lu into its presently existing form appears
to have occurred sometime between the time of the Chuandeng lu’s compilation in 1004 and that of the Tiansheng guangdeng lu in 1036, as the latter
work contains a text of the Linji lu diﬀering somewhat from the earlier versions but identical to the work as we presently have it. The compiler, the lay
believer Li Zunxu,69 was a student of Guyin Yuncong,70 a master in the sixth
generation from Linji. Li’s purpose in compiling this thirty-fascicle work,
complete with a preface by Emperor Renzong 仁宗 (r. 1022–1063), seems to
have been to promote the lineage of Mazu, Baizhang, Huangbo, and Linji by
recording the sermons, statements, and teaching devices of these masters in
as much detail as possible. Hence the inclusion of the entire Linji lu.
We can only guess what text or texts Li used as the basis for his lengthy
treatment of Linji. There existed at that time a work known as the Sijia yulu
四家語錄 (Recorded sayings of the four houses), which was probably a collection of the records of Mazu, Baizhang, Huangbo, and Linji.71 That it contains
the work of Huangbo, at least, is known by the fact that the Yuan edition of
the Chuandeng lu includes part of the Chuanxin fayao, with the comment
that it was added by a certain Nanzong Tianzhen 南宗天眞 in 1048 (t 51:
273a) and a note, probably appended by Tianzhen himself, that the Chuanxin
fayao passage was copied from “the Sijia yulu and other records.”
Although we have no idea when or by whom the Sijia yulu was compiled, and little knowledge of its contents, there does seem to have been at
this time a demand for works providing more information on the lineage
of Mazu, and it seems probable that both the Sijia yulu and the Tiansheng
guangdeng lu were issued in answer to this need. Judging by the rapidity with
which works were published at this time, we may guess that a printed edition
of the Sijia yulu appeared shortly after its compilation.
The present texts of the Linji lu are based on an edition printed in 1120 by
the monk Yuanjue Zongyan72 at Mount Gu 鼓 in Fuzhou 福州 (present-day
Fujian 福建). This edition is clearly stated to have been a reprint, so we know
that there must have been at least one earlier edition of the work. Whether
the earlier text was part of the Sijia yulu or whether it was an independent
version of the Linji lu, we do not know.

84 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

This edition, like all later ones, appends the Memorial Inscription. As
mentioned above, the Memorial Inscription constitutes an important source
for the life of Linji, but is at the same time problematic as its statements are so
often at variance with those in earlier sources. A comparison of the Inscription with earlier texts such as the Zutang ji, Chuandeng lu, and Tiansheng
guangdeng lu suggests, as has been stated above, that the Inscription was
either compiled some time after those works—that is, after 1036—or was
put together by people of a diﬀerent area or teaching lineage than those who
compiled the earlier works, and thus was unknown to the latter. Otherwise it
is diﬃcult to imagine why they would ignore so many of the facts included
in the Memorial Inscription, especially the date of the master’s death, and
instead recorded information that is quite diﬀerent.
The supposition that the Memorial Inscription was either not in existence or not widely known prior to the time of the 1120 reprint of the Linji lu
is further supported by the fact that the Zuting shiyuan 祖庭事苑, a collection
of notes on Chan terms and proper names published by Muan Shanqing73 in
1108, records under the entry for Linji (writing his name with the characters
林際) a short biography that is based entirely upon information found in
the earlier sources, but that makes no mention of the data recorded in the
Memorial Inscription. We may thus surmise that the Inscription was ﬁrst
appended to the Linji lu at the time of the 1120 reprint, as it is quite possible
that Zongyan, the editor, knew of the Inscription while earlier editors had
not. Zongyan was a native of Hebei who only later went south to Fuzhou;
the Memorial Inscription may well have existed from earlier times in the
Linji school in Hebei, but not yet reached the more southerly regions where
the earlier sources were compiled. In that case it seems reasonable to assume
that Zongyan would have brought it with him when he traveled to Fuzhou,
and there appended it to his reprint of the Linji lu as an additional source of
information on Linji.
It would also appear that the notation at the beginning of the Linji lu,
“Compiled by his humble heir Huiran of Sansheng,” as well as the one at the
text’s end, “Respectfully inscribed by the humble heir Yanzhao of Baoshou
in Zhenzhou,” were both added to the text at the time of the 1120 reprint.
Although earlier works mention Huiran and a certain “Baoshou Zhao” as
disciples of Linji, none of them makes any mention of them as compilers
or inscribers of the Linji lu. Like the data recorded in the Memorial Inscription, therefore, the tradition that the Linji lu was compiled by Huiran and
inscribed by Yanzhao could well have been part of the lore handed down in
the Linji school in Hebei. Since we have no evidence to support or refute this
tradition, our acceptance of it should be tempered by the understanding that
it is unconﬁrmed by earlier sources and could be of somewhat later origin.

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 85

Such Hebei traditions may have taken shape under Linji’s fourth, ﬁfth, and
sixth successors: Fengxue Yanzhao, Shoushan Shengnian, and Fenyang Shanzhao. Fenyang Shanzhao’s successor, Shishuang Chuyuan, worked to spread
the Linji teachings in southern China, and it is therefore not surprising
that from his time onward these teachings came to be known there. Under
Shishuang the Linji school achieved a position of widespread eminence and
prosperity, and this in turn no doubt created an increased interest in the
origin and history of the school, and, consequently, a stronger demand for
information about its founder and a deﬁnitive edition of the record of his
teachings.
The 1120 reprint of the Linji lu would have answered these demands, and
Zongyan’s edition did, indeed, become the deﬁnitive edition of the work.
Seven years after its publication, the Song court, threatened from the north
by the invasion of the Khitan armies, abandoned its capital at Kaifeng 開封
and transferred the seat of government to Hangzhou 杭州 in the south. From
that time on, during the period known as the Southern Song, the center of
Chinese culture shifted from the north to the region around the new capital.
The Linji school, under the leadership of ﬁgures such as Yuanwu Keqin74
and his best-known and perhaps most inﬂuential disciple Dahui Zonggao,75
entered upon its period of greatest prosperity, centering about the so-called
Five Mountains and Ten Temples of Hangzhou. The 1120 reprint of the Linji
lu served as the bible of its teaching.
In addition to the Memorial Inscription, Zongyan’s redaction of the Linji
lu also contained the preface by Ma Fang.76 This preface, written in elegant
four-character phrases and summarizing the principal anecdotes and doctrines of the text, has been highly esteemed in China and Japan, and has been
included in nearly all later editions of the Linji lu. In the title to the preface
Ma Fang is described as:
Scholar of the Yankang Hall; Gentleman of the Gold and Purple Rank in attendance at Imperial Banquets; Emissary in Charge of Keeping Order in Zhending Circuit; concurrently Chief Commandant of Cavalry and Infantry Forces;
concurrently Administrator of Chengde Military Prefecture.

Given the imposing nature of his title, it is unfortunate that we know nothing whatsoever of his life. His preface is dated the ﬁfteenth day of the eighth
month of the second year of the Xuanhe 宣和 era, that is, 9 September 1120,
which is, in fact, what leads us to assume that this reprint of the Linji lu dates
from that year.
The present texts of the Linji lu are divided into three parts. The ﬁrst part
is known as “Discourses” (lit., “Taking the high seat in the hall” 上堂), and
consists mainly of sermons and addresses; the second part is entitled “Criti-

86 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

cal Examinations” 勘辨; and the third is called “Record of Pilgrimages” 行
錄. It is known that Zongyan also collated and prepared for publication an
edition of the Yunmen guanglu, which, like the Linji lu reprint of 1120, was
published at Mount Gu in Fuzhou. Present texts of the Yunmen guanglu are
divided into sections similar to those of the Linji lu, including collected sermons and sections entitled “Critical Examinations” and “Record of Pilgrimages.” It is quite possible, therefore, that Zongyan was responsible for this
type of arrangement, and that the present three-part division of the Linji lu
dates from the time of his redaction.
Fuzhou was the center of considerable literary activity during this
period. In addition to the above-mentioned printings of the Linji lu and Yunmen guanglu, two private editions of the Tripiṭaka were printed, as well as
such speciﬁcally Chan works as the Liuzu tanjing, Chanyuan zhuquanji duxu
禪源諸詮集都序 (Preface to the Anthology of essential writings on the origins
of Chan), Xuefeng Yicun Chanshi yulu 雪峰義存禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings
of Chan Master Xuefeng Yicun), Xuansha Zongyi Dashi guanglu 玄沙宗一大
師廣錄 (Extensive record of Great Teacher Xuansha Zongyi), and others. In
the early years of the Zhaoxing 紹興 era (1131–1162), some ten or twenty years
after the Linji lu reprint, the ﬁrst large anthology of Chan works was printed
at Mount Gu. This work, the Guzunsu yuyao 古尊宿語要 (Essential sayings
of the ancient worthies) compiled by Sengting Shouze,77 is no longer extant,
though its contents have probably been copied into and thus preserved in
various other later works. It appears to have contained the recorded sayings
of twenty (or, according to some accounts, twenty-two) Chan masters. The
Linji lu and Yunmen guanglu were not included in this compilation, a fact
that suggests copies of these works were so readily available at the time that
it was not considered necessary to reproduce them.
About a century later, in 1238, another monk of Mount Gu, Huishi
Shiming,78 compiled a second anthology containing eighty-one Chan
works that had not been included in the earlier compilation. This anthology, the Xukai guzunsu yuyao 續開古尊宿語要 (Further essential sayings of
the ancient worthies), includes the complete text of the Zongyan edition of
the Linji lu. This was the ﬁrst time that the Linji lu was included in one of
the guzunsu anthologies. A copy of this work is preserved in the Dai Tōkyū
Kinen Bunko 大東急記念文庫 in Tokyo, and the Linji lu found therein represents the oldest text of that work known to be in existence today.
In 1267, a revised and greatly enlarged edition of the Xukai guzunsu
yuyao in forty-eight fascicles was issued, and this is the work known today
as the Guzunsu yulu. The Linji lu is included in the fourth and ﬁfth fascicles,
but for some reason the text is somewhat diﬀerent from that contained in the
Xukai guzunsu yuyao. For one thing, it does not include the Ma Fang preface.

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 87

Furthermore, the Memorial Inscription is separated from the main part of
the text and placed at the very end with a note (not found in the earlier version of the text) reading, “Collated and compiled by the humble heir Cunjiang of Xinghua in Daming Prefecture.” In addition, there are several places
in the body of the text where the narrative has been somewhat expanded.
After north China fell to the Khitan armies and the Song court moved
south to Hangzhou, the Linji school in Hebei is little heard of until the time
of the Mongol conquest and the establishment of the Yuan in 1206. It appears
that, under the Mongol policy of tolerance towards Buddhism, the school
once more began to ﬂourish. The outstanding ﬁgure in this Linji revival in
the north was Haiyun Yinjian,79 a tenth-generation heir of Yangqi Fanghui.
He enjoyed the patronage of the second, third, and fourth emperors of
the new dynasty, and was invited to lecture to the ﬁfth ruler, Kublai Khan
(1214–1294), while the latter was still a boy. With the approval and support of
the imperial house he became head of Linji yuan, Linji’s old temple in Hebei,
and worked to restore and expand the buildings and grounds. He seems to
have held this position from about 1246, and in the years that followed to
have trained a number of distinguished disciples.
Several decades later a new edition of the Linji lu appeared. The monk
mainly responsible for this was Xuetang Puren,80 who worked in cooperation with other Chan monks of the time. This new edition, entitled Linji Huizhao Xuan Gong Dashi yulu 臨濟慧照玄公大師語錄, contains three prefaces,
the ﬁrst by Linquan Conglun,81 dated 1296; the second by Guo Tianxi,82
dated 1298; and the third by Wufeng Puxiu,83 undated. In this last preface,
Wufeng speaks of himself as a third-generation disciple under Xuetang, so it
is possible that Xuetang did not live to see the actual publication of the work,
which probably took place during the Dade 大德 era (1297–1307). Conglun’s
preface is noteworthy because it mentions the extreme diﬃculty that he had
in ﬁnding a copy of the Linji lu and the joy with which he greeted the text
that ﬁnally came to his hand, indicating how scarce copies of the earlier editions had become by this time. Aside from its inclusion of these three prefaces and exclusion of the Ma Fang preface, the Xuetang edition is practically
identical with the Zongyan version.
A number of subsequent editions of the Linji lu appeared in China,
among which the most noteworthy are one published in 1607 and included
as part of the extant Sijia yulu, and one published in the early part of the
Chongzhen era (1628–1644) and included in the Wujia yulu. These two editions played a large part in the revival of interest in the Linji lu that took
place in Japan during the early part of the Tokugawa period (1603–1868).

88 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

the linji lu in japan
No one knows exactly when the Linji lu was ﬁrst brought to Japan. The earliest text mentioned in the literature is that referred to in the biography of
Gidō Shūshin,84 composed in diary form by his disciples. The entry in question is dated Genkō 元弘 2 (1332), when Gidō was eight years old:
One day the master [Gidō] found a copy of the Linji lu in one volume among
the books in his house and read it with great pleasure. It was just as though he
had studied it in the past, and his parents were amazed and considered that he
had a heaven-given talent…. The master’s grandfather had studied Confucianism and Buddhism, concentrating particularly on Zen. Once he visited National
Teacher Yura, had sanzen, and inquired about the Way, saying, “I would like to
obtain a copy of the Linji lu….” National Teacher Yura accordingly gave him a
copy, and this is the book that the master found.

The “National Teacher Yura” referred to here is Shinchi Kakushin,85
a Japanese monk who journeyed to China in the mid-thirteenth century
to practice Zen, and who resided at the temple Kōkoku-ji in Yura, present
Wakayama Prefecture, after returning to Japan. According to the Enmyō
kokushi gyōjitsu nenpu 圓明國師行實年譜 (Chronology of the life of National
Teacher Enmyō), when Kakushin returned to Japan in 1254 he brought
with him the copy of the Linji lu mentioned above. Since 1254 was sixteen
years after the publication of Huishi’s Xukai guzunsu yuyao and about half
a century before the appearance of the next edition of the Linji lu, the Linji
Huizhao Xuan Gong Dashi yulu of Xuetang Puren, we may assume that what
came into Kakushin’s hands was the Linji lu text contained in the Xukai
guzunsu yuyao or some earlier text.
However, it is quite possible that copies of the work had already reached
Japan before the time of Shinchi Kakushin’s return. Dōgen Kigen86 quotes a
passage of the Linji lu in his Tenzō kyōkun 典座敎訓 (1237) (Instructions to
the cook), and there is a tradition that the Chinese monk Lanxi Daolong87
lectured on the text after his arrival in 1253 at Kenchō-ji in Kamakura. No
deﬁnite evidence exists, however, for the presence in Japan of any text of
the Linji lu prior to the time of the one mentioned in the biography of Gidō
Shūshin.
The ﬁrst Japanese edition of the Linji lu was published in 1320 by a priest
named Myōshū,88 who stored the printing blocks at Shōun-an 祥雲庵, a subtemple of Kennin-ji. Myōshū’s edition, a copy of which is preserved in the
Seikadō 靜嘉堂 Library in Tokyo, contains the preface by Ma Fang, the body
of the text, and a note by Myōshū giving the date of printing. Shōun-an was
founded by Mujaku Ryōen,89 a disciple of Yishan Yining,90 and thus it is possible that Myōshū was a student of one of these two monks.

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 89

This period was one of great activity in the publication of Zen works.
Not only were shorter works published, such as the Chuanxin fayao (J. Denshin hōyō), 1283; Rentian yanmu (J. Ninden ganmoku) 人天眼目 (The eye of
humans and gods), 1303; Chanyuan zhuquanji duxu, 1305; and Wumen guan
(J. Mumonkan), 1291, but also longer texts like the Biyan lu (J. Hekigan roku),
1335; Jingde chuandeng lu (J. Keitoku dentō roku), 1348; and Zongjing lu (J.
Sugyō roku), 1371. The Linji lu was also reprinted several times during this
period, among the best-known editions being those of 1329, 1384, 1437, and
1501. All of these editions contained only the Ma Fang preface except for that
of 1437, which was a copy of the Yuan-dynasty version of Xuetang Puren, with
the three prefaces of Linquan Conglun, Guo Tianxi, and Wufeng Puxiu.
In the Tokugawa period a great many new editions of the Linji lu
appeared, owing to a resurgence in Japanese interest in the text following
the arrival in the early seventeenth century of the Chinese master Yinyuan
Longqi91 and other monks of the tradition that came to be known in Japan as
the Ōbaku 黃檗 school, but which the Chinese monks themselves regarded
as the “true lineage of Linji” 臨濟正宗. New editions were issued not only by
Rinzai-school monks, but also by those of the Sōtō and Ōbaku traditions.
Among the new editions the most noteworthy was that printed in 1727
with the five-fascicle commentary Rinzai Eshō zenji goroku soyaku (see
note 25), by the eminent Rinzai scholar-priest Mujaku Dōchū.92 This edition corrected a number of mistakes present in the earlier editions, supplied
Japanese reading marks to the text, and became the standard edition during the remainder of the Tokugawa period. The work demonstrates a truly
impressive level of scholarship, limited only by the restricted understanding
of Tang-dynasty colloquial Chinese at the time of Mujaku.
notes
1. Linji Yixuan 臨濟義玄 is the full name of the master with whom the Linji lu 臨濟錄
(ll) is concerned. Yixuan 義玄 is his religious name, which he either received from his
teacher or took for himself when he became a monk. Linji 臨濟 derives from Linji yuan
臨濟院, the name of the temple where the master resided and taught during the years of
his maturity. Thus, accurately rendered, the name would be “Yixuan of Linji [yuan].” In
the text of the ll Linji Yixuan is invariably referred to as simply “master” 師.
2. For further information on this period in Chinese Buddhist history, see, for example, Eberhard 1956 (110–176), Zürcher 1959, Wright 1959, and Chen 1964, 1973.
3. The Chusanzang jiji 出三藏記集 (Collection of records concerning the Tripiṭaka;
t 55: 1–114), the oldest extant catalogue of Chinese Tripiṭaka texts, was based on an even
earlier list, the Zongli zhongjing mulu 綜理衆經目錄 (Comprehensive catalogue of sutras),
published in 374.
4. The character 寺, used in the Han dynasty to mean “government oﬃce,” seems to

90 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
have been adopted as the designation for a Buddhist monastery or temple at the beginning of the third century ce or earlier. See Zürcher 1959, 38–39.
5. Although the attribution of these phrases to Bodhidharma is erroneous, there is no
question that they express the fundamental standpoint of Chan from the earliest times
of the school’s existence. These phrases or similar ones are found in several early Chan
texts, the earliest apparently being the Xuemai lun 血脈論 (Treatise on the transmission),
attributed to Bodhidharma but dating probably from the mid-Tang. The opening line of
this text reads, “The three realms arise out of the One Mind. Former buddhas and latter
buddhas transmitted mind by mind; [they] did not depend upon written words” (t 48:
373b).
6. Baizhang Huaihai 百丈懷海 (720–814) was a native of what is now Fujian 福建,
with the family name Wang 王. After being ordained at the age of twenty he studied the
Tripiṭaka, then went to study under the Chan master Mazu Daoyi (see note 15). After succeeding to Mazu’s dharma he established a monastery on Baizhang 百丈 peak of Mount
Daxiong 大雄, in Hongzhou 洪州. Huaihai did much to regulate the daily life of the Chan
monastery, being the ﬁrst person to create a formal rule for monastic life; though the
original text of this rule has been lost, its inﬂuence still lives in subsequent Zen monasticism. Manual labor was a central element of the monastic life for Huaihai, as expressed
in his famous dictum, “A day of no working—a day of no eating” (see comment on page
320, below). When Huaihai grew old, his monks, fearing that the master was no longer
strong enough to work, hid his garden tools. Huaihai thereupon went to his quarters and
refused to eat until the tools were returned. Following his death the master was awarded
the honorary names Dazhi Juezheng 大智覺證, and, in the Yuan dynasty, Hongzong
Miaoxing 弘宗妙行.
7. Ennin 圓仁 (794–864), third patriarch of the Japanese Tendai 天台 school, was born
in a humble family in present Tochigi Prefecture 栃木県. At ﬁfteen he went to Mount
Hiei 比叡, the Tendai headquarters northeast of Kyoto, where he became a favored disciple of Saichō 最澄 (767–822), the founder of the Japanese Tendai school. Ennin took
monk’s vows at twenty-one, and at twenty-three received full ordination at Tōdai-ji 東
大寺 in Nara. In accordance with his teacher’s dying wish Ennin worked to establish a
Tendai ordination platform on Mount Hiei, ﬁnally succeeding despite opposition from
the monks of Nara, where previously all Japanese monks had been ordained. Somewhat
later, during a period of poor health, Ennin built a hermitage with his own hands in a
remote ravine on Mount Hiei, and retired there for ten years to devote himself to Tendai
meditation practices.
In 835 the Japanese court sent an embassy to China, which Ennin was ordered to
accompany in the capacity of scholar-monk. After two unsuccessful attempts to get
under way, the embassy set sail in 838 and reached Yangzhou 揚州 late in the summer.
While the other members of the embassy proceeded to the capital, Ennin and two disciples remained in Yangzhou studying Sanskrit and esoteric Buddhism as they awaited
permission to travel to Mount Tiantai 天台, where they intended to make further studies
in the doctrines of their own school.
The permission never arrived, so the following year Ennin set sail for Japan with the
returning embassy. Unfavorable winds drove the ships back to China, however, and when
the ﬂeet ﬁnally departed again Ennin and his disciples managed to get left behind. Making their way to the southeastern tip of the Shandong 山東 Peninsula, they took refuge
in Fahua yuan 法華院, a Korean temple at Mount Chi 赤. With the help of a local oﬃcial

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 91
they succeeded in procuring a travel permit for the capital, Chang’an, by way of Mount
Wutai 五臺 , the center of popular worship of the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī. When they
reached the capital on 19 September 840 they were ordered by the government to reside
at the temple Zisheng si 資聖寺. Ennin remained for ﬁve years, continuing his studies of
Sanskrit and esoteric Buddhism. In June 845, as a result of the persecution of Buddhism
by Emperor Wuzong 武宗 (814–846), Ennin was ordered laicized and deported. In the
face of many hardships, he and his party made their way to the coast and ﬁnally to the
same Korean temple on Mount Chi where they had stayed at the beginning of their journey. It was a year and a half more before they were able to board a Korean ship for Japan,
which they reached on 28 October 847, bringing with them many books, mandalas, and
ritual implements. The Nittō guhō junrei kōki, the journal that Ennin kept of his stay in
China, ranks with the great travel books of all time.
In Japan, Ennin devoted himself to spreading the Tendai esoteric teachings, known
as Taimitsu 台密 (in contrast to Tōmitsu 東密, the Shingon esoteric teachings). He was
given the court title of Great Dharma Master Dentō 傳燈大法師 and appointed Tendai
Zasu 天台座主, chief abbot of the Tendai school. He gave the bodhisattva precepts to the
emperors Montoku 文德 (827–858) and Seiwa 淸和 (850–880), the empresses Junna 淳和
and Gojō 五條, and members of their courts. To his many disciples he taught the rites,
ceremonies, and doctrines he had studied in China, devoting himself particularly to the
Godaizan Nenbutsu 五臺山念佛, a practice he had learned at Mount Wutai and that gave
rise in later times to the Pure Land teachings of Mount Hiei. Ennin died on 13 February
864. In 866 the posthumous title Great Master Jikaku 慈覺大師 was bestowed upon him
by imperial decree.
Ennin’s writings totaled 154 volumes. The 584 Buddhist works he brought back from
China, among them many Chan texts, are listed in the Jikaku daishi shōrai mokuroku 慈
覺大師將來目錄 (Catalogue of materials brought by Jikaku Daishi); the Nihonkoku jōwa
gonen nittō guhō mokuroku 日本國承和五年入唐求法目錄 (Catalogue of a pilgrimage to
Tang in search of the dharma in year 5 of the Japanese Jōwa era); and the Nittō shingu
shōgyō mokuroku 入唐新求聖敎目錄 (Catalogue of sacred teachings newly sought in the
Tang). Ennin’s diary has been translated into English (Reischauer 1955).
8. On the authorship and authenticity of the Memorial Inscription, see Yanagida
1958 and 1961.
9. Dayu 大愚 (n.d.) is listed in the jc (t 51: 273c) as a disciple of Zhichang 智常 (n.d.)
of the temple Guizong 歸宗 on Mount Lu 廬, Zhichang himself being an heir of Mazu
Daoyi. In Linji’s biography in zj 19, Huangbo is quoted as saying that Dayu was a fellow
student under Mazu. These references, plus the statements about him in the “Record
of Pilgrimages,” constitute all of our information on Dayu. In the ll, Huangbo refers
to Dayu as Gao’an Tantou Dayu 高安灘頭大愚, “Dayu who lives by the river in Gao’an.”
Gao’an was in the area of Ruizhoufu 瑞州府 of Hongzhou 洪州, in the southwestern part
of present-day Nanchangxian 南昌縣, Jiangxi Province. “Tantou” 灘頭 at this time meant
simply “rapids,” although by the early Ming it was used as the name of a district in this
area. Since Huangbo was then living at the temple Da’an si 大安寺 in Hongzhou, Dayu’s
hermitage was not far away.
Although Huangbo’s statement in the zj that Dayu was a fellow student under Mazu
is open to question, we cannot deﬁnitely reject it since the dates of both men are uncertain. The zj also states that after his enlightenment Linji served Dayu until the latter’s

92 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
death, a period of about ten years. Since Huangbo was still living at the time, we may
assume that Dayu died between 845 and 850.
10. Deshan Xuanjian 德山宣鑑 (780/82–865) was a native of Jiannan 劍南 in modern Sichuan; his family name was Zhou 周. He entered temple life as a child, and as a
young monk became deeply learned in doctrine, particularly that of the Diamond Sutra,
expounding on it so often that he became known as “Diamond Sutra Zhou.” When he
heard of the Southern school teaching that buddhahood can be attained by seeing into
one’s own nature, he headed south with his commentaries to refute the “southern devils.”
When he stopped at a teahouse for refreshment (Chin. 點心, “to refresh the mind”), the
woman attendant saw his Diamond Sutra commentaries and asked, “The sutra says, ‘Past
mind cannot be obtained, present mind cannot be obtained, and future mind cannot
be obtained.’ What mind does the learned monk wish to refresh?” Xuanjian was unable
to answer. Hearing from the woman the name of Longtan Chongxin 龍潭崇信 (n.d.) in
Lizhou 澧州, he journeyed there to study.
One evening Xuanjian was with Longtan. “It is late,” the master said. “Why don’t
you retire?” Xuanjian went outside, but, noticing how dark it was, turned back and told
Longtan that he could not see. Longtan lit a paper torch and held it out to Xuanjian, but
as Xuanjian reached for it the master blew it out. At that moment Xuanjian was deeply
enlightened. He bowed to Longtan. The master asked, “What did you understand?”
Xuanjian replied, “From now on I will never doubt the words of Chan masters anywhere.”
Afterwards Xuanjian burned his commentaries in front of the Dharma Hall, saying,
“Though one masters the deepest doctrines, it is like throwing a hair into the great void.
Though one succeeds in the greatest of worldly tasks, it is like ﬂicking a drop of water into
a chasm.” He then bowed to Longtan and left. He lived in solitude for thirty years in a cave
in Mount Dufu 獨浮, Hunan, until the governor called him to lead the monastery Gude
chanyuan 古德禪院 on Mount De 德 in Langzhou 朗州. He was known for his use of the
stick, and is recorded to have said, “If you can speak, thirty blows! If you can’t speak,
thirty blows!” Xuanjian’s posthumous title was Chan Master Jianxing 見性禪師. Many of
his teachings are nearly identical to those of his contemporary Linji; several examples are
mentioned in the text notes.
11. Xiangyan Zhixian 香嚴智閑 (9th cent.) is said to have been born in Qingzhou 淸
州 in modern Shandong 山東 Province; nothing is known of his early life, but he is said
to have been unusually intelligent and well-read. He studied under Guishan Lingyou (see
note 16), who said to him one day, “I do not ask about your knowledge of the scriptures
and other sacred writings. I ask that you speak a word about the time while you were still
in your mother’s womb and before you could distinguish east from west.” Zhixian had no
reply. After searching to no avail through the mass of sutras and commentaries he had
collected, he said to himself, “A painting of food does not allay hunger,” threw away all his
books, and retired to the abandoned hermitage of Nanyang Huizhong 南陽慧忠 (d. 775)
on Mount Baiyai 白崖 in Henan 河南. One day, while clearing weeds, he happened to toss
a piece of broken tile against the stem of a bamboo. At the sound of the tile striking the
tree Zhixian suddenly attained enlightenment. He returned to Guishan and eventually
became one of that master’s heirs. He later opened a teaching hall at the temple Xiangyan
si 香嚴寺 in modern Henan, where he was active in spreading the Chan teachings. His
posthumous title was Great Teacher Xideng 襲燈大師.
Xiangyan Zhixian was known for his religious verse. Examples are found in several
Dunhuang manuscripts, one of which, S.5558 in the British Museum, contains thirty-

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 93
three verses bearing his signature. His verses are also interspersed in his biography in
zj 9. The jc contains his biography (t 51: 283c–284c) and a selection of his verses (t 51:
452a–c).
12. Huangbo Xiyun 黃檗希運 (d. ca. 850) was the heir of Baizhang Huaihai. Born in
Fuzhou 福州, present Fujian, he became a monk at the temple Jianfu si 建福寺 on Mount
Huangbo 黃檗 while still a youth. He later made a pilgrimage to Mount Tiantai 天台,
and eventually arrived in the capital, Chang’an 長安. According to the Huangbo Xiyun
Chanshi yulu 黃檗希運禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master Huangbo Xiyun),
one day while Huangbo was begging in the capital he met a woman who advised him to
go to the famous master Mazu Daoyi in Jiangxi 江西 (see note 15). Upon reaching there
he found that Mazu had already died, so he went to Mazu’s heir Baizhang and eventually
succeeded to that master’s dharma. The zj’s statements on this point are contradictory,
as in its biography of Linji it quotes Huangbo as stating that he and Dayu had been fellow students under Mazu, implying that he had actually studied under that master. On
the other hand, the zj’s biography of Huangbo has the woman in Chang’an advising
him to go directly to Baizhang. In any event the matter is not of great importance, as all
accounts agree that Huangbo did study under Baizhang and become his dharma successor. It seems probable that, after leaving Baizhang, Huangbo spent time with two other
heirs of Mazu: Nanquan Puyuan 南泉普願 (748–835) in Chizhou 池州 and Yanguan Qi’an
鹽官齊安 (d. 842) in Hangzhou 杭州. About 833 he seems to have taken up residence at
the temple Da’an si 大安寺 in the city of Hongzhou 洪州. In Hongzhou he met the eminent oﬃcial and Buddhist devotee Pei Xiu (see note 13), who in 842 had been appointed
governor of Zhongling 鍾陵, in present Jiangxi. Pei became Xiyun’s disciple, and a year
or two later built a temple for him in the mountains of Gao’anxian 高安縣, in western
Hongzhou. Because of Huangbo’s aﬀection for the place where, as a young man, he had
become a monk, this temple was named Hongzhou Huangboshan 洪州黃檗山; unfortunately, its exact location is no longer known. There Huangbo instructed many disciples,
among them Linji. During Emperor Wuzong’s proscription of Buddhism he hid in the
mountains, returning to Mount Huangbo after the persecution ended. It was there that he
died sometime during the Dazhong 大中 era (847–859). His posthumous title was Chan
Master Duanji 斷際禪師, and his teachings are contained in the Huangbo Duanji Chanshi
chuanxin fayao 黃蘗斷際禪師傳心法要 (usually abbreviated to Chuanxin fayao 傳心法要
[Essentials of the transmission of mind-dharma]), compiled by Pei Xiu, and the Wanling
lu 宛陵錄, by an anonymous disciple. An English translation of Huangbo’s teaching is
found in Blofeld 1959a.
13. Pei Xiu 裴休 (797–870), style Gongmei 公美, was an oﬃcial and a famous lay
Buddhist. He was born in Mengzhou 孟州 in Henan (other accounts say Hedong 河東,
in present Shanxi). He is said to have taken his civil service degree in 823, and thereafter
to have held a succession of government positions. Pei ﬁrst studied Buddhism under
Guifeng Zongmi 圭峰宗密 (780–841), ﬁfth patriarch of the Heze 荷澤 school of Chan
and the ﬁfth and last patriarch of the Huayan 華嚴 school. He wrote prefaces to several of
Zongmi’s works, and the latter reciprocated by writing one for Pei Xiu’s Quanfa putixin
wen 勸發菩提心文 (On giving rise to bodhicitta). On Zongmi’s death, Pei composed the
memorial inscription for the master. In 842 Pei was appointed governor of Zhongling 鍾
陵, and in 848 acceded to the same oﬃce in the district of Wanling 宛陵, both in present
Jiangxi. It was during his tenure in the former oﬃce that he met Huangbo Xiyun, became

94 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
his devoted disciple, and built for him a temple at Mount Huangbo 黃檗. Compilation of
the Chuanxin fayao is traditionally attributed to him.
As might be expected, Pei was active on behalf of his Buddhist friends during the
persecution under Emperor Wuzong. The jc biography of Huangbo’s disciple Qian’qing
Chu’nan 千頃楚南 (813–888) states, “When Buddhism was proscribed by Emperor
Wuzong of the Tang, Chu’nan went into hiding deep in the forest. At the beginning of
the Dazhong era, when the Chief Councilor Pei Xiu came to take charge of the region of
Wanling, he invited Huangbo to come out of hiding in the hills, and Chu’nan followed
the master” (t 51: 292b). Guishan Lingyou also received Pei’s assistance. Though the
oﬃcial was never Guishan’s disciple, they were close “dharma friends.” The memorial
inscription for Guishan, written by the eminent oﬃcial Zheng Yu 鄭愚 (n.d.), says,
When Emperor Wuzong demolished the temples and drove out the monks, the
master (Guishan), wrapped his head with cloth and became one of the common people. His only fear was that he would stand out among the ignorant
and humble men with whom he associated, and those who knew his identity
admired him all the more for this. Later, when Emperor Xuanzong lifted the ban
on Buddhism, the regional supervisor of Hunan, the late Chief Councilor Pei
Xiu, who was an ardent follower of Buddhism, entreated the master to come out
of hiding. He placed the master in his own carriage and followed in attendance
on him. (qt, 820)
In 850 Pei Xiu rebuilt the memorial tower and the former temple of the Chan master
Mazu, arranging for the presentation to the temple of an imperial tablet (t 51: 246c). Two
years later he was appointed chief councilor to Emperor Xuanzong 宣宗 (r. 847–859), and
served Emperor Yizong 懿宗 (r. 859–873) in the same capacity until his death in 870.
His Buddhist fervor seems to have bordered on the eccentric. He never took meat or
wine; in place of oﬃcial dress he wore a priest’s robe, but made of silk, and with bowl in
hand he went begging to the houses of the singing girls. He was, nevertheless, a writer of
considerable distinction. In addition to his Buddhist works he composed a number of
memorial inscriptions for eminent priests, not all of them of the Chan school, and these,
together with his other writings, are collected in qt 743. His biography is found in the
Jiu Tang shu 舊唐書 (Older chronicles of the Tang) 177; the Xin Tang shu 新唐書 (Newer
chronicles of the Tang) 182; the jc (t 51: 293a–c); and the Jushi zhuan 居士傳 (Biographies
of lay practicers) (x 88: 208b–210c).
14. Neither the ll nor the older biographical collections name the head monk who
urged Linji to question Huangbo. He is ﬁrst identiﬁed as Chen Zunsu 陳尊宿 (also
known as Muzhou Daozong 睦州道蹤 or Daoming 道明, whose family name was Chen)
in the Shimen wenzi chan 石門文字禪 (Stone Gate literary Chan), by the important Chan
scholar-monk Juefan Huihong 覺範慧洪 (1071–1128; “Stone Gate” was an appellation of
Huihong). Although so late an identiﬁcation must be held suspect, later compilations like
the bl (case 11; t 48: 151c), the cs (x 79, no. 1560, 535c), and the wz (x 78, no. 1554, 581c),
undoubtedly following Huihong, also refer to him thus. Muzhou studied the vinaya as
a youth, then became the disciple, and eventually the heir, of Huangbo. Afterwards he
lived at the temple Guanyin yuan 觀音院 in Muzhou 睦州, in present Zhejiang, then at
Longxing si 龍興寺, a temple that later texts call Kaiyuan si 開元寺. There people called
him Chen Puxie 陳蒲鞋 (Rush-sandal Chen) from the rush sandals he plaited and hung
under the eaves of the temple to give or sell to passersby. His methods of handling such
students as came to him are described as eccentric, even violent, but he appears to have

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 95
been much respected among his contemporaries. The Muzhou yulu 睦州語錄 (Recorded
sayings of Muzhou) states that he was ninety-eight years old when he died, but does not
give the date of his death. According to the Yuan-dynasty work Shishi qigu lue 釋氏稽古
略 (An outline of research on the lineage of Śākya) (t 49: 843a.), Muzhou died during the
Qianfu 乾符 era (874–879), and this dating is generally accepted.
15. Mazu Daoyi 馬祖道一 (709–788), one of the great ﬁgures of early Chan, was a
native of Hanzhou 漢州, in modern Sichuan; his surname was Ma 馬. At an early age
he entered the temple Dechun si 德純寺, also in Sichuan, where he studied under Chuji
處寂 (665–732), a third-generation descendant of the Fifth Patriarch, Hongren 弘忍
(601–674). Later he went to Chuanfa yuan 傳法院 on Mount Heng 衡 in Hunan, where
he met Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷讓 (677–744) and became his student and later his sole
heir. Thereafter he spent a considerable time wandering and staying at various temples.
During the Dali 大曆 era (766–779) he went to live, on imperial order, at Kaiyuan si 開元
寺, a temple in Hongzhou 洪州, in present-day Jiangxi. There his fame as a teacher spread
widely.
The story of Mazu’s enlightenment is one of the best known in Chan. Mazu was living in a hermitage practicing meditation throughout the day. Nanyue asked him why he
was sitting in meditation. When Mazu replied, “To become a buddha,” Nanyue picked
up a tile and started polishing it on a stone. When Mazu asked him what he was doing, he
replied that he was making it into a mirror. “How can you make a mirror by polishing a
tile?” asked Mazu. “How can you become a buddha by sitting in meditation?” responded
Nanyue. He further explained, “Are you practicing to be a sitting buddha? …. Meditation
is not limited to sitting…. the buddha is not limited to any ﬁxed form.”
Mazu was a man of imposing appearance, said to have had a stride like a bull’s, a
gaze like a tiger’s, a tongue that could cover his nose, and two wheel-shaped marks on
the soles of his feet. One of the greatest teachers of early Chan, he was the ﬁrst to employ
many of the methods that later became central to Chan training, such as use of the shout,
the stick, and wordless gestures. He is said to have had 139 dharma heirs; of these, the
most important for later Zen history were Baizhang, the founder of the Chan monastic
system; Nanquan Puyuan; and Damei Fachang 大梅法常 (752–839).
Mazu died in 788 on the anniversary of Śākyamuni’s Nirvana. At his own request
he was buried on Mount Shimen 石門, not far from his own temple, and a tomb was
erected for him there. His funeral matched in magniﬁcence those of the great clerics in
the capital in early days, and many eminent men wrote inscriptions in his honor. Mazu’s
posthumous title was Chan Master Daji 大寂禪師.
16. Guishan Lingyou 潙山靈祐 (771–853) was born in Changxi 長溪 in Fuzhou, and
his surname was Zhao 趙. He became a monk at the age of ﬁfteen, and thereafter studied
the vinaya and Hinayana doctrines under the precept master Fachang 法常 (n.d.) at
Longxing si 龍興寺 in Hangzhou 杭州. At twenty-three he made a pilgrimage to Mount
Baizhang 百丈 in Jiangxi and there joined the assembly under Baizhang Huaihai, where
Huangbo Xiyun was then a member. Lingyou served as the head cook for many years
and later became Baizhang’s dharma heir. Later, at the beginning of the Yuanhe 元和 era
(806–820), Baizhang had to choose a suitable leader for a new monastery to be established on Mount Gui 潙 in Tanzhou 潭州. Putting a jug on the ﬂoor, he asked, “If you can’t
call this a jug, then what do you call it?” The head monk answered, “It can’t be called a
wooden sandal.” Lingyou’s response was to kick over the jug and walk away; it was he
who was named head of the new monastery.

96 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
When Lingyou arrived at Mount Gui he built a hut and continued his practice; after
seven or eight years students started gathering around him and eventually numbered
about 1,500. Lingyou produced forty-one dharma heirs, including Yangshan Huiji 仰
山慧寂 (807–883), the cofounder with Lingyou of the Guiyang 潙仰 lineage of Chan
Buddhism, known for its use of the so-called circle-ﬁgures 圓相. Soon after Lingyou’s
death he was given the posthumous title Chan Master Dayuan 大圓禪師 by Emperor
Xuanzong.
Guishan was known for his mild and kindly nature. His relation with his heir Yangshan, resembling that of father and son, is famous in Chan and formed the basis for the
characteristic style of the Guiyang school. A number of conversations between master
and disciple are recorded in the “Record of Pilgrimages” section of the ll.
17. Mount Jing 徑 is located in Zhejiang and forms the northeastern peak of Mount
Tianmu 天目. A temple was ﬁrst built there by Daoqin 道欽 (715–793) of the Niutou
(Oxhead) 牛頭 school. After the establishment of the Southern Song capital at Lin’an 臨
安 (modern Hangzhou) in 1127, this temple, Nengren xingsheng wanshou chansi 能仁興
聖萬壽禪寺, became very famous, numbering among its eminent abbots Dahui Zonggao
(see note 75, below), Xutang Zhiyu 虛堂智愚 (1185–1269), and Wuzhun Shifan 無凖師範
(1177–1249). It is not clear who the master of Mount Jing was at the time of Linji’s visit to
the temple. See pages 40–41, above, and page 310, below.
18. The “Zhending shifang Linji Huizhao Xuangong dazongshi daoxing beiming” 眞
定十方臨濟慧照玄公大宗師道行碑銘, a memorial inscription carved on a stele erected
during the Yuan dynasty, gives the date of Linji’s journey to the north as Dazhong 大
中 8 (854). The inscription is given in full in the Shaku Sōen 釋宗演 reprint edition of
the Kōtei Rinzai roku 校訂臨濟錄 (Revised edition of the Record of Linji), edited by the
scholar-monk Mujaku Dōchū 無著道忠, appendix 2, 1–4. The Qing-dynasty work Zongtong biannian 宗統編年 states that Linji reached Zhenzhou in Dazhong 3 (849) (x 86, no.
1600, 168b). Given the late origin of these works, it is likely that such dates are simply
conjecture.
19. The Zhenzhou 鎮州 of Linji’s time was northeast of the city of Shijiazhuang 石家
莊 in central Hebei 河北. In the Warring States era (403–221 bce) this district was part of
a region called Zhao 趙; during the Han dynasty (206 bce–25 ce) it was renamed Zhending 眞定, and after that was variously referred to as Changshan 常山, Hengshan 恒山,
or Hengzhou 恒州. The name was oﬃcially designated as Zhenzhou in 820. It was one of
the four prefectures 州 of which Chengdefu 成德府, also known as Hebei, was composed
(the others were Zhao 趙, Ji 冀, and Shen 深). In the Later Tang 後唐 (923–934) of the Five
Dynasties period, the region was designated as the Beidu 北都 (Northern Capital) and
called Zhendingfu 眞定府, the name used from the Song dynasty on. During the middle
and later years of the Tang, as the control of the central court over the regional governments became increasingly tenuous, the local administrator of Chengdefu, known as the
regional commissioner 節度使, came to have almost complete control over the area (see
also note 21).
20. “Fuzhu” 府主, here translated as “governor” (Hucker 1985 has “commandery governor” [2047]–Ed.), was a title for the chief administrator of a superior prefecture 府, in
this case Chengdefu 成德府. The title, an informal rather than oﬃcial one, was used by the
subordinates of such an administrator to refer to their oﬃcer-in-chief (see Morohashi 4,
no. 9283. 45). The title “changshi” 常侍 may be translated as “councilor” (Hucker 1985 has
“attendant-in-ordinary” [262]–Ed.), and is an abbreviation of the longer title 散騎常侍,

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 97
an honorary title conferring rank but exacting no speciﬁc duties. Several members of the
Wang family were recipients of this title.
21. The Wang 王 family had held the office of military commissioner 節度使 of
Chengdefu for several generations. Their power was consolidated by the rebellion of
Wang Chengzong 王承宗 (d. 820) against the throne in 809. A year later, with no decisive
victory in sight for the imperial armies, Emperor Xianzong 憲宗 (r. 805–820), yielding to
his ministers’ advice, halted the war and reinstated Chengzong to all of his former oﬃces.
The power of the Wang family in the Hebei area went unchallenged for nearly a century
(see Feifel 1961, 115–155).
22. From Song times on, Linji’s patron Wang has been mistakenly identiﬁed with
a certain Wang Jingchu 王敬初 (n. d.). This error appears to have its origins in the zh,
compiled in 1183. Part of zh 8 is devoted to a lay disciple of Guishan Lingyou referred
to as Xiangzhou Changshi Wang Gongjing[chu] 襄州常侍王公敬[初] (x 79, no. 1557,
78b–c). One of the three episodes in this section is identical with episode 12 in the
Critical Examinations section of the ll, the episode in which Councilor Wang appears.
Its inclusion indicates that the compiler believed the Councilor Wang of the ll to be
the same person as Guishan’s disciple Wang. According to zj 19 and the jc (t 51: 286a),
the latter Wang lived in Xiangzhou 襄州, Hubei 湖北, and was the author of a stone
inscription in the founder’s hall of the temple Yanqing si 延慶寺. There is no evidence to
indicate that he was ever regional commissioner of Chengdefu or had any relationship
with Linji.
23. Zhenzhou Puhua 鎮州普化 (d. 860), was a disciple of Panshan Baoji 盤山寶積 (n.
d.) of Youzhou 幽州; Baoji, in turn, was an heir of Mazu. Very little is known of his life.
The biographical accounts found in zj 17, the jc (t 51: 280b–c), and the sg (t 50: 837b)
consist of little more than the anecdotes featuring Puhua in the Critical Examinations
section of the ll. In Japan, Puhua (Jap. Fuke) is honored as the patriarch of the Fuke
school 普化宗, a subordinate and now defunct order of the Zen school. Its adherents
(known as komusō 虛無僧) led itinerant lives and played bamboo ﬂutes called shakuhachi
尺八, the music of which was considered an aid to enlightenment. Japanese tradition
holds that the school was founded after Puhua’s death by his lay disciple Zhang Bai 張伯
(n.d.) of Henan. The Fuke school was introduced to Japan by the Japanese Zen monk
Shinchi Kakushin (see note 85) on his return from China in 1254.
24. Yangshan Huiji 仰山慧寂 (807–883) was a direct heir of Guishan Lingyou and
the cofounder with him of the Guiyang school of Chan. He was raised in Huaihua 懷化
in Shaozhou 韶州, in present Guangdong 廣東; his family name was She 葉. He became
a monk at the age of seventeen after demonstrating his determination to his parents by
cutting oﬀ two of his ﬁngers. He studied the vinaya at Nanhua si 南華寺, then set out on
a pilgrimage that took him to several of the greatest masters of his time. Under Danyuan
Yingzhen 耽源應眞 (n.d.), who lived in Jizhou 吉州 in modern Jiangxi, he had his ﬁrst
awakening. Danyuan is said to have transmitted to Huiji the teachings regarding the
use of ninety-six (or -seven) circle-ﬁgures 圓相, which he himself had received from his
teacher Nanyang Huizhong, an heir of the Sixth Patriarch. Later, Huiji wandered for a
time, then came to Guishan Lingyou, who was living in Tanzhou, Hunan. He remained
with Guishan for ﬁfteen years and eventually succeeded to his dharma. Subsequently he
lived at Yangshan in Yuanzhou 袁州 in Jiangxi, where he instructed many disciples in
Guishan’s style of Chan and in Danyuan’s circle teachings, thus laying the foundations for
the Guiyang school. His posthumous title was Great Teacher Zhitong 智通大師.

98 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
The record of Yangshan’s teachings is included in the Wujia yulu 五家語錄 (Recorded
sayings of the ﬁve houses), under the title Yangshan Huiji Chanshi yulu 仰山慧寂禪師語
錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master Yangshan Huiji; t 47: 582a–588a). The principal
source for his biography is the stele inscription for Yangshan composed by Lu Xisheng
陸希聲 (n.d.) in qt 813.
25. The identity of Mo Junhe 默(墨)君和 is discussed by Mujaku Dōchū in his Rinzai
Eshō zenji goroku soyaku 臨濟慧照禪師語錄疏瀹 (Commentary on the Record of Zen master Rinzai Eshō), an unpublished manuscript dated 1726. Dōchū quotes the section of the
Jiu Wudai shi 舊五代史 (Older chronicles of the Five Dynasties) that deals with the rescue
of Wang Rong 王鎔 (874–921) by Mo (see below), including the commentary and a quotation from the Taiping guangji 太平廣記 (Extensive record of the Taiping era) 192, which,
in turn, quotes from the Liushi ermu ji 劉氏耳目記 (Record of things seen and heard by
Mr. Liu), a no-longer extant popular historical text. Dōchū, however, did not compare
Linji’s dates with those for Wang Rong and, by intimation, for Mo Junhe, but, after proving the historicity of Mo, was content to accept the Memorial Inscription at face value. In
1953 Yanagida Seizan, while examining Dōchū’s commentary, cross-checked with the Jiu
Wudai shi and the Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑑 (Comprehensive mirror to aid government), a
reliable Song historical work, and established Mo’s age as twenty-six or -seven when the
893 rescue took place.
The story of Wang Rong and Mo Junhe, while unrelated to Linji, is sufficiently
interesting as background material on the period to warrant retelling here. Wang Rong
was the grandson of Wang Shaoyi, who, as noted above, was regional commissioner of
Zhenzhou in Linji’s day. Wang Rong was only ten years old when, upon the death of his
father, he succeeded to the latter’s position. Shortly thereafter he chanced to see a youth
whose skin was black as iron and whose eyes and eyebrows slanted sharply upward. On
inquiry he found the youth’s name to be Mo 墨 (“Ink-stick”) and his occupation that of
a butcher. “How do I happen to have such a black Indian in my country!” he exclaimed.
He dubbed the youth Mo Kunlun 墨崑崙, “Ink-stick Black-man,” and bestowed a black
robe upon him.
In 892 Zhenzhou was attacked by the forces of Bingzhou 幷州, its neighbor to the
west. With the help of Li Kuangwei 李匡威 (d. 893), regional commissioner of Youzhou
幽州, northeast of Zhenzhou, Wang Rong’s troops were victorious the following year. In
the meantime, however, Li, having lost Youzhou to his younger brother while assisting
Wang, secretly plotted to kill the young sovereign and seize Zhenzhou for himself. In 893
Li used a ruse to induce Wang, then seventeen, to oﬀer him the prefectures of Zhen 鎮,
Zhao 趙, Jin 晉, and Ji 冀. The two, accompanied by Li’s soldiers, rode side by side into
the inner city to arrange for the transfer of powers, when suddenly a great storm broke.
As they entered the eastern gate of the prefectural headquarters, Li’s soldier accomplices
quickly shut it so as to cut oﬀ Wang’s escape. At that moment the butcher Mo leapt
through a breach in the wall, knocked down Li’s soldiers, and lifted the young Wang onto
his own horse. Then, with Wang on his back, he jumped onto the roof of the headquarters building. When the people of Zhenzhou realized that their beloved young ruler was
safe, they turned on Li and killed him and his accomplices. Wang later rewarded Mo with
a thousand pieces of gold, a mansion in the city, a large farm estate, and immunity from
punishment for ten capital oﬀenses. He also petitioned the throne to award Mo the title
of Guanglu Dafu 光祿大夫 (Gentleman of the Banquet Hall). For forty years thereafter
Mo enjoyed wealth and high position. In the region of Zhenzhou, those who had dark-

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 99
skinned children considered themselves fortunate, for they hoped their children would
be like Mo Junhe.
26. Wang Rong is not accorded the title Zhao Wang 趙王 in the Chinese histories.
The jc, however, lists among the disciples of Zhaozhou Congshen 趙州從諗 (778–897)
the names Zhenzhou Zhaowang 鎮州趙王 and Youzhou Yanwang 幽州燕王 (t 51: 281c.
27). The former name refers to Wang Rong, the latter, in all probability, to Li Kuangwei,
the ruler of Youzhou who later attempted to assassinate the young Wang Rong, though
we have no ﬁrm proof of this. Both men, under these titles, are mentioned several
times, separately and together, as the “two kings” in the Zhaozhou Zhenji Chanshi yulu
趙州眞際禪師語録 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master Zhaozhou Zhenji) (e.g., x 68, no.
1315, 76b).
27. The city of Zhenzhou 鎮州 lay on the main road to Mount Wutai 五臺, in northern
Shanxi, where the Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī was believed to reside. From early times this has
been a famous place of pilgrimage. In the spring of 849 the Japanese Tendai monk Ennin
(see note 7) passed through Zhen on his way to Mount Wutai, reaching the mountain just
a week later (Reischauer 1955a, 214–266). For a description of Mount Wutai in modern
times, see Blofeld 1959b, 85–103.
28. Zhaozhou Congshen 趙州從諗 (778–897) was an heir of Nanquan Puyuan. He is
thought to have been a native of Hexiang 赫鄕 in Caozhou 曹州, Shandong Province,
with the family name He 郝. He entered a temple near his home as a young boy, and
at eighteen visited Nanquan, who was living in Chizhou 池州 in Anhui 安徽 Province.
There Congshen remained for forty years, until Nanquan’s death in 835. Now in his late
ﬁfties, Congshen set out on a long pilgrimage, during the course of which he visited most
of the important Chan masters of the time; he vowed, it is said that “I will ask even a
child of seven to teach me if his understanding is greater than mine, and I will teach even
a man of one hundred if my understanding is greater than his.” He is said to have been in
his eighties when he was invited to live at Guanyin yuan 觀音院, a temple situated to the
east of the prefectural capital of Zhaozhou. There the master instructed numerous disciples in his characteristic style of Chan, stressing penetrating statements rather than use
of the shout or the stick—Zhaozhou’s lips, it was said, sparkled light. Many of his words
and actions later became the basis of famous koans. Zhaozhou died at the advanced age
of one hundred and twenty, leaving a number of eminent heirs. His posthumous title,
Chan Master Zhenji 眞際禪師, was bestowed upon him by imperial decree.
29. It is interesting to note that this same anecdote is found in the Zhaozhou lu, with
the rather important diﬀerence that the roles of the two men are reversed.
30. Little is known of Mayu 麻谷, who lived at Mount Mayu in Puzhou 浦州 in the
southern part of modern Shanxi. He is identiﬁed by certain old commentators as Baoche
寶徹 (n.d.), the ﬁrst abbot of the monastery at Mount Mayu and one of Mazu Daoyi’s
heirs. However, Baoche was considerably older than Linji, so other commentators suggest that the Mayu mentioned in the ll is Baoche’s disciple, who was presumably the
second abbot of Mayu. In the ll Mayu appears twice, but it is clear that these are merely
two accounts of the same incident.
31. Longya Judun 龍牙居遁 (835–923) was in the sixth generation of the Qingyuan 淸
原 line and a direct heir of Dongshan Liangjie 洞山良价 (807–869), one of the founders
of the Caodong 曹洞 (Jap. Sōtō) school. Judun was from Nancheng 南城 in Fuzhou 撫
州 in present-day Jiangxi. After having his head shaved at the age of fourteen he visited
many teachers. Finally he came to Dongshan and remained with him for eight years. One

100 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
day he asked the master, “What is the meaning of the Patriarch’s coming from the West?”
Liangjie answered, “I will tell you when the Dong River runs uphill.” At these words
Judun was enlightened. He departed again on pilgrimage; among the masters he met
were Linji and Cuiwei Wuxue 翠微無學 (n.d.), with whom he had the exchanges recorded
in Critical Examinations 22 of the ll. These exchanges appear also in case 20 of the bl,
where the roles of Linji and Cuiwei are reversed. (For Cuiwei, see page 309, below.)
At the invitation of Ma 馬, the ruler of Hunan, Judun eventually settled at the temple
Miaoji chanyuan 妙濟禪院 on Mount Longya 龍牙 in Hunan. There he spent the remainder of his long life teaching; the assembly under him, it was said, never numbered less
than 500. His posthumous title was Chan Master Zhengkong 證空禪師. Longya was
noted for his religious poetry, and a collection of ninety-ﬁve poems entitled Tanzhou
Longyashan Dun Chanshi song 潭州龍牙山遁禪師頌 (Poems of Chan Master Longya
Judun), with a preface by Nanyue Qiji 南嶽齊己 (861–933?), is preserved in the Chanmen zhuzushi jiesong 禪門諸祖師偈頌 (Poems of the Chan patriarchs) (x 66, no. 1298,
726c–729a). Eighteen poems from this collection appear in the jc (t 51: 452c–453b). The
Dunhuang manuscript Stein 2165 also contains some of this master’s verses, indicating
that they circulated widely during Tang times.
32. Dajue 大覺 (n.d.) is known only by this name, which derives from the fact he is
recorded to have lived at the temple Dajue si 大覺寺 in the province of Wei 魏, in southeastern Hebei. He is regarded as an heir of Linji by the tg and by editions of the jc dating
from the Yuan, whereas the Song edition of the jc, and works depending on it, list him
as an heir of Huangbo.
33. Xingshan Jianhong 杏山鑑[鑒]洪 (n.d.) of the Qingyuan line was a direct disciple
of Yunyan Tansheng 雲巖曇晟 (782–841?) and thus a fellow student of Dongshan Liangjie
洞山良价 (807–869). Nothing is known of Jianhong beyond the fact that he lived on
Mount Xing 杏 in Zhuozhou 涿州, in the northern part of Hebei. The section devoted to
him in the jc (t 51: 323b), records only the anecdote given in Critical Examinations 13.
However, since, in the section on Linji in the jc, where this anecdote is also recounted,
Linji’s companion is identiﬁed as Ven. Mukou 木口和尙, it seems probable that Mukou
and Xingshan are the same person. This would seem to be true also for the Ven. Mukou
mentioned in the section on Shishi Shandao 石室善道 in zj 5.
34. Lepu 樂普 is the common designation for Yuan’an 元安 (834–898). A native of
Linyou 麟遊, his family name was Dan 淡. He became a monk at the age of twenty and
studied under Cuiwei Wuxue and Linji, serving as the latter’s attendant. Later he went to
Jiashan Shanhui (see note 39) and eventually became his dharma successor. Upon leaving Jiashan he ﬁrst dwelt at Mount Lepu 樂普 (also written 洛浦 and 落浦) in Lizhou 澧州,
then at Suxi 蘇谿 in Langzhou 朗州. Renowned as a teacher, Lepu is said to have attracted
students from everywhere in China.
35. The Zhengfayan zang 正法眼藏 (Treasury of the true dharma eye) is a collection
of koans and dialogues compiled between 1147 and 1150 by Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲
(1089–1163); the sermon referred to is in fascicle 2 (x 67, no. 1309, 574b–c). The Zongmen liandeng huiyao 宗門聯燈會要 was compiled in 1183 by Huiweng Wuming 晦翁悟明
(n.d.), three generations after Dahui in the same line; the sermon is found in zh 20 (x
79: 173a).
36. Little is known of Sansheng Huiran 三聖慧然 (n.d.) other than that he was a disciple of Linji and later lived at Sansheng yuan 三聖院 in Zhenzhou. The jc (t 51: 294c–295a)
devotes a section to him consisting only of anecdotes and dialogues. These indicate that

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 101
after Linji’s death Sansheng went south, where he had interviews with Deshan Xuanjian,
Xiangyan Zhixian, and Yangshan Huiji, and others. Several interviews between Sansheng
and Ven. Cen 岑和尙 (n.d.), a disciple of Nanquan Puyuan, are recorded in the section
on Cen in zj 17, and one between Sansheng and Xuefeng Yicun 雪峰義存 (822–908), a
disciple of Deshan, is the subject of bl case 49 (t 48: 184c).
37. The identity of Baoshou Yanzhao 保壽延沼 (n.d.), the “humble heir Yanzhao of
Baoshou in Zhenzhou” 住鎮州保壽嗣法小師延沼, is uncertain. Though from the wording
he would seem to be a direct disciple of Linji, nowhere in any of the lists of Linji’s heirs
is there mention of this name. However, zj 20 and the jc (t 51: 294c) have short sections
comprised of anecdotes on a Baoshou Zhao 寶壽沼 (n.d.) of Zhenzhou, whom they
regard as one of Linji’s heirs. Both record a conversation between Baoshou Zhao and
Zhaozhou Congshen, and the zj records one between him and Linji’s disciple Sansheng.
The fact that both this ﬁgure and the author of the Memorial Inscription have surnames
pronounced “Bao” (though the characters are diﬀerent) has from olden times led them
to be considered as the same person.
38. Xinghua Cunjiang 興化存奬 (830–888) was the second patriarch of the Linji
school. According to the stele inscription written for him by Gongcheng Yi 公乘億 (see
note 44), Cunjiang was a native of Youzhou 幽州 in Hebei with the surname Kong 孔. He
is believed to have descended from Confucius, as his ancestors originally lived in Lu 魯,
the birthplace of Confucius. Cunjiang entered temple life at seven, and, at twenty-one,
was among the ﬁrst group of monks to take the precepts on the ordination platform
built by Zhang Yunshen 張允伸 in the city of Youzhou. When Zhang constructed another
platform at the temple Yunju si 雲居寺 (Shijing si 石經寺) in Zhuozhou in 855, Cunjiang
was invited to become the precept master 律師. In 861 Cunjiang visited Linji in Zhenzhou
and remained with the master for probably a year or more. He then left on an extended
pilgrimage to the south, visiting, perhaps at Linji’s suggestion, Yangshan Huiji. Hearing that Linji was leaving Zhenshou, Cunjiang returned to the north, joined Linji and
accompanied him to Guanyin si in the city of Wei. He remained until the master’s death.
Following this, Cunjiang refused requests from friends to return to Yunju si, remaining
instead in Wei, where the governor, Han Gong 韓公, held him in high esteem and built
a splendid temple for him. There Cunjiang remained until his death in 888. Cunjiang is
regarded in Chan tradition as the editor of the ll, and perhaps also the compiler of the
“Xing lu” 行錄 (Record of Pilgrimages) section of the work.
39. Jiashan Shanhui 夾山善會 (805–881) was born in Xianting 峴亭 in Guangzhou 廣
州; his surname was Liao 廖. While still a child he became a monk on Mount Longya 龍牙,
in modern Hunan. Later he went to Jiangling 江陵 in modern Hubei, took the precepts,
and became a lecture master 座主. One night when Shanhui was lecturing in Jingkou 京
口, where he had subsequently gone to live, a monk asked, “What is the dharmakāya?”
Shanhui answered, “The dharmakāya is without form.” “What is the dharma eye?” the
monk then asked. Shanhui said, “The dharma eye is ﬂawless. Before the eyes there are
no dharmas. Though the meaning exists before the eyes, it cannot be reached by the
eyes or ears.” At this point the visiting monk laughed. When Shanhui asked why he had
laughed, the monk, Daowu Yuanzhi 道吾圓智 (769–835), suggested that he go to Huating
華亭 to see Chuanzi Decheng 船子德誠 (n.d.), a monk who was at that time working as a
ferryman. Decheng, Daowu said, “hasn’t a tile to cover his head above, nor a gimlet point
of earth to stand on below.” Shanhui went straightaway to Huating and found Decheng
in his boat on the river. In the subsequent encounter Shanhui thoroughly penetrated

102 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
Decheng’s dharma. Decheng told him to avoid crowded cities, live in the mountains, and
concentrate on ﬁnding a successor to keep the dharma alive. He then tipped over his
boat and was never seen again. Shanhui lived in seclusion for over thirty years. In 870 he
and the assembly that had gathered around him built a monastery, Lingquan yuan 靈泉
院, on Mount Jia 夾山.
40. Song editions of the jc and dependent works like the Chuandeng yuying ji 傳燈
玉英集 (Precious ﬂowers of the lamp transmission) and Da guangming zang 大光明藏
(Treasury of great light) list Dajue as a fellow disciple with Linji under Huangbo Xiyun.
He is identiﬁed as a disciple of Linji in tg 12, in the section on Dajue (x 78, no. 1553,
475a), which records the same anecdote about him as is given in Critical Examinations
16. Editions of the jc dating from the Yuan follow this view (see t 51: 295a).
41. E.g., tg 13 (x 78, no. 1553, 483a); and zh 10 (x 79, no. 1557, 97a). The tg, on the evidence of Critical Examinations 18, regards Elder Ding 定上座 as a disciple of Linji, a view
repeated in the zh and the wh. The word 上座 (“elder”; Skr., “thera” or “sthavira”), which
originally designated the leader of a group of monks, came to be used, as here, simply
as a title of respect between one monk and another. As a koan, this incident appears as
case 32 of the bl.
42. See bl 32 (t 48: 171b–c).
43. Guanxi Zhixian 灌溪志閑 (d. 895) was a disciple of Linji during the master’s later
years.
44. Gongcheng Yi 公乘億 (n.d.) received his government service degree in 871, and
later served on the staﬀ of Le Yanzhen 樂彦禎 (d. 888), the regional commissioner of
Weibo 魏博 (Weizhou 魏州). His style was Shoushan 壽山. He is noted for his literary
works—his poetry is found in qt 22 and his prose in qt 813. For his stele inscription, the
Weizhou gu chan dade Jiang gong tabei 魏州故禪大德奬公塔碑 (Memorial inscription for
the monk [Xinghua Cun]jiang of Weizhou), see qt 813.
45. Puxiang Jiang Gong 蒲相蔣公. Though the stele inscription for Xinghua Cunjiang
provides no further information on this person, it is possible that he was Jiang Shen 蔣伸
(d. ca. 867), a high oﬃcial, scholar, and member of the Hanlin Academy. Jiang Shen was
the second son of Jiang Yi 蔣乂 (747–821), a distinguished minister during the reigns of
the emperors Dezong 德宗 (779–805) and Xianzong 憲宗 (806–820). After passing the
civil service examination, Jiang Shen was rapidly promoted to successively more important oﬃces. He was appointed to the Hanlin Academy in 855 and became Vice-Minister
of the Army 兵部侍郞 the following year. He also served as President of the Ministry of
Justice 刑部尙書 and National Historian 國史. In 861, without relinquishing his posts in
the central government, he assumed the position of regional commissioner of Hezhong
河中, with his seat of government at Puzhou 蒲州. After that he moved to Xuanbu 宣部
in Kaifengfu 開封府, Henan. In 866 he was appointed Grand Tutor to the Heir Apparent
太子太博.
46. “Lord He” refers to Xian Taiwei Zhong[shu]ling He Gong 先太尉中[書]令何公
(d. 866), idem He Hongjing 何弘敬, whose real name was Chongshun 重順. His family
originated in Lingzhou 靈州, Shanxi 陝西, but his grandfather moved to Weizhou, where
he and his son became powerful military oﬃcers. Chongshun himself became regional
commissioner of Weizhou in 840, and in 843 received the name of Hongjing 弘敬 from
Emperor Wuzong. Later he refused to obey the orders of the court and, backed by his
own army, assumed independent control of his area. Emperor Xuanzong took a tempo-

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 103
rizing attitude toward him, however, honoring him with several oﬃcial titles, including
that of President of the Imperial Grand Secretariat 兼中書令. His son succeeded him,
but was killed in 870. Thus over a period of forty years three generations of the family
controlled Weizhou.
47. See note 45.
48. Han Yunzhong 韓允忠 (814–874) was born in Weizhou; his original name was
Junxiong 君雄. He achieved military distinction under He Hongjing, the regional commissioner of Weizhou, to whom he is said to have been related, and, on the death of
He’s son in 870, was chosen deputy regional commissioner of that prefecture. Emperor
Yizong bestowed the name Yunzhong upon him; the succeeding emperor, Xizong 僖宗
(862–888), honored him with a number of titles. His son Jian 簡 (d. 881) succeeded him.
49. Ma Fang 馬防 was a Song-dynasty imperial court oﬃcial about whom nothing
is known. His preface to the ll, dated 9 September 1120, is written in elegant fourcharacter phrases summarizing the principal anecdotes and doctrines of the text. It is
highly esteemed in China and Japan and has been included in almost every edition of
the work.
50. Fengxue Yanzhao 風穴延沼 (896–973) was a native of Zhejiang 浙江 Province; his
family name was Liu 劉. After failing to pass the civil examinations he became a monk,
studying the Lotus Sutra and Tiantai meditation before practicing Chan under Xuefeng
Yicun, Jingqing Daofu 鏡淸道怤 (868–937), and others before joining the assembly under
Nanyuan Huiyong. The biographies describe Fengxue as proud of his understanding,
and in need of Nanyuan’s strict training to realize the limitations of his earlier awakenings. Nanyuan’s sole dharma successor, Fengxue, subsequently settled in Ruzhou 汝
州, where he practiced alone for ten years at the abandoned temple Fengxue si 風穴寺,
from which he derived his name. Eventually students gathered under him, and in 951 he
relocated to Guanghui si 廣慧寺, a temple built for him by the local prefect. One day, at
the age of seventy-eight, Fengxue addressed the following verse to the assembly before
passing away seated in the full lotus posture:
Truth, availing itself of the ﬂow of time / Must of necessity save all beings.
Remote from it though they who long for it may be / Step by step they will
approach it.
In years to come, should there be an old man / Whose feelings resemble mine,
Day after day the incense smoke will rise / Night after night the lighted lamp
will burn. (zd, 271; x 68, no. 1315, 45a)
51. Shoushan Shengnian 首山省念 (926–995) was a native of Laizhou 萊州 in present Shandong; his family name was Di 狄. He trained under Fengxue Yanzhao. It is
recorded that Fengxue once lamented to Shengnian that Linji’s dharma would end with
him (Fengxue). When Shengnian inquired whether there were none among his students
who were worthy, Fengxue replied that, although many were intelligent, none had realized self-nature. Shengnian urged him to inquire further. When Fengxue next addressed
the monks in the hall, he stated, “The World-Honored One looked upon the assembly
with his lotus-blue eyes. At just that moment, what was he preaching? If you say he was
preaching through nonpreaching, you bury the World-Honored One. So tell me, what
was he preaching?” Shengnian shook his sleeves and walked out. Fengxue put down his
staﬀ and returned to his quarters. When his attendant later asked, “Why didn’t Shengnian
answer you?” he responded, “Because he understood.” Shengnian succeeded to Fengxue’s
dharma and later lived quietly on Mount Shou 首 in Ruzhou, maintaining Linji’s dharma

104 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
during the turbulent period at the end of the Tang dynasty. Subsequently he served as
abbot of the temples Guangjiao chanyuan 廣敎禪院 and Baoying chanyuan 寶應禪院.
52. Fenyang Shanzhao 汾陽善昭 (947–1024) was a native of Taiyuan 太原, in present
Shanxi 山西; his family name was Yu 兪. Shanzhao is said to have visited seventy-one
teachers (many of them of the Caodong school) before coming to Shoushan Shengnian,
whose successor he became. He later resided at the temple Taizi yuan 太子院 on Mount
Fenyang 汾陽. The Xu chuandeng lu 續傳燈錄 (Further transmission of the lamp) reports
that near the end of his life he was visited three times by a messenger from the governor with an invitation to become abbot of an important temple. Each time the master
refused. On his fourth visit the messenger reported that he had been severely punished
because of the master’s refusals on the three previous occasions, and that another refusal
would result in his death. Fenyang said, “Old age and sickness have prevented my leaving the mountain, but if I do go I would like to choose the time. We needn’t go together.”
“If only you accept, you may go whenever you wish,” replied the messenger. The master
ordered a farewell meal and put on his traveling clothes. “I’m going ahead,” he said to his
monks. “Who can come with me?” A monk came forward and said, “I can.” “How far can
you walk in a day?” the master asked. “Fifty li,” replied the monk. “You can’t come with
me,” said Shanzhao. Another monk came forward, saying he could walk seventy li in a
day. “You can’t come with me either,” said the master. Finally the master’s attendant came
forward and said, “I’ll accompany you wherever you go.” “You can come with me,” said
Shanzhao. Then, turning to the messenger and saying, “I’m going ahead,” he put down
his chopsticks and died.
Fenyang’s wide-ranging studies during his time as a training monk were put to use
in his teaching methods. He was, for example, the ﬁrst Linji master to use the Five Ranks
五位 system of the Caodong school. He was also instrumental in introducing the koan as
a method of instruction in Chan, combining old stories from the sutras, Chan masters,
and other sources with verse commentaries 頌. This method eventually led to the writing
of such great koan collections as the bl and the wg.
53. Shishuang Chuyuan 石霜楚圓 (986–1039) was a native of Quanzhou 全州, in present Guangxi 廣西, with the family name Li 李. He commonly appears in koans under the
name of Ciming 慈明. He became a monk at age twenty-two and joined the assembly
under Fenyang Shanzhao. Fenyang treated him with great severity, not allowing Chuyuan
into his room for instruction and showering him with abuse whenever they met. After
two years of such treatment Chuyuan complained to the master, but Fenyang glared at
him and retorted, “Idiot! Do you take me for a peddler?” and started to drive him away
with a stick. When Chuyuan again tried to speak the master covered his mouth, at which
Chuyuan attained a deep understanding. Chuyuan remained with Fenyang for another
seven years and succeeded to his dharma. Later he served as abbot of several temples in
the south, spreading Linji’s teachings in that area. One of these temples was Shishuang
si 石霜寺 in Tanzhou 潭州, from which he derived his name. Chuyuan died at the age of
ﬁfty-three, but despite the comparative brevity of his life he was of great importance for
the Linji lineage, leaving over ﬁfty dharma heirs, the most important historically being
Yangqi Fanghui and Huanglong Huinan (see following notes).
54. Yangqi Fanghui 楊岐方會 (992–1049) was a native of Yichunxian 宜春縣 in Yuanzhou 袁州; his family name was Leng 冷. After becoming a monk he traveled widely in
search of a teacher, ﬁnally remaining under Shishuang Chuyuan and succeeding to his
dharma. He later taught at the temple Putong chanyuan 普通禪院 on Mount Yangqi 楊

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 105
岐 in Yuanzhou, then moved to Haihui si 海會寺 on Mount Yungai 雲蓋 in Tanzhou 潭州.
His vigorous style of teaching is preserved in the lineage named after him, which continues till this day and to which all present-day Japanese Rinzai masters belong.
55. Huanglong Huinan 黃龍慧南 (1002–1069) was a native of Xinzhou 信州; his family
name was Zhang 章. He received dharma transmission from a Yunmen master named
Huaicheng 懷澄 (n.d.), but resumed training at another monastery upon hearing criticism
of Huaicheng’s understanding; when the master died and Shishuang Chuyuan became the
new abbot, Huinan studied under him and attained enlightenment at the age of thirtyﬁve. After succeeding to Shishuang’s dharma he left on an extended pilgrimage, residing
at many temples and even undergoing imprisonment for a time because of a ﬁre at the
temple Guizong si 歸宗寺. He eventually settled on Mount Huanglong 黃龍 and there
taught the distinctive style of koan-centered Chan that became known as the Huanglong
line. Although this lineage lasted only about 150 years, it was historically signiﬁcant as the
ﬁrst of the Chan lineages to be transmitted to Japan, by the Japanese Tendai priest Myōan
Yōsai (Eisai) 明庵榮西 (1141–1215).
56. Fayan Wenyi 法眼文益 (885–958) was a native of Zhejiang 浙江; his family name was
Lu 魯. He was ordained at the age of seven and excelled in the Confucian classics and Buddhist sutras, particularly the Avataṃsaka Sutra. His ﬁrst Chan master was Changqing Huileng 長慶慧稜 (854–932), a disciple of Xuefeng Yicun 雪峯義存 (822–908). Later, while taking shelter at the monastery of Luohan Guichen 羅漢桂琛 (869–928), he was asked by the
master where he was going. “I’m on pilgrimage,” replied Fayan. “What’s the use of pilgrimage?” Luohan asked. “I don’t know,” answered Fayan. “Not knowing is closest!” responded
Luohan. Fayan stayed with Luohan and eventually succeeded to his dharma. After a period
of wandering, he was invited to live at the temple Chongshou yuan 崇壽院; later, under
the patronage of Li Jing 李璟 (916–961), the self-styled “Lord of Jiangnan” 江南國主, he
resided ﬁrst at Bao’en chanyuan 報恩禪院 and then at Qingliang yuan 淸涼院 in Jinling 金
陵, where, as a popular teacher in the lineage of Deshan Xuanjian, he never had less than
a thousand students. He is recognized as the founder of the Fayan 法眼 school of Chan.
57. The xg, in its section on Bodhidharma, after quoting the complete text of the Erru
sixing lun 二入四行論 (Discourse on the two entrances and the four practices), states,
“By this teaching Bodhidharma converted the land of Wei. Those who understood the
truth followed it and attained awakening. His words and instructions were recorded and
the rolls spread abroad in the world” (t 50: 551c). One of the earliest extant works on
Chan history, the Lengqie shizi ji 楞伽師資記 (Record of the masters and disciples of the
Laṅka school), compiled in 720–730 by Jingjue 淨覺 (683–760?) and found at Dunhuang,
reports in its section on Bodhidharma:
These four practices were explained by Bodhidharma personally. As for other
matters, the disciple Tanlin 曇林 recorded the master’s words and sermons. These
were collected in one volume, entitled Damo lun 達磨論 (Discourses of Bodhidharma). For the sake of those who practiced meditation, Master Bodhidharma
also explained the cardinal meaning of the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra. This one roll contained twelve or thirteen sheets and was also called Damo lun. These two works
were completely harmonious in style and principle. They circulated freely in the
world. (t 85: 1285b)
The above two works indicate that some kind of collection of Bodhidharma’s
words did exist at an early time. However, the fact that such works as the Erru sixing
lun, attributed, correctly or incorrectly, to Bodhidharma, are all written in the literary

106 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
style rather than the spoken language means that they cannot correctly be classiﬁed
as “recorded sayings.” On the other hand, the text of the collection of questions and
answers appended to the Dunhuang Erru sixing lun contain many passages in the
spoken language of the time, and may therefore be regarded as a very early example of
“recorded sayings.” Whether or not it is composed of Bodhidharma’s actual words is, of
course, another matter.
58. Daoxin 道信 (580–651) is said to have been a native of Henei 河內 in Henan
with the surname Sima 司馬, to have left home at the age of seven, and, at fourteen, to
have become a disciple of the Third Patriarch, Sengcan 僧粲 (d. 606?), from whom he
received transmission after nine years. He later lived in Jizhou 吉州, where he is said to
have saved the city during a rebel seige by telling the populace to recite the Perfection of
Wisdom Sutra. In 624, after a period of wandering (some records have him studying at
Dalin si 大林寺 on Mount Lu 廬), Daoxin went to Huangmeixian 黃梅縣 in Qizhou 蘄州,
Hubei, and there resided on Mount Potou 破頭. He attracted numerous followers, over
ﬁve hundred according to some of the biographies, the ﬁrst time in China that such a
large group had assembled for the purpose of Chan study under a single teacher. It is
said that he never left the mountain for the remaining thirty years of his life. Emperor
Taizong 太宗 (r. 627–649) summoned Daoxin to the capital several times, but he refused
to leave his mountain retreat though threatened with death for his disobedience. Later
Emperor Daizong 代宗 (r. 763–779) bestowed upon him the posthumous title of Chan
Master Dayi 大醫禪師.
59. Hongren 弘忍 (601–674) was born in Huangmei 黃梅 in Qizhou 蘄州, Hubei; his
surname was Zhou 周. It is said that the Fourth Patriarch, Daoxin, was once traveling
through the Zhou family’s neighborhood and noticed Hongren, then a boy of six or
seven, and, recognizing the child’s unusual nature, requested his parents to allow him
to become a monk. Said to have been quiet and unusually diligent in both work and
meditation, Hongren studied under Daoxin and eventually succeeded to his dharma. He
spent the rest of his life on Mount Huangmei 黃梅, where Daoxin had lived before him,
and, it is said, had over seven hundred monks studying under him at the temple Dongshan si 東山寺. Among the most famous were Shenxiu and Huineng (see notes 60 and
61, below). Emperor Daizong bestowed upon him the posthumous title of Chan Master
Daman 大滿禪師.
60. Shenxiu 神秀 (606?–706), also called Daoxiu 道秀, was a native of Weishixian 尉
氏縣 in present Henan, with the family name Li 李. At the age of twenty he received the
precepts at the temple Tiangong si 天宮寺 in Luoyang. He appears to have been scholarly
by nature—even while making a deep study of the Tripiṭaka, he continued the study of
Confucianism and Taoism begun in his youth. He was nearly ﬁfty when he ﬁrst visited
Hongren, with whom he remained for six years. Even after departing from Mount
Huangmei following the completion of his practice under Hongren, he subjected himself
to rigorous self-discipline for another ﬁfteen or sixteen years.
In the Yifeng 儀鳳 era (676–678) Shenxiu registered as a member of the community
at the Tiantai temple Yuquan si 玉泉寺 on Mount Dangyang 當陽 in Jingzhou 荊州. To
the east of the temple he built himself a hermitage and there continued his ascetic practices. He appears to have been a gifted teacher; gradually students sought him out, and
in 700, at the age of ninety-four, he was summoned to the capital by Empress Wu 武后
(625–705) and asked to preach before the court. He spent the remaining six years of his
life in Luoyang. Soon after his death at the age of 101 he received the posthumous title

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 107
Chan Master Datong 大通禪師. This was the ﬁrst time that the title 禪師 (Chan master,
meditation master), had ever been conferred. Shenxiu left a number of distinguished disciples, who promulgated the teachings of their master in and around the two capitals of
Luoyang and Chang’an, at ﬁrst with great success. Later, however, their lineage—known
as the Northern school—came under attack by Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會 (see note 62,
below), principally because of its doctrine of “gradual enlightenment” 漸悟, which Shenhui contrasted to the “sudden enlightenment” 頓悟 advocated by the Southern school of
the Sixth Patriarch Huineng. Shenxiu was the author of the Da Huayan jing shu 大華嚴
經疏 (Commentary on the Avataṃsaka Sutra) and the Miaoli yuancheng guan 妙理圓成
觀 (Contemplation of the mysterious principle and the perfectly accomplished), both of
which are no longer extant. The Guanxin lun 觀心論 (Treatise on contemplating mind) is
attributed to him, as are parts of the Dasheng wusheng fangbian men, which gives expression to the philosophical views of the Northern school.
61. Huineng 慧能 (638–713) is considered the predecessor of the so-called “Patriarch
Chan” 祖師禪 that developed during the Tang dynasty. The information on Huineng contained in the traditional Chan biographies is often contradictory, and much of it appears
to have no historical foundation. The sketch of his life that follows is based upon as reliable information as is available, along with the best known of the legendary material.
Huineng’s family name was Lu 盧; his forebears were native to Fanyang 范陽 in modern Hebei. After his father, a minor oﬃcial, was banished to the south, the family lived
in Xinzhou 新州 in present Guangdong. His father died while Huineng was only three,
leaving the boy under the care of his mother; as he grew older he sold ﬁrewood to help
support her. One day as he entered the city with his ﬁrewood he heard someone reciting
a sutra and was deeply struck by the line, “Give rise to the mind that does not abide in
anything.” Hearing that the text was the Diamond Sutra, and that the reciter had received
it from the Chan master Hongren, Huineng headed north to Hongren’s monastery on
Mount Huangmei. Upon meeting him, Hongren commented, “A barbarian from the
south can never become a buddha.” Huineng responded, “There is no north and south in
buddha-nature.” Hongren, sensing his ability, directed him to start work as a lay laborer
行者 threshing rice for the monastery.
One day Hongren asked the monks to write verses expressing their understanding
so that he might choose a worthy successor. Shenxiu, the head monk, posted his verse at
midnight on a wall: “The body is the Bodhi tree / The mind is like a clear mirror’s stand
/ At all times strive to polish it / And let no dust collect.” Huineng heard another monk
reciting Shenxiu’s verses and, recognizing their inadequacy, had someone post the following verse: “Originally there is no tree of enlightenment / Nor is there a stand with a
clear mirror / From the beginning not a single thing exists / Where is there for dust to
collect?” Hongren, seeing the profound insight of these verses but fearful that Huineng
might be hurt by jealous supporters of Shenxiu, withheld his praise. At midnight, however, he summoned the layman, handed him the robe and bowl symbolizing transmission of the patriarchate, and ordered him to ﬂee south. There for some sixteen years
Huineng led a secluded life in the mountains. In 676 Huineng went to the temple Faxing
si 法性寺 in Guangzhou 廣州, where he met Dharma Master Yinzong 印宗法師 (627–713),
who shaved Huineng’s head and gave him the full precepts. The following year he went
to stay at Baolin si 寶林寺, a temple in the mountains at Caoxi 曹溪. Soon after this the
local prefect, Wei Ju (see note 64), invited Huineng to preach at the temple Dafan si 大
梵寺 in the city of Shaozhou 韶州, modern Canton. In time the master’s fame spread to

108 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
the imperial court, and in 705 he was summoned to Luoyang by Emperor Zhongzong 中
宗 (656–710). The master refused on the plea of ill health, and spent the rest of his life at
Baolin si and Dafan si. The posthumous title Chan Master Dajian (Great Mirror) 大鑑禪
師 was conferred upon him by Emperor Xianzong 憲宗 (r. 805–820). The lists of the master’s ten great heirs given in the early editions of the Platform Sutra, curiously enough, do
not mention Nanyue Huairang and Qingyuan Xingsi, the disciples who gave rise to the
later Five Houses of Chan.
62. Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會 (684–758) was born in Xiangyang 襄陽, in present Hubei;
his surname was Gao 高, or, according to some texts, Wan 萬. He studied Confucianism
and Taoism as a youth but decided to become a monk after reading about Buddhism in
the Hou Han shu 後漢書 (Chronicles of the Later Han). He ﬁrst studied for three years
under Shenxiu in Jingzhou; after Shenxiu’s departure for the capital in 701, he went
south to Caoxi and trained under Huineng for the remainder of the latter’s life. In 720
Shenhui moved, on imperial order, to the temple Longxing si 龍興寺 in Nanyang, in
modern Henan, where he had close contacts with several distinguished scholar-oﬃcials,
among them the great poet Wang Wei 王維 (699–759). From 730 Shenhui engaged in
public debates over the course of several years with Chongyuan 崇遠 (n.d.), a monk of
the Northern school, at the temple Dayun si 大雲寺 in Huatai 滑臺, present Hebei. Shenhui criticized the “gradual” teachings of the Northern school and vigorously upheld the
Southern school’s “sudden” teachings.
In 745, having been invited by Song Ding 宋鼎 (n.d.), the vice-minister of the army,
to take up residence at the temple Heze si 荷澤寺 in Luoyang, Shenhui was aﬀorded the
opportunity of spreading his views in the capital. Shortly after this, however, on the basis
of false evidence, he was removed from his position by the censor Lu Yi 廬奕 (n.d.), an
ardent adherent of the Northern school, and sent to Yiyang 弋陽 in Raozhou 饒州, in
present Jiangxi. Later, during the An Lushan rebellion in 755, the central government
found itself in serious ﬁnancial straits. Shenhui, who at that time was residing at Kaiyuan
si 開元寺 in Jingzhou, advised the government to establish ordination platforms and sell
ordination certiﬁcates. This method of fundraising was so successful that, in appreciation, the government called Shenhui back to his former temple Heze si in Luoyang, from
where he was summoned to the court by Emperor Suzong 肅宗 (r. 756–762). Under
imperial patronage Shenhui spent the rest of his life championing the cause of the Southern school. By imperial order his tomb was constructed at Longmen 龍門, and the temple
Baoying si 寶應寺 was established there in his honor. In 770 Emperor Daizong conferred
upon him the title of Great Teacher Bore (Prajñā) 般若大師, and presented to his tomb a
plaque bearing the inscription 眞宗般若傳法之堂, “Hall of the prajñā dharma transmission of the true school.” In 796 Emperor Dezong 德宗 (r. 779–805) granted Shenhui the
posthumous title of Seventh Patriarch.
Shenhui had many disciples, both lay and ordained. His school of Chan, which even
in his time appears to have been known as the Southern school, was ﬁrst called the Heze
荷澤 school by Guifeng Zongmi, the ﬁfth and last patriarch of the school. In the past
the only known work by Shenhui was the Xianzong ji (Dunwu wusheng bore song) 顯
宗記(頓悟無生般若頌) (Verses on sudden awakening to the wisdom of no-birth), but
several additional records were discovered among the Dunhuang manuscripts, including the Nanyang heshang wenda zazheng yi 南陽和尙問答雜徵義 (The priest of Nanyang’s
question-and-answer examination of various points of doctrine); the Nanyang heshang
dunjiao jietuo chanmen zhiliaoxing tanyu, mentioned in the text above; and the Puti-

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 109
damo nanzong ding shifei lun 菩提達磨南宗定是非論 (Treatise establishing the true and
false according to the Southern school of Bodhidharma), recording the debates with
Chongyuan at Dayun si, and edited by Shenhui’s lay disciple Dugu Pei 獨孤沛.
63. 南宗頓敎最上大乘摩訶般若波羅蜜經六祖慧能大師於韶州大梵寺施法壇經兼受無相戒弘
法弟子法界集記.
64. Wei Ju 韋璩 (also 葦據 or 韋據; n.d.). The Lidai fabao ji 歷代法寶記 (Chronicles of
the dharma treasure), in stating that Wei Ju wrote a memorial inscription for Huineng,
gives his title as “Assistant in the Bureau of Imperial Sacriﬁces” 大常寺丞 (t 51: 182c).
The Heze Shenhui Chanshi yulu 荷澤神會禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master
Heze Shenhui), while agreeing that Wei wrote the Memorial Inscription, gives him the
title “Assistant in the Imperial Household Service Department” 殿中丞 (Suzuki and
Kda 1934, 63). However, the Guangdong tongzhi 廣東通誌 (Comprehensive gazetteer
of Guangdong) states that Wei Ju became prefect of Shaozhou 韶州 in 713, the year of
Huineng’s death. This suggests that at the time Wei invited Huineng to speak at Dafan si
he was a minor oﬃcial, but that when the Platform Sutra was actually compiled—that is,
sometime after the master’s death in 713—he had been elevated to the post of prefect, and
hence was given this title throughout the text.
65. Nothing is known of Fahai 法海 (n.d.) other than what is contained in the concluding section of the Dunhuang text of the Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, where it
is written, “This Platform Sutra was compiled by the head monk Fahai, who, on his death,
entrusted it to his fellow student Daocan 道璨…. This priest was originally a native of
Qujiangxian 曲江縣 in Shaozhou.” (t 48: 345b). Presumably the “priest” referred to here
is Fahai; at least the writer of Fahai’s biography in the jc seems to have thought so. Other
biographical information on Fahai, such as that in the qt 915 or the Yuan edition of the
Platform Sutra, is of no value as history, although a preface by Fahai is appended to the
latter (t 48: 362b). Fahai may have been the monk Zhihai 智海 (n.d.), a disciple of the Sixth
Patriarch (t 51: 182c).
66. For example, zj 15, in the section on Dong si 東寺 (n.d.), states, “After his master
Daji (Mazu Daoyi) died, [Dongsi] constantly worried lest men who had an interest in
such matters and recorded Daji’s yuben 語本 would not be able to cast oﬀ the unessentials
and grasp the master’s meaning.” Again, in the memorial tower inscription for Baizhang
Huaihai composed by Chen Xu 陳詡 (n.d.) in qt 446 we ﬁnd, “[Baizhang’s] disciples
Shenxing 神行 (n.d.) and Fanyun 梵雲 (n.d.) gathered together his subtle words and
compiled them into a book of sayings (yuben).”
67. This work is probably identical with the Baizhangshan heshang yaojue 百丈山和
尙要訣 (Essential secrets of the priest of Mount Baizhang), one of the works on the lists
of books reported to have been brought back to Japan from Tang China by the Japanese
monks Ennin and Enchin 圓珍 (814–891). Another work on these lists is the Nanyang
Zhong heshang yanjiao 南陽忠和尙言敎 (Oral teachings of Ven. Nanyang Zhong). None
of the books on the lists, however, contained the term yulu in their title.
68. Among such works may be mentioned the Yichuan xiansheng yu 伊川先生語
(Sayings of Master Yichuan), about Cheng Yi 程頤 (1033–1107); the Shangcai yulu 上蔡語
錄 (Recorded sayings of Shangcai), about Xie Liangzuo 謝良佐 (1050–1103); and the Zhu
Zi yulu 朱子語錄 (Recorded sayings of Zhu Zi), about Zhu Xi 朱熹 (1130–1200).
69. Li Zunxu 李遵勗 (d. 1038) was originally named Li Xu 李勗, but upon receiving an
imperial princess for his wife he was given by Emperor Zhenzong 眞宗 (r. 997–1022) the

110 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
epithet “Zun” 遵, meaning “obedient,” to be added to his personal name. He held a series
of posts in the provincial administration and was an enthusiastic supporter of Linji
Chan, being a disciple of Guyin Yuncong (see following note) and a friend of Shishuang
Chuyuan (see note 53).
70. Guyin Yuncong 谷隱蘊聰 (965–1032) was a dharma heir of Shoushan Shengnian
(see note 51, above). After a period of travel, Guyin took up residence at the temple Taipingxingguo chanyuan 太平興國禪院 at Mount Guyin 谷隱 in present Hubei. His disciples included a number of prominent oﬃcials, among them Li Zunxu, who composed
a memorial inscription for Guyin, found in tg 17.
71. The existing Sijia yulu records the sayings of Mazu, Baizhang, Huangbo, and Linji,
but was compiled in the late Ming and may have no connection with the earlier work of
the same name.
72. Yuanjue Zongyan 圓覺宗演 (n.d.) was a native of Enzhou 恩州 in Hebei; his lay
name was Cui 崔. After becoming a monk he studied Chan under Yuanfeng Qingman
元豐淸滿. He resided at Mount Xuefeng 雪峰 in Fuzhou, but also lectured at the court.
He received the title Chan Master Yuanjue 圓覺禪師 from Emperor Huizong 徽宗 (r.
1100–1125).
73. Little is known of Muan Shanqing 睦庵善卿. The Zuting shiyuan was completed
in 1108.
74. Yuanwu Keqin 圜悟克勤 (1063–1135) was born in Pengzhou 彭州 in present
Sichuan; his family name was Luo 駱. It is said that as a child he could memorize a
thousand-character passage in a single day. He became a monk in his early teens after
reading Buddhist texts at a temple and feeling a sudden aﬃnity with the teachings. After
studying the precepts and scriptures he suﬀered a grave illness, thus realizing the futility of attempting to resolve samsara through words. He visited several masters and was
praised everywhere as a great vessel of the dharma. He ﬁnally came to Wuzu Fayan 五祖
法演 (1024?–1104) of the Yangqi line of Linji Chan. When Fayan refused to sanction his
understanding Yuanwu left in anger, upon which Fayan called after him, “Remember me
when you are ill with fever!” Soon afterwards, at the monastery on Mount Jin 金, he did,
in fact, become gravely ill, and, upon recovery, returned to study under Fayan. After years
of training he became Fayan’s heir. In 1102, owing to the illness of his mother, he returned
to Sichuan. There he assumed the abbacy of the temple Zhaojue si 昭覺寺 at the invitation of the prefect of Chengdu 成都. After eight years he was asked to become priest of
Lingquan yuan 靈泉院 on Mount Jia 夾, and it was there that he gave his famous lectures
on the Xuedou baize songgu 雪竇百則頌古, a collection of verse commentaries on koans
by Xuedou Chongxian 雪竇重顯 (980–1052) of the Yunmen school. Yuanwu’s lectures
were later published as the Biyan lu 碧巖錄 (Blue cliﬀ record), which became one of the
most important texts for Linji school koan study.
Yuanwu was very successful as a teacher, numbering among his students not only
monks but also lay practicers, some of them high government oﬃcials. He was granted
the title Chan Master Foguo 佛果禪師 by Emperor Huizong 徽宗 (r. 1100–1125), and by
imperial command resided at several temples in the north and (following relocation of
the capital to the city of Hangzhou in 1127) in the south. The title Chan Master Yuanwu
圜悟禪師, by which he has been generally known ever since, was conferred upon him by
Emperor Gaozong 高宗 (r. 1127–1162). In 1130 Yuanwu returned to the temple Zhaojue
si, and there, in 1135, died in the sitting posture after writing his farewell poem. The two
most important of his sixteen dharma heirs were Dahui Zonggao (see following note)

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 111
and Huqiu Shaolong 虎丘紹隆 (1077–1136), whose line includes all Japanese Rinzai Zen
masters.
75. Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲 (1089–1163) was born in Xuancheng 宣城 in present-day
Anwei; his family name was Xi 奚. He left home at the age of sixteen and entered Huiyun
si 慧雲寺, a temple on Mount Dong 東, where he was ordained the following year. From
early on, after reading the Yunmen guanglu 雲門廣錄 (Extensive record of Yunmen), he
felt a special sense of relationship with Yunmen Wenyan 雲門文偃 (864–949). During an
extensive pilgrimage Dahui studied under some of the important Caodong masters of
his time, and, later, under Zhantang Wenzhun 湛堂文準 (1061–1115) of the Huanglong line
of Linji Chan. Following Wenzhun’s death, Dahui, on Wenzhun’s deathbed advice, joined
the assembly under Yuanwu Keqin at the temple Tianning Wanshou si 天寧萬壽寺 in the
capital, Bianliang 汴梁, in modern Kaifeng. One day during a lecture Yuanwu said, “A
monk asked Yunmen, ‘What is the place from which all Buddhas come?’ Yunmen replied,
‘East Mountain walks on the water.’ But if I were asked the same question I would simply
say, ‘A fragrant breeze comes from the south, and in the palace a refreshing coolness
stirs.” At these words Dahui was greatly enlightened. Dahui eventually became Yuanwu’s
dharma-heir and succeeded him as master of the monastery. His renown soon spread as
far as the capital; in 1126 he was given a purple robe and an honorary name, Fori 佛日, by
Lü Shun 呂舜 (n.d.), Minister of the Right.
When the Northern Song dynasty fell to the invading Jurchens in 1127, Dahui ﬂed
south and lived for a time with his teacher Yuanwu, then residing at the temple Zhenru
yuan 眞如院 on Mount Yunju 雲居 . Following Yuanwu’s return to Sichuan in 1130,
Dahui built a hermitage on the mountain where a Yunmen temple had formerly stood,
and soon attracted a large following. He later moved to Yunmen an 雲門庵 in modern
Fujian. In 1137, at the invitation of the prime minister, Zhang Jun 張浚 (a former student
of Yuanwu), he went to Mount Jing 徑 near the city of Hangzhou 杭州. The assembly
under him there is said to have numbered over two thousand. In 1141 Dahui was laicized
for advocating armed resistance against the Jurchen invaders of the Northern Song. He
retired to Hengyang 衡陽 in modern Hunan and there wrote his Zhengfayan zang 正法
眼藏 (Treasury of the true dharma eye). In 1150 he moved to Meiyang 梅陽 in modern
Guangdong, then in the midst of a plague that eventually took the lives of half of his students. He devoted himself to helping the populace, remaining even after he was oﬃcially
pardoned in 1155, until in 1158 he returned to Mount Jing on imperial command. There
he soon attracted an assembly of about 1,700 students and received the patronage of
Emperor Xiaozong 孝宗 (r. 1162–1189). He died in 1163, leaving ninety-four Dharma heirs.
He was granted the posthumous title Chan Master Pujue 普覺禪師.
Two of the best-known aspects of Dahui’s teaching are his opposition to what he
called the “silent-illumination false Chan” 默照邪禪 of the Caodong school, and his
promotion of “koan-introspecting Chan” 看話禪, which from his time on came to characterize the practice of the Linji school. His ongoing debate with the eminent Caodong
master Hongzhi Zhengjue 宏智正覺 (1091–1157) on the subject of silent illumination
versus koan work is famous in Zen circles.
76. See note 49, above.
77. Of Sengting Shouze 僧挺守賾 nothing is known.
78. Of Huishi Shiming 晦室師明 nothing is known.
79. Haiyun Yinjian 海雲印簡 (1202–1257) was a native of Ningyuan 寧遠 in present
Shanxi; his family name was Song 宋. He was ordained under Zhongguan Zhao 中觀

112 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
沼 and received the full precepts at the age of eleven. Yinjian was still thirteen when
Chinggis Khan’s armies conquered large parts of northern China. At the age of eighteen
Yinjian accompanied Zhongguan north with the Mongol army. After Zhongguan’s death
the following year Yinjian set oﬀ for Yanjing 燕京 (present-day Beijing). He is said to have
attained enlightenment on the way when he took refuge from a rainstorm under a cliﬀ
and saw a ﬂash of lightning. Upon arriving in Yanjing, Yinjian went to the temple Daqing
si 大慶寺 to meet Zhonghe Zhang 中和璋, a sixteenth-generation heir of Linji. Zhonghe
accepted him as a student and in time designated him a dharma successor. Later, under
the patronage of the Yuan court, Yinjian was appointed priest to a number of temples,
including Zhonghe’s temple Daqing si.
80. Xuetang Puren 雪堂普仁 was a thirteenth-generation heir of Fenyang Shanzhao
(see note 52).
81. Linquan Conglun 林泉從倫 (n.d.) was a dharma heir of Wansong Xingxiu 萬松
行秀 (1166–1246), the master at the temple Bao’en si 寶恩寺 in Yanjing 燕京 (present-day
Beijing), and served as Wansong’s successor at Bao’en si upon the latter’s death. In 1268 he
was invited to the court to lecture on Buddhism. A famous leader of the Caodong school,
Linquan was the compiler of the koan commentaries Konggu ji 空谷集 (Empty valley
anthology) and Xutang ji 虛堂集 (Empty hall anthology).
82. Guo Tianxi 郭天錫 was a well-known writer and painter of the period who, at
least at the time he wrote his preface, held a government post. The information in his
preface indicates that he lived from 1286 to 1341, though there is reason to doubt these
dates.
83. Of Wufeng Puxiu 五峯普秀 nothing is known.
84. Gidō Shūshin 義堂周信 (1325–1388), also known as Kūge Dōjin 空華道人, was a
native of Nagaoka 長岡 in Tosa 土佐, present-day Kōchi Prefecture 高知県. A member
of the Taira 平 family, he was ordained at fourteen, receiving the precepts on Mount
Hiei 比叡 near present-day Kyoto. At seventeen he entered the temple Rinsen-ji 臨川寺
in the western outskirts of the city to study under the Zen master Musō Soseki 夢窓疎
石 (1275–1351). After completing his training he attempted to visit China, but was prevented from going by illness. Following further training under Ryūzan Tokken 龍山德
見 (1284–1358) of Kennin-ji 建仁寺, he resided for over twenty years at Enpuku-ji 圓福寺,
Zenpuku-ji 禪福寺, and Hōon-ji 報恩寺, all temples in Kamakura 鎌倉, which had been
the capital of the shogunate during the Kamakura period (1185–1333). He was invited
by the shogun, Ashikaga Yoshimitsu 足利義滿 (1358–1408), to return to Kyoto, where he
served as the chief abbot of such important temples as Kennin-ji and Nanzen-ji 南禪寺.
Shūshin collected and classiﬁed several thousand poems by Song- and Yuan-dynasty
Chan monks, which he compiled in a ten-fascicle work called the Jōwa ruishu soon
renpōshū 貞和類聚祖苑聯芳集 (Jōwa-era collection of verse from the ancestral garden).
He also wrote much poetry of his own, and is one of the most famous ﬁgures of the Five
Mountains 五山 literary movement. His biography, the Kūge nichiyō kufū ryakushū 空華
日用工夫略集 (Short collection of Kūge’s daily thoughts), was compiled by Gidō’s successors on the basis of the diaries that the master kept throughout his life.
85. Shinchi Kakushin 心地覺心 (1207–1298) was a native of Shinshū 信州 (present
Nagano Prefecture); his family name was Tsunezumi 常澄. He entered the temple at
eighteen, and at twenty-nine received the full precepts at Tōdai-ji 東大寺 in the ancient
capital of Nara. He then studied esoteric Buddhism on Mount Kōya 高野, headquarters
of the Japanese Shingon 眞言 school, where he also met the Rinzai Zen master Taikō

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 113
Gyōyū 退耕行勇 (1163–1241). He practiced Zen under Gyōyū from 1239 to 1241 at Kongōzanmai-in 金剛三昧院 on Mount Kōya and Jufuku-ji 壽福寺 in Kamakura. He took the
bodhisattva precepts under Dōgen Kigen 道元希玄 (see note 86) at Gokuraku-ji 極樂寺
in Fukakusa 深草, then studied under several other Zen masters before embarking for
China in 1249. After ﬁnding that Wuzhun Shifan 無準師範 (1177–1249), the master he
had hoped to study under, was no longer alive, Kakushin set out on a pilgrimage, visiting various important Buddhist centers until a fellow Japanese monk named Genshin 源
信 directed him to Wumen Huikai 無門慧開 (J., Mumon Ekai; 1183–1260), master of the
temple Huguo Renwang si 護國仁王寺, near the city of Hangzhou 杭州 in present-day
Zhejiang. In a well-known story, Kakushin, when asked by Wumen, “My place has no
gate; how did you get in?” answered, “I entered from no-gate (wumen).” After a mere six
months Kakushin received dharma transmission from Wumen, along with the gifts of a
robe, a portrait of Wumen, and the Wumen guan 無門關 (Jap., Mumonkan), a collection
of koans compiled by Wumen that has remained a central text in Japanese Rinzai koan
study.
Following his return to Japan in 1254 Kakushin ﬁrst resided on Mount Kōya, then
became abbot of the temple Saihō-ji 西方寺 (later called Kōkoku-ji 興國寺) in Yura 由良,
in the province of Kii 紀伊, present Wakayama Prefecture 和歌山県. There he remained
until his death in 1298, interrupted only by short intervals to serve, by imperial invitation, as the abbot of the Zen temples Zenrin-ji 禪林寺 and Myōkō-ji 妙光寺 in Kyoto. He
often lectured before the emperors Kameyama 龜山 (r. 1259–1274) and Go-Uda 後宇多 (r.
1274–1287). During his lifetime Kakushin received from Kameyama the honorary title
Zen Master Hattō 法燈禪師, and following his death he was designated National Teacher
Hottō Enmyō 法燈圓明國師 by Emperor Go-Daigo 後醍醐 (r. 1319–1339). Kakushin’s
lineage, the Hottō 法燈 (or Hattō) line of Rinzai Zen, continued for a number of generations and included the important Japanese master Bassui Tokushō 拔隊得勝 (1327–1387).
Kakushin is also regarded as the founder of the Japanese Fuke school 普化宗, a tradition
of largely lay practicers who wandered about the country playing the shakuhachi 尺八, a
bamboo ﬂute whose music was regarded as an aid to enlightenment.
86. Dōgen Kigen 道元希玄 (1200–1253) was born in Kyoto to an aristocratic family.
Both of his parents having died when he was still a child, Dōgen left home at the age
of twelve and became a monk on Mount Hiei the following year. Later he turned his
attention to the Zen school, and became a disciple of the Rinzai master Myōzen 明全
(1184–1225), the successor of Myōan Yōsai (Eisai) 明菴榮西 (1141–1215) at Kennin-ji in
Kyoto. In 1223 Dōgen, together with Myōzen, traveled to China. After some wanderings
Dōgen became a student under the Caodong master Changweng Rujing 長翁如淨 (J.,
Chōō Nyojō; 1163–1228) on Mount Tiantong 天童 in present-day Zhejiang. After receiving dharma transmission from Rujing he returned to Japan in 1227 and resided for a time
at Kennin-ji. In 1229 he moved to the temple An’yō-in 安養院 in Fukakusa 深草, south
of Kyoto, and in 1233 to Kannondōri-in Kōshō-ji 觀音導利院興聖寺 in Yamashiro 山城.
In 1243, after ten years at Kōshō-ji, Dōgen moved north to the province of Echizen 越前,
present Fukui Prefecture 福井県, where he built the great temple Eihei-ji 永平寺. There
he worked to spread the teachings of Zen and to train students according to his understanding of what he had learned under his teacher in China. He was a proliﬁc writer;
among his most important works are the Shōbōgenzō 正法眼藏 (Treasury of the true
dharma eye), Eihei kōroku 永平廣錄 (Comprehensive records of Eihei), and Eihei shingi
永平淸規 (Monastic regulations of Eihei). He is honored as the founder of the Japanese

114 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
Sōtō school, and was posthumously granted the titles National Teacher Busshō Dentō 佛
性傳東國師 and Great Teacher Shōyō 承陽大師.
87. Lanxi Daolong 蘭溪道隆 (J., Rankei Dōryū; 1213–1278), a native of the Sichuan
region of China, entered temple life at the age of thirteen. He studied under the masters
Wuzhun Shifan 無準師範 (1177–1249), Chijue Daochong 痴絶道冲 (1169–1250), and others, and succeeded to the dharma of Wuming Huixing 無明慧性 (1162–1237). In 1246 he
and several of his disciples came to Japan, ﬁrst to the southern island of Kyūshū and
later, at the invitation of the regent Hōjō Tokiyori 北條時賴 (1227–1263), to the city of
Kamakura, the capital of the shogunate. There in 1253 he was named founding priest of
Kenchō-ji 建長寺, Japan’s ﬁrst true Rinzai Zen monastery. Later Lanxi moved to Kyoto
and was appointed abbot of Kennin-ji 建仁寺, Yōsai’s part-Zen, part-Tendai temple that
Lanxi succeeded in turning into a center of pure Zen training. He subsequently returned
to Kamakura and served again as the abbot of Kenchō-ji and other temples. Following
his death he was granted the posthumous title Zen Master Daikaku 大覺禪師, the ﬁrst
time anyone in Japan had received the “meditation master” (zenji 禪師) title.
88. Myōshū 妙秀 (n.d.). Almost nothing is known of this ﬁgure.
89. Mujaku Ryōen 無著良緣 (n.d.) practiced Zen under Yishan Yining 一山一寧 (see
following note) at the temple Nanzen-ji 南禪寺 in Kyoto. After receiving dharma transmission from Yishan he traveled to China and there remained for twenty years studying
under Gulin Qingmao 古林淸茂 (1262–1329), Yishan Liaowan 一山了萬 (d. 1312), and
Qingzhuo Zhengcheng 淸拙正澄 (1274–1339). When Zhengcheng went to Japan and was
named abbot of the temple Kenchō-ji, Mujaku entered Kenchō-ji and was appointed
head monk. Subsequently he was called to Kyoto and appointed abbot of Saizen-ji 西禪
寺. It is not known at what period of his life he established Shōun-an at Kennin-ji.
90. Yishan Yining 一山一寧 (J., Issan Ichinei; 1247–1317) was a native of Taizhou 臺州
in present-day Zhejiang, with the family name Hu 胡. Yining entered the temple Hongfu
si 鴻福寺 while still a child and, following full ordination at Puguang si 普光寺, studied the
teachings of the Vinaya and Tiantai schools. Turning to Chan, he trained under a number
of masters and became the dharma heir of Wanji Xingmi 頑極行彌. After serving as abbot
at several temples in China he was given the honorary title of Great Teacher Miaoci
Hongji 妙慈弘濟大師 by the Yuan emperor Chengzong 成宗 (r. 1294–1307).
In 1299, at the order of the Yuan court, he came to Japan as part of a delegation to
discuss peace negotiations between China and Japan. Although the delegation was at
ﬁrst detained by the Kamakura regent Hōjō Sadatoki 北條貞時 (1271–1311) on suspicion
of spying, Yining was ultimately shown great favor by Sadatoki, who allowed him to
reside at the Kamakura Zen temples Kenchō-ji 建長寺, Engaku-ji 圓覺寺, and Jōchi-ji 淨
智寺. In 1313 he was invited by Emperor Go-Uda 後宇多 (r. 1274–1287) to become abbot
of Nanzen-ji 南禪寺 in Kyoto, where he served as a popular teacher of students both lay
and ordained until his death in 1317.
91. Yinyuan Longqi 隱元隆琦 (J., Ingen Ryūki; 1592–1673) was a native of Fuqing 福淸
in present-day Fujian; his family name was Lin 林. In his early life he was a farmer, but
began spiritual training at age twenty-three following a religious experience one night
while sitting under a tree. At twenty-nine he became a monk at the temple Huangbo
Wanfu si 黃檗萬福寺 , then studied under a number of masters before receiving the
“mind-seal” 心印 from Miyun Yuanwu 密雲圓悟 (1566–1642). When Miyun’s student Feiyin Tongrong 費隱通容 (1593–1661) assumed the abbacy of Huangbo Wanfu si, Yinyuan
became head monk under him and later was named Feiyin’s dharma successor. Yinyuan

h i s t o r i c a l i n t r o d u c t i o n | 115
subsequently served as abbot of several temples, including Wanfu si, where he oversaw
the ﬁnal stages of restoration. In 1654 he departed for Japan, landing in Nagasaki 長崎
on the island of Kyūshū. There he became abbot of Kōfuku-ji 興福寺, and the following
year of nearby Sōfuku-ji 崇福寺 as well, serving both positions simultaneously. Later the
same year he was named abbot of Fumon-ji 普門寺 in present-day Osaka. In 1661, with
the support of the shogunate, construction began on a temple in Uji 宇治, just south of
Kyoto, to serve as a base for Yinyuan’s eﬀorts to spread the teachings of Ming-dynasty
Chan. Yinyuan gave to the new institution the temple-name Manpuku-ji 萬福寺 and the
mountain-name Ōbaku-san 黃檗山, in honor of the community he had left behind in
China. Manpuku-ji was designed according to contemporary Chinese temple architecture, and its rule followed the monastic code of its namesake in China. In 1664 Yinyuan,
already advanced in age, retired in favor of his disciple Muan Xingtao 木菴性瑫 (J.,
Mokuan Shōtō; 1611–1684), but continued to actively participate in temple aﬀairs from
his hermitage, Shōin-dō 松隱堂, on the grounds of Manpuku-ji.
92. Mujaku Dōchū 無著道忠 (1653–1744) was a native of the Tanba 但馬 area, in
present-day Hyōgo Prefecture 兵庫県. Placed in a local temple at the age of seven, at
age nine he was taken to Kyoto to live at Ryūge-in 龍華院, a subtemple of Myōshin-ji 妙
心寺, where he was raised by the priest Jikuin Somon 竺印祖門. From the age of seventeen he embarked on an extended pilgrimage during which he studied under various
masters. Upon Jikuin’s death in 1678, Mujaku, then twenty-ﬁve, assumed the priesthood
of Ryūge-in. In 1707, after further Zen studies, he became the thirty-fourth abbot of
Myōshin-ji at the age of ﬁfty-ﬁve. Mujaku spent much of his time lecturing on Buddhist
texts and did a vast amount of critical scholarly work, leaving at his death a body of
writings said to number 661 volumes (kan 卷). His commentaries on the ll, the bl, and
other major Zen works are regarded as his most important contributions, along with
two dictionaries of Zen technical terms, the Zenrin shōkisen 禪林象器箋 (Notes on Zen
implements) and the Kattō gosen 葛藤語箋 (Notes on Zen terminology).

Commentary

鎮州臨濟慧照禪師語錄
住三聖嗣法小師慧然集

The Recorded Sayings of Linji Huizhao Chanshi of Zhenzhou
Compiled by his humble heir Huiran of Sansheng
discourses
i

上堂

府主王常侍、與諸官請師升座。師上堂云、山僧今日事不獲
已、曲順人情、方登此座。若約祖宗門下、稱揚大事、直是開
口不得、無爾措足處。山僧此日以常侍堅請、那隱綱宗。

The Prefectural Governor, Councilor Wang, along with the other oﬃcials, requested the master to address them. The master took the high seat in
the Dharma Hall and said:
“Today, I, this mountain monk, having no choice in the matter, have
perforce yielded to customary etiquette and taken this seat. If I were to demonstrate the Great Matter in strict keeping with the teaching of the ancestral
school, I simply couldn’t open my mouth and there wouldn’t be any place
for you to ﬁnd footing. But since I’ve been so earnestly entreated today by
the councilor, why should I conceal the essential doctrine of our school?
for additional biographical material; also
zd, 154–157.

i
Huizhao Chanshi 慧照禪師,“Meditation
Master of Illuminating Wisdom,” is the
imperially conferred posthumous title of
the master usually known as Linji Yixuan
臨濟義玄 . The name Linji derives from
Linji yuan 臨濟院, the master’s temple on
the Hutuo 滹沱 River in Zhenzhou 鎮州,
an area in the central part of the present
Hebei 河北 region. See the Introduction

Huiran of Sansheng. See page 100, n. 36.
Prefectural Governor, Councilor Wang,
Fuzhu Wang Changshi 府主王常侍. See the
Introduction, page 96, n. 20 for a discussion of his titles.
To address is a free translation of either
升座 or 上堂 , both of which are terms

meaning “to take the high seat in the hall”;

117

118 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
see Intro duction, page 79, for a further
discussion of these terms. In the ll the
terms are used interchangeably.
Mountain monk translates 山僧, a deprecatory term used by Chan monks to
refer to themselves. Originally it appears
to have signiﬁed monks who lived alone
in the mountains, and not in communities. Early usages occur in the Zhao lun 肇
論 (The treatises of Zhao), by Sengzhao 僧
肇 (374/78–414), an eminent Chinese disciple of Kumārajīva (t 45: 155a; 155c), and
in the section on Xuangao 玄高 (402–444)
in the gz (t 50: 397a). Later usages seem to
refer also to monks lacking oﬃcial ordination certiﬁcates. The section on Tanqian 曇
遷 (542–607) in the xg contains the following passage:
In the spring of [Kaihuang 開皇] 10 [590],
the emperor [Wen 文帝] journeyed to Jinyang 晉陽 and commanded Jian to attend
upon him…. The emperor said [to Tanqian], “Your disciple’s journey has brought
him here, and he has been informed that
there are a great many self-ordained
monks 私度山僧 who are requesting government licenses. I am desirous of granting certificates to them. What do you
think of this? (t 50: 572c–573a)

As early as the early eighth century,
however, “mountain monk” was being
used by Chan monks as a self-deprecatory
term, as seen in several poems of that
period, e.g., the Zhengdao ge 證道歌 (Song
of enlightenment; t 48: 396c), attributed
to Yongjia Xuanjue 永嘉玄覺 (663–713), a
disciple of the Sixth Patriarch. The usage
also appears in the Guishan jingce 潙山
警策 (Guishan’s admonitions) and in the
section on Sikongshan Benjing 司空山本淨
(667–761) in the jc (see t 51: 242c; 243a).
Customary etiquette translates 人情 ,
the usual meaning of which is “human
feeling, sentiment, kindness,” but which
as an ancient colloquial expression meant
“traditional custom” or “gifts given as an
expression of goodwill” (see Tongsu bian

通俗編 9:180). In Tang colloquial language

this term was often used as a verb.
Great Matter translates 大事, an important Buddhist term that derives from the
following passage in the Miaofa lianhua
jing 妙法蓮華經 , Kumārajīva’s Chinese
translation of the Lotus Sutra: “All the
buddhas, the world-honored ones, appear
in the world only for one great matter 大
事, one great cause” (t 9: 7a). In time, the
term came to mean the fundamental truth
of Buddhism, the teaching by which sentient beings are brought to salvation.
Ancestral school 祖宗 is the term used
by Chan adherents to designate their
tradition, since they regarded its distinctive feature to be its transmission of the
ineffable buddha-mind from master to
disciple through a long and unbroken lineage. According to tradition, this wordless transmission first took place when
Śākyamuni held up a golden flower and
his disciple Mahākāśyapa smiled in understanding. This incident, as related in wg
case 6, is as follows:
One day at the Vulture Peak Śākyamuni
stood in front of the assembly and simply
held up a flower. No one reacted except
Mahākāśyapa, who smiled. At this the
Buddha said, “I possess the Treasury of
the True Dharma Eye, the Ineﬀable Mind
of Nirvana, the True Form of the Formless, the Subtle Dharma Gate that does
not depend on words and letters but is a
special transmission outside the teachings. This I entrust to Mahākāśyapa.” (t
48: 293c)

From Mahākāśyapa, the ﬁrst Indian patriarch of Chan in the traditional lineage,
the transmission continued from master
to disciple until it reached Bodhidharma,
the twenty-eighth Indian patriarch. From
Bodhidharma, who is also regarded as
the first patriarch in the Chinese line,
the transmission was handed down to
Bodhidharma’s Chinese disciple Huike
慧可 (487–593) and through him down to

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 119

還有作家戰將、直下展陣開旗麼。對衆證據看。僧問、如何是
佛法大意。師便喝。僧禮拜。師云、這箇師僧、卻堪持論。

Now, is there any adept warrior who forthwith can array his battle line and
unfurl his banners here before me? Let him try proving himself before the
assembly!”
A monk asked, “What about the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?” The master gave a shout. The monk bowed low.
“As an opponent in argument this young reverend is rather good,” said the
master.
Huineng 慧能 (638–713), the sixth Chinese
patriarch. Though the traditional patriarchate as such ended with Huineng, the
transmission continued from that master
to his immediate heirs, and from them
down to and beyond Linji’s generation.
Though the transmission lines of successive Chinese masters had been established earlier, the bz, compiled in 801 by
Huiju 慧炬 (n.d.), was the first work in
which the transmission was extended
back through a lineage of Indian patriarchs to Śākyamuni himself (for more
information on the patriarchal legend in
Chan see, e.g., Yanagida 1967; Yampolsky 1967; Dumoulin 1988, 1990; McRae
1986, 2003).
Essential doctrine translates 綱宗 , a
term that might be more literally rendered
as “main cord of our school.” In Chan special emphasis is laid upon the 綱 (literally,
the large rope that controls a net) since
Chan sees itself as handling the “main
cord” of the all-embracing net of Buddhist teaching, in which beings are caught
and brought to salvation. In the section of
zj 19 devoted to Linji we ﬁnd, “Virtuous
monks, for your sakes I have laid bare the
cord of the doctrine 綱宗 in a few words.”
In Chan literature the term 提綱 , “to lift
up the cord,” regularly refers to explaining
the fundamental principle of Chan. Thus
in the Muzhou yulu we find, “Someone
asked, ‘What is the cardinal meaning of

the buddhadharma? I beg the master to
explain 提綱.’ Muzhou replied, ‘Bring it to
me and I will explain it 提綱 for you’” (x
68: 36a).
For further information on Muzhou,
see Introduction, note 14.
Adept translates 作家 , which, in the
sense of “well-skilled,” is a term almost
exclusive to Chan. “Warrior” 戰將 as a
metaphor for a Chan monk might reﬂect
the dominant role of the military in Hebei
during Linji’s time.
Let him try proving himself before
the assembly. The Chinese, 對衆證據看 ,
should, according to Mujaku Dōchū, be
read in Japanese as shū ni taishite shōko
seyo, min, meaning, “Let him prove himself to the assembly and I will judge him.”
However, in the colloquial language of the
Tang, 看 at the end of a sentence indicates
that the sentence is in the imperative and
thus means “do…,” “let… do…,” or “try to
do…,” depending upon the context. The
complete form of this expression is usually 試 …看 . The following examples are
from the Baishi wenji 白氏文集 (Anthology of Bai Juyi):
碧氈帳下紅爐畔、試爲來嘗一盞看 “Close
to the glowing brazier under the blue
woolen curtains / Please come and drink
a cup of wine with me” (58, 招客, “Inviting
a guest”)
唯求造化力、試爲駐春看 “I’ll just ask the

120 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
問、師唱誰家曲、宗風嗣阿誰。師云、我在黃檗處、三度發
問、三度被打。僧擬議。師便喝、隨後打云、不可向虛空裏釘
橛去也。

A monk asked, “Master, of what house is the tune you sing? To whose
style of Chan do you succeed?”
The master said, “When I was staying with Huangbo I questioned him
three times and was hit three times.”
The monk hesitated. The master gave a shout and then struck him, saying, “You can’t drive a stake into the empty sky.”
power of creation / To halt for me the
passing of spring (65, 寄李相公, “Visiting
Councilor Li”)

It should be noted, however, that occasionally this expression did not indicate
the imperative but merely meant “try
to…,” as in:
偶因群動息、試撥一聲看 “Now that all

stirrings have come to rest / I’ll try plucking a tune” (55, 松下琴贈客, “Playing a lute
for a guest under the pines”)

Buddhadharma is a term that has a
wide range of meanings, but in the present text it signifies the basic teaching
or doctrine of Buddhism. The question
asked here by the monk, “What is the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?”,
was one frequently used to open Chan
dialogues. The answers of a number of
famous Chan masters are recorded in the
Chanlin leiju 禪林類聚 (Classiﬁed anthology of the Chan forest), fascicle 4 (x 67:
26c–28a).
Gave a shout. In Chan the function of
the shout 喝 is to indicate a state beyond
discrimination or words. Mazu Daoyi 馬
祖道一 (709–788) appears to have been
the ﬁrst master to purposely use the shout
in this manner. The jc mentions that one
day Mazu shouted at his disciple Baizhang
Huaihai 百丈懷海 (720–814) during an
exchange. Huaihai later said in a lecture,
“The buddhadharma is no small matter.

My teacher Mazu once shouted at me, and
for three days afterwards I was deaf and
blind” (t 51: 249c).
Huaihai transmitted the use of the shout
to his own heir Huangbo Xiyun 黃蘗希運
(d. 850?), and Huangbo then transmitted
it to Linji. From then on it became one of
the deﬁning characteristics of this lineage
of Chan. Linji used it on many occasions;
that he did not always employ it with the
same intent is clear from his categorization of its use into four diﬀerent types (see
page 308, below). Today it is still among
the important teaching devices used by
Japanese Zen masters.
At ﬁrst the characters 叱 or 咄 were used
to indicate the shout, but soon its deﬁnitive form 喝 (C., he, J., katsu) came into
use. This character is often translated to
represent the actual sound of the shout
(e.g., “He shouted, ‘He!’”), but the character simply means “to shout.”
Young reverend 師僧 has here a certain sarcastic overtone that should not be
overlooked.
Of what house is the tune you sing
translates 誰家曲. The Chinese philologist
Zhang Xiang, in dealing with the Tang
colloquial compound 誰家 , regards the
character 家 as a mere suﬃx (Zhang 1955,
348–350). In the present case, however,
this compound cannot be considered a
colloquialism. It is far more likely that

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 121
the visiting monk, in asking Linji to what
school of Chan he belonged, drew his
metaphor from the concept of transmission as it existed in the Chinese world of
music. The schools of Chinese zither 琴
music had long been known as “houses”
家 . During the Tang dynasty there were
three representative houses, known as the
Dongjia 董家 , the Shenjia 沈家 , and the
Zhujia 祝家 (see the Qin ji 琴集 [Anthology of Qin music], as quoted in Yuefu
shiji 樂府詩集 [Anthology of yuefu songs]
59, by Guo Maoqing 郭茂清 of the Song
dynasty; and in Qin shi 琴史 [History of
zither music] 4, by Zhu Zhangwen 朱長文
[1041–1100]).
Referring to a Chan lineage as a “house”
was not, of course, original with this particular monk. The Lengqie shizi ji 楞伽師資
記 (Record of the masters and disciples
of the Laṅkā school) has the following
passage in its section on the Chan master
Shenxiu 神秀 (606?–706), the traditional
founder of the Northern school of Chan:

Yuanjue jing dashu shiyi chao 圓覺經大疏
釋義鈔 (Subcommentary to the Large commentary on the Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment).
And finally, considerably after Linji’s
time, perhaps during the eleventh and
twelfth centuries, there took place the
definitive division of Chan into what
were termed the Five Houses 五家, or ﬁve
major teaching lines. See, for example,
Dumoulin, 211–242).
Huangbo. See Introduction, note 12.
I questioned him…. This episode is
des cribed in detail at the beginning of
the “Record of Pilgimages” section (see
pages 312–317, below), where, however,
the account differs considerably from
that found in the biography of Linji as
recorded in the zj.
Hesitate 擬議. In colloquial Chinese 擬
means “to wish to…,” “to be about to…,”
“to get ready to…,” and is the equivalent of
欲 in classical Chinese. The compound 擬
欲 is sometimes found in colloquial Tang
Chinese.

Empress Zetian Dasheng [Empress Wu
of Tang, r. 685–704] questioned Chan
Master Shenxiu, “Of what house 誰 家
is the dharma that has been transmitted to you?”[The master] replied, “I have
received the teaching of Dongshan 東山 of
Qizhou 蘄州 [the Fifth Patriarch, Hongren 弘忍 (601–674)].” “Upon what scriptural authority does it depend?” asked
the empress. The master said, “It depends
upon the samādhi of one practice set
forth in the Wenshu shuo bore jing 文殊
說般若經 [Perfection of wisdom sutra as
preached by Mañjuśrī; Skr., Saptaśatikāprajñā-pāramitā Sutra].” The empress
said, “When we speak of the practice of
the Way, none surpasses the teaching of
Dongshan.” (t 85: 1290b)

You can’t drive a stake into the empty
sky 不可向虛空裏釘橛去也. This exchange
is identical to one in the jc between two
contemporaries of Linji: Ezhou Zhuyushan 鄂州茱萸山 (n.d.), a disciple of
Nanquan Puyuan 南泉普願 (748–835), and
Ven. Kuan 觀 (n.d.), a disciple of Xuefeng
Yicun 雪峯義存 (822–908).

Over one hundred years later, Guifeng
Zongmi 圭 峰 宗 密 (780–841), the fifth
patriarch of both the Huayan 華嚴 school
and Chan’s Heze 荷澤 school, described
the Seven Houses 七家 of Chan and their
respective teachings in fascicle 3 of his

Ven. Kuan asked, “What about the Way?”
Master Zhuyushan replied, “Don’t drive
a stake into the empty sky.” “‘The empty
sky’—just this is a stake,” returned Ven.
Kuan. Whereupon the master struck him.
(t 51: 278b)

And then struck him translates 隨後打,
which is traditionally interpreted by Japanese commentators to mean “hit him on
the back.” Research on the colloquial language of the Tang, however, indicates that
隨後 is an expression meaning “immediately after.”

122 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
有座主問、三乘十二分教、豈不是明佛性。師云、荒草不曾鋤。

A lecture master asked, “The Three Vehicles’ twelve divisions of teachings make the buddha-nature quite clear, do they not?”
“This weed patch has never been spaded,” said Linji.
Lecture master (lit., “master of the lecture seat” 座主) was a term used by Chan
people to refer to teachers of other schools
who devoted themselves largely to giving lectures on the Buddhist scriptures.
Sometimes the word has a derogatory
tone, implying a person who is good at
“book learning” only.
The Three Vehicles’ twelve divisions
of teachings 三乘十二分教 refers to the
totality of the Buddhist scriptures, with
an emphasis on their role as repositories
of doctrinal theory, speciﬁcally in terms
of the use they were put to in Buddhist
schools other than Chan.
In other words, what the lecture master
is saying is that the scriptures, upon which
other schools depend, must of their very
nature reveal the ultimate truths of Buddhism, since they are the record of words
spoken by the Buddha himself. How, then,
can Chan neglect the sutras and take the
position that these truths lie outside the
written word?
“Three Vehicles” 三乘 (Skr., triyāna)
refers to the several paths by which Buddhist salvation is reached and, by extension, to the persons seeking salvation by
these several means. The noun “yāna” lends
itself to two interpretations: “that along
which one goes,” i.e., “path”; and “that by
means of which one goes,” i.e., “vehicle.”
While the former meaning appears to
have been the one originally intended,
there can be little doubt that quite early
the latter interpretation became the preferred one even in India, since in both
Chinese and Tibetan the term “yāna” is
rendered by words meaning “vehicle.” The
three yāna are as follows:

1. Śrāvaka, lit., “listener.” This word was
apparently misunderstood from even
before the time of its entry into China.
From India (one can only surmise)
the word must have passed through a
language in which the verb follows its
object, and thus have been translated
that way into Chinese, since the order
of the characters in the Chinese version,
聲聞, violates the normal syntax of Chinese. The śrāvaka is one who achieves
enlightenment and consequent salvation by hearing and contemplating the
words of a buddha. This and the following are considered Hinayana vehicles.
2. Pratyekabuddha, lit., “individually awakened,” or “awakened for oneself alone.”
This word, too, seems to have been
misunderstood from before the time of
its entry into China, since the original
translation was 緣覺, “awakened through
causality.” That is, at some point it
appears that the “pratyeka” of this word
became confused with the “pratītya”
of “pratītya-samutpāda,” “dependent
origination,” so that the idea arose that
a pratyekabuddha achieves enlightenment by realizing the truth of dependent
origination. The Tang-dynasty translator Xuanzang 玄奘 (600?–664), with his
excellent knowledge of Sanskrit, realized that 緣覺 was a mistranslation and
consistently rendered the word as 獨覺,
“individually enlightened.” The term 緣
覺 was, however, too ﬁrmly entrenched
to be replaced. Subsequently Chinese
Buddhist scholarship combined Xuanzang’s erudition with the piety of his
predecessors and held that pratyekabuddhas are those who, in buddha-less
ages, achieve enlightenment through
their own eﬀorts by observing the work-

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 123
ings of cause and effect. The Chinese
often skirt the question of the meaning
of this term through the device of phonetic transcription, writing the word 辟
支佛 . The śrāvaka and pratyekabuddha
both contemplate Hinayana doctrinal
propositions, and through this process
they become arhats.
3. Bodhisattva: The original meaning of
this word is obscure, and seems to have
presented some diﬃculty to the Chinese
since they seldom translate it, preferring the phonetic transcription 菩提薩埵
(usually abbreviated 菩薩). The bodhisattva is a being on the way to buddhahood,
a goal achieved through transcendent
wisdom and inﬁnite compassion toward
all sentient beings.

Twelve divisions of the scriptures 十二
分教 (outside of Chan usually 十二部經 )
translates the Sanskrit terms “dvādaśāṅgabuddha-vacana” (or“-pravacana”),“twelvelimbed buddha-discourses,” and “dvādaśāṅga-buddha-śāsana,” “twelve-limbed
buddha-teaching.” These refer to a division by form and content of the portion
of the Buddhist scriptures purporting
to be the word of the Buddha himself.
The names of the twelve “limbs” as given
below are represented by the (a) Sanskrit
word, (b) Chinese transcription, (c) Chinese translation or translations, and (d)
English deﬁnition or explanation.
1. a. Sūtra: In non-Buddhist Sanskrit a
sūtra is a manual of aphorisms on
any of a variety of subjects, aphorisms
allegedly hanging together like threads
(“thread” being the literal meaning of
the word). In Buddhist Sanskrit the
word refers to statements of doctrine
in prose ascribed to the Buddha himself. There is reason to believe that the
Buddhist term may be unrelated to
the non-Buddhist term, and instead
be simply a mis-Sanskritization of the
Pāli word “sutta,” which has the same
meaning, and whose proper Sanskrit
equivalent may be “sūkta,” “Well said.”
b. 修多羅

c. 經: This is the usual Chinese translation of the word, and the best adapted.
First, 經 also has the literal meaning
of “thread,” and second, the cardinal
Chinese classics are also called 經 ,
with the specific meaning of “warp,”
as opposed to the apocryphal classics,
which are called 緯, “woof.”
契經: The traditional interpretation
of the first character is that it refers
to the accordance of the sutras with
truth, and also that their content is
accommodated to the understanding
of the Buddha’s listeners.
法本 , “Dharma-base,” “root of the
dharma.”
d. See 1. a.
2. a. Geya: “That which is to be sung”
b. 祇夜
c. 應頌: “Corresponding hymn”
重頌經: “Repetitive hymn”
d. A verse repetition of the points made
in a preceding prose section in a sutra.
3. a. Vyākaraṇa: “Discrimination, detailed
des cription, manifestation, revelation”
b. 和伽羅那
c. 授記: “The conferring of a record”
授決: “The conferring of a decision”
記莂: The original meaning is obscure.
d. A prophesy addressed by the Buddha to his disciples, specifically the
announcement to specific disciples
that they will eventually attain buddhahood.
4. a. Gāthā: “Song”
b. 伽陀
c. 頌
不重頌: “nonrepetitive hymn”
d. A poetic passage that makes an independent point, and does not merely
repeat something that has already
been said in prose.
5. a. Udāna: “(Joyous) exhalation”
b. 優陀那
c. 自說: “Self-proclaimed”
無問自說 : “Self-proclaimed without
(prior) interrogation”
d. Statements made by the Buddha of his

124 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
own volition and without any prompting from his listeners in the form of
questions.
6. a. Nidāna: “Band, bond, (hence) primary
cause”
b. 尼陀那
c. 因緣 : “Dependence and connection,
(hence) cause and condition”
緣起: “Emergence in connection with”
d. An explanation by the Buddha regarding previous circumstances as a result
of which a certain situation has arisen
at the time of his speaking.
7. a. Avadāna: “Great or glorious act (of
legendary proportions)”
b. 阿波陀那
c. 譬喻: “Parable”
解語: “Explanatory saying”
d. Explanation of a doctrine by parables.
8. a. Itivṛttaka: “Occurrence, event”
b. 伊帝曰多伽
c. 本事: “Former matter”
如是語: A saying that begins with the
words, “(It was) like this.”
d. A recitation by the Buddha of any previous event other than one of his own
previous incarnations. The story told
usually contains a lesson or moral.
9. a. Jātaka: “Birth stories”
b. 闍陀伽
c. 生: “Birth”
本生: “Former birth”
d. A story of the form assumed by the
Buddha in a former incarnation.
10. a. Vaipulya: “Breadth”
b. 毘佛略
c. 方等: “Equal in (all) directions”
方廣: “Broad in (all) directions”
d. The Mahayana scriptures.
11. a. Adbhuta-dharma: “Wondrous matters”
b. Afoutuodamo: 阿浮陀達磨
c. 未曾有法 : “Unprecedented dharmas”
(a common but mistaken translation,
based on the almost ubiquitous confusion between “adbhuta” and “abhūta”)
希法: “Rare dharmas”
d. Stories of miraculous deeds achieved
by the Buddha and his disciples.

12. a. Upadeśa: “Instruction”
b. 優波提舍
c. 論議: “Discussion”
義 : “Meaning, signiﬁcance, principle,
doctrine, instruction”
d. An exposition of doctrine based on
theory.

Buddha-nature 佛性 translates the Sanskrit “buddhatā” or “buddhatva.” Buddhanature is that nature inherent in all sentient beings by virtue of which they have
the capacity to attain enlightenment, and
thus to attain buddhahood.
In China the concept of buddha-nature
was ﬁrst advanced by the monk Daosheng
道生 (ca. 360–434), one of the top disciples of the great translator Kumārajīva
(350–ca. 409). At the time Daosheng’s idea
was condemned as heretical, since it recognized the potential for buddhahood
even in icchantikas (beings traditionally
regarded in Buddhism as having no seeds
of enlightenment). However, some twenty
years later, after the complete Nirvana
Sutra had been translated into Chinese,
the scripture was found to substantiate
Daosheng’s view (see Chen 1964, 112–116).
Most Mahayana schools accept the doctrine of buddha-nature; the Chan schools
have always considered it basic to their
teachings.
Weed patch might have been Linji’s
metaphor for the “twelve divisions of the
scriptures,” for the cluttered minds of
those who concern themselves primarily
with “written words” (in this case the lecture master), or, in a diﬀerent sense, for the
buddha-nature itself. Japanese commentators on the ll—no Chinese commentaries
exist—suggest several possibilities, but
consistently avoid committing themselves
to a ﬁrm deﬁnition of either this expression or Linji’s enigmatic statement as a
whole.
In this connection, there is an interesting dialogue in the traditional biography
of the master Yunyan Tansheng 雲巖曇晟

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 125

主云、佛豈賺人也。師云、佛在什麼處。主無語。師云、對常
侍前、擬瞞老僧。速退速退。妨他別人請問。復云、此日法
筵、爲一大事故。更有問話者麼。速致問來。爾纔開口、早勿
交涉也。

“Surely the Buddha would not have deceived people!” said the lecture
master.
“Where is the Buddha?” asked Linji. The lecture master had no reply.
“You thought you’d make a fool of me in front of the councilor,” said the
master. “Get out, get out! You’re keeping the others from asking questions.”
The master continued, “Today’s dharma assembly is concerned with the
Great Matter. Does anyone else have a question? If so, let him ask now! But
the instant you open your mouth you’re already way oﬀ.
(782?–841), teacher of Dongshan Liangjie
洞山良价 (807–869), one of the founders of the Chinese Caodong 曹洞 school.
According to zj 5:
A monk asked Shitou [Shitou Xiqian 石
頭希遷 (700–790)], “What is the cardinal meaning of the patriarchs?” Shitou
said, “Right in front of me is a stretch of
weeds that I’ve never hoed in the past
thirty years.” Later someone mentioned
this remark to the master [Yunyan]. The
master said, “The ox doesn’t eat the weeds
along the edge of its pen.”

You’re keeping the others from asking
questions translates 妨他別人請問. In the
colloquial language of the Tang and Song,
the glyph 他 was generally used to represent the third person pronoun (see Zhou
1959 3:113–115). However, as in this case, it
was also used as a particle having no speciﬁc meaning. Rhythmically, this sentence
is constructed of the following three disyllables: 妨他＋別人＋請問. Accordingly, 他
serves as a suﬃx of the preceding verb 妨.
Other examples of this usage are 從
他 and 任他 , both of which mean “even
though…” or “however… may…” (see also
comment on page 294, below, where the
expression 知他 is discussed). The expression 請問 has, in non-Chan usage, the

meaning of “I beg to ask.” While Chan
also uses the word in this sense, too, it
also employs it as an abbreviation of the
phrase 請益問答 , which literally means,
“request-benefit question-and-answer.”
These terms refer to the exchange of question and answer that customarily took
place after a Chan master had concluded
his sermon. At that time both his disciples
and any visiting monks were free to question him in order to deepen or confirm
their own understanding, as well as to test
that of the master.
Dharma assembly translates 法筵, with
筵 originally indicating a mat woven of
thin bamboo strips, but later coming to
mean “banquet” or “gathering.” A dharma
assembly was a gathering held for the purpose of hearing a discourse on Buddhist
doctrine. The term was already used in
the early Tang; the section on (Shi) Huize
(釋)慧賾 (580–656) in xg 5 has the statement 武德年內釋侶云繁、屢建法筵, “During the Wude 武德 era (618–626) monks
gathered [around him] in swarms; then
he frequently held dharma assemblies 法
筵.” (t 50: 440c)
You’re way oﬀ translates 勿交涉, which
is unusual in using 勿 to replace the negative 沒, though 沒 is the character usually

126 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
何以如此。不見釋尊云、法離文字、不屬因不在緣故。爲爾信
不及、所以今日葛藤。恐滯常侍與諸官員、昧他佛性。不如且
退。喝一喝云、少信根人、終無了日。久立珍重。

“Why is this? Don’t you know that Venerable Śākyamuni said, ‘Dharma
is separate from words, because it is neither subject to causation nor dependent upon conditions’? Your faith is insuﬃcient, therefore we have bandied
words today. I fear I am obstructing the councilor and his staﬀ, thereby
obscuring the buddha-nature. I had better withdraw.”
The master shouted and then said, “For those whose root of faith is weak
the ﬁnal day will never come. You have been standing a long time. Take care
of yourselves.”
used in Tang works written in the colloquial language. In the Tang the two characters were identical in pronunciation and
meaning. See page 251, where the same
word is written 沒交涉.
Dharma is separate from words…
upon conditions. What appears here as a
single quotation is actually taken from two
diﬀerent sutras. The ﬁrst clause, “Dharma
is separate from words” 法離文字, is from
the Lengqie abaduoluobao jing 楞伽阿跋
多羅寶經, the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra as translated by Guṇabhadra (Qiunabatuoluo 求
那跋陀羅, 394–468):
Mahāmati, if it is said that the Tathāgata
expounds a dharma that falls into words,
that is an erroneous statement, for dharma
is separate from words. Wherefore is it,
Mahāmati, that we buddhas and all the
bodhisattvas utter not a single word,
answer not a single word? Why is this so?
Because dharma is separate from words.
(t 16: 506c)

The second clause, “because it is neither
subject to causation nor dependent upon
conditions” 不屬因不在緣故, is an out-ofcontext, hence slightly distorted, quotation from the Weimojie suoshuo jing 維摩
詰所說經, Kumārajīva’s translation of the
Vimalakīrti Sutra:
Dharma is without names for it is cut oﬀ
from words. Dharma is without that which

is spoken about, for it is separate from
apprehending and observing. Dharma is
without form for it is like empty space.
Dharma is without sophistries for it is
fundamentally void. Dharma is without
that which belongs to self for it is separate
from that which belongs to self. Dharma
is without discrimination for it is separate
from all consciousness. Dharma is without that to which it can be compared for it
has no counterpart. Dharma is not subject
to causation for it is not dependent upon
conditions. (t 14: 540a)

While Linji’s words “Śākyamuni said” are,
in a general way, applicable to both clauses
in that both are found in the sutras, the
latter is actually a statement made by
Vimalakīrti to Mahāmaudgalyāyana, and
repeated by the latter to the Buddha.
Bandied words translates 葛藤, literally
“creepers and vines,” suggesting things
that wrap around one and obstruct one’s
freedom. The term is used metaphorically
to signify complications and diﬃculties.
In a general Buddhist context the word
stands for the afflicting passions (Skr.,
kleśa) and the delusive concepts that arise
from them; also for a too-strict adherence
to the written word.
In Chan, however, it is generally used
to mean “words” or “verbiage,” with an
undertone of disparagement. The word

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 127
can function as a noun or as a verb. In the
Muzhou yulu we ﬁnd, “[Muzhou] further
said ‘Come here, come here, and I’ll bandy
words with you’” (x 68: 35b). “He [then]
said, ‘You can’t understand even these
words 這葛藤尚不會得’” (x 68: 37a). Here,
as in the present instance in the ll text,
it would seem that 葛藤 was employed
in the late Tang as a deprecatory slang
expression for the Chan dialogues usually referred to by their Japanese name of
mondō 問答.
During the Song dynasty the term
acquired an additional, favorable meaning as a synonym for verbal expedients
(such as koans) that help lead the student
to enlightenment. Thus bl 12 has the following remark: “Why are there so many
entangling koans 葛藤公案? Let him who
is furnished with an eye [to see] try to
explain [them]” (t 48: 152c).
But that the derogator y meaning
early attached to the word still remained
is clearly indicated by the term 葛藤禪 ,
“wordy Chan” or “word-entangled Chan.”
The Dahui wuku 大慧武庫, a work comprising various talks given by Dahui
Zonggao 大慧宗杲 (1089–1163), says:
Old man Yunju [Xiao]shun always abused
Chan Master Tianyi Yihuai for displaying
wordy Chan 葛藤 . One day, on hearing
that Yihuai had died, Shun, in the Dharma
Hall, made a proper salutation with his
palms pressed together, then said, “How
I rejoice to hear that the main pillar of
wordy Chan has fallen down!” (t 47: 943c)

(Yunju Xiaoshun 雲 居 曉 舜 [n.d.] and
Tianyi Yihuai 天衣義懷 [993–1064] were
both in the ﬁfth generation of the Yunmen
雲門 line; Tianyi was an heir of Xuedou
Chongxian 雪竇重顯 [980–1052]).
Faith 信, in the form of the term “root
of faith” 信根 (Skr., śraddāindriya), has
from the earliest days of Buddhism been
considered one of the qualities essential
for attaining awakening. It was placed
first among the five “spiritual roots” or

agents 五根 , Skr., “pañcendriyāni” (there
is also another group of pañcendriyāni,
comprising the ﬁve organs of sense: eyes,
ears, nose, tongue, and body). Śākyamuni
spoke many times about the “ﬁve spiritual
roots,” as in the following quotation, taken
from one of his sermons in the Za ahan
jing 雜阿含經 (Guṇabhadra’s translation
of the Saṃyukta Āgama [Miscellaneous
discourses of the Buddha]):
At that time the World-Honored One said
to all the bhikkus: “There are five roots:
the root of faith 信, the root of endeavor
精進, the root of mindfulness 念, the root
of samādhi 定, and the root of prajñā 慧.
What is the root of faith? I say to you that
when, in the place of the Tathāgata, a holy
disciple arouses the mind of faith, the root
of which is immovable, so that no deva,
māra, śramaṅa, brahmin, or anything in
the world can destroy it, this is the root of
faith.” (t 2: 183c–184a)

The same term is found in the Zhufa wuxing
jing 諸法無行經 (Kumārajīva’s translation
of the Mahāyāna Sarvadharmapravṛttinirdeśa):
Buddha addressed Mañjuśrī, “When the
practicer has faith that all dharmas fundamentally are not produced, because from
the beginning they have always been as
they are, this is what is called the root of
faith.” (t 15: 754b)

The term appears in many Chan texts. For
instance, Zihu Lizong 子湖利蹤 (800–880),
a disciple of Nanquan and a contemporary
of Linji, is recorded in gy 12 as saying,
[All beings] that transmigrate through
the six ways of existence, from gods and
humans down to the minutest forms of
life, [all] are never in the slightest discord
with the tathatā. Do you have faith in this?
Can you accept this? Generally speaking,
he who would make a pilgrimage must
be endowed with a great root of faith and
become a resolute man. (x 68: 75a)

Take care of yourselves translates 珍重, a
set phrase used to conclude a lecture or
sermon; it means little more than “good-

128 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

ii
師、因一日到河府。府主王常侍、請師升座。時麻谷出問、大
悲千手眼、那箇是正眼。師云、大悲千手眼、那箇是正眼、速
道速道。麻谷拽師下座、麻谷卻坐。師近前云、不審。麻谷擬
議。師亦拽麻谷下座、師卻坐。麻谷便出去。師便下座。

One day Linji went to He Prefecture. The governor, Councilor Wang,
requested the master to take the high seat. At that time Mayu came forward
and asked, “The Great Compassionate One has a thousand hands and a thousand eyes. Which is the true eye?”
The master said, “The Great Compassionate One has a thousand hands
and a thousand eyes. Which is the true eye? Speak, speak!”
Mayu pulled the master down oﬀ the high seat and sat on it himself.
Coming up to him, the master said, “How do you do?” Mayu hesitated.
The master, in his turn, pulled Mayu down oﬀ the high seat and sat upon it
himself. Mayu went out. The master stepped down.
bye.” Zanning 贊寧 (921–1002), the great
scholar-monk and compiler of the sg,
writes in another of his works, the Dasong
sengshi lue 大 宋 僧 史 略 (Song-dynasty
compendium of monastic history):
What is meant by saying 珍重 when one
is about to take one’s leave? When our
meeting comes to an end and our feelings
have been mutually communicated, we
bid farewell to one another with this word.
It is like saying, “Take good and tender
care of yourself,” or “Please be indulgent
to yourself.” (t 54: 239a)

ii
He Prefecture 河府 is an abbreviation of
Hebeifu 河北府, also known as Chengdefu
成德府, which occupied the area northeast
of present Shijiazhuang 石家莊. Tradition
regards “He Prefecture” as referring to
Henanfu 河南府, lit., “South-of-the-River
Prefecture,” but this interpretation is
untenable for several reasons:
a. The tg 10 recension of the ll text reads,
“When the master went to Heyangfu 河
陽府” (x 78: 467a). 陽, used in reference
to a river, indicates its northern side, so

that Heyang 河陽 and Hebei 河北 refer to
the same place.
b. The ll text in the gy has this exchange
beginning with the words “One day the
master went to Hebeifu” (x 68: 23b).
c. The reference to Wang Changshi, which
follows immediately, leaves no doubt
that the place in question was north of
the Yellow River, since the area under
the control of the Wang family did not
extend south of it.
d. In the Tang, the place name Henanfu
referred to a speciﬁc area south of the
Yellow River, viz., the area surrounding
Luoyang 洛陽, in other words, the Henan
河南 and Shandong 山東 provinces of
today. It is extremely unlikely that Linji
ever set foot in this area.

Mayu 麻谷; see page 99, note 30.
The Great Compassionate One translates 大悲 , which in turn translates the
Sanskrit “Mahākaruṇa.” “The Great Compassionate One” is a reference to Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara (C., Guanshiyin 觀世
音 ), whose name is usually abbreviated
in East Asia to Guanyin 觀音 (J., Kannon)

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 129

iii
上堂。云、赤肉團上有一無位眞人、常從汝等諸人面門出入。
未證據者看看。時有僧出問、如何是無位眞人。

The master, taking the high seat in the hall, said, “On your lump of red
ﬂesh is a true man without rank who is always going in and out of the face of
every one of you. Those who have not yet conﬁrmed this, look, look!”
A monk came forward and asked, “What about the true man without
rank?”
and whose primary attribute is, as his (or
her) name indicates, compassion.
The cult of Guanyin steadily increased
from the time of the Six Dynasties; the
object of worship in the esoteric schools
of Buddhism was frequently the type of
image indicated in the text, in which the
bodhisattva possessed many arms—symbolically representing a thousand—and
an eye in the palm of each hand.
How do you do translates 不審, a customary, somewhat perfunctory greeting
among Chinese Buddhist monks of the
time. Originally the expression meant
“I do not know for certain.” The abovequoted Dasong sengshi lue has the following comment on this expression:
When monks meet they bow, bringing
the palms of their hands together, and say
不審. What does this mean? It is a threefold act of obeisance. (The bowing and the
joining of the palms are [acts of] the body.
The greeting itself is [an act of] speech. As
for thought, if there were not reverence
in the mind, how could body and mouth
move?) This is called “inquiry” 問訊. Thus,
an inferior who wishes to inquire about a
superior will say, “I am not well informed
不審 , but have you any illnesses or troubles? Is your daily life proceeding well?”
Or again, a superior who wishes to show
solicitude for an inferior will say, “I am not
well informed, but are you free from illnesses or troubles? Can you acquire alms
with ease? In your dwelling place are you

without evil companions? And on water
or land, are you unbothered by noxious
insects?” Later, men reduced such inquiries to 不審 alone. (t 54: 239a)

iii
Lump of red ﬂesh translates 赤肉團上,
which refers to either the physical heart
or the physical body. These words begin
two of the major variant forms of this,
one of Linji’s most famous sermons. The
texts with the same expression are the tg,
compiled by Li Zunxu 李遵勗 (d. 1038) (x
78: 466a); the gy (x 68: 23b); and the section of the Yuan edition of the jc devoted
to Linji (t 51: 300a). The Song edition of
the latter work varies slightly, reading 肉團
心上, “on the ﬂesh-lump heart,” as does the
Zuting shiyuan 祖庭事苑 2 (Chrestomathy
from the ancestral garden; x 64: 339c).
The expression undoubtedly derives
from the following passage in the Chanyuan zhuquanji duxu 禪 源 諸 詮 集 都 序
(Preface to the Anthology of essential writings on the origins of Chan), a work by
the Chan and Huayan master Guifeng
Zongmi:
Regarding the word 心, in short there are
four kinds. The Sanskrit word for each
is diﬀerent and the translation of each is
also diﬀerent. First, 紇利陀那 [the Chinese
transliteration of Skr., “hṛdāya”], which is
called “the ﬂesh-lump heart” 肉團心. This
is the heart which is one of the ﬁve organs
within the body. (t 48: 401c)

130 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
On the basis of these texts, the “lump of
red flesh” has traditionally been interpreted to mean the physical heart.
A somewhat different version of this
sermon from that in the ll is found in zj
19, and in abbreviated form in the zl of
Yanshou 延壽 (904–975) (t 48: 943c), as
well as in fascicle 28 of both the Song and
Yuan editions of the jc. These texts read:
I say to you that in your body-ﬁeld of the
five skandhas 五陰身田內 is a true man
without rank revealing himself splendidly
and not separated from yourself by so
much as the width of a hair. Why don’t you
recognize him? (t 51: 447a)

The latter three texts end here. The zj continues, completing the sermon with some
further variations from the ll text (see
following two notes). Obviously the texts
having 赤肉團上 and those having 五陰身
田內 represent two diﬀerent traditions.
True man without rank translates 無
位眞人, a term coined by Linji that is one
of the key expressions in his presentation
of Chan. “True man” 眞人 was originally a
term for the ideal, perfected adept of Taoism. The best-known, and perhaps earliest,
appearance of the term is in the “Dazongshi” 大宗師 chapter of the Zhuangzi 莊子,
where the characteristics of the classic
Taoist “true man” are described in detail
(see, e.g., Legge 1891, 256–258; Watson
1968, 77–91; Palmer and Breuilly 1996,
47–58). In Buddhist works from the Later
Han on, the term was used to designate
fully enlightened disciples of the Buddha,
i.e., completed arhats (see the Jiashe jie
jing 迦葉結經 [Sutra of Kāśyapa], translated by An Shigao 安世高 [n.d.; t 49:
4b–7a] and the Zhong benqi jing 中本起
經 [Middle-length record of the Buddha’s
former deeds], translated by Tanguo 曇果
[n.d.] and Kang Mengxiang 康孟詳 [n.d.; t
4: 156a–163c]). Later, “true man” 眞人 was
also applied to bodhisattvas.
Face is an abbreviated form of the text’s
“face-gate” 面門, an exclusively Buddhist

term that originally meant “mouth.” The
Northern Nirvana Sutra 大般涅槃經 , the
Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra as translated by
Dharmakṣema (Tanwuchen 曇無讖, 385–
433?), contains the following passage:
At that time, from the Tathāgata’s mouth
面門 streamed forth a five-colored radiance. This radiance shone upon everyone
in the great assembly. [So brilliant was it
that] the brightness of everyone’s body
was not visible. After this miraculous
manifestation was completed, the radiance reentered his mouth. (t 12: 371b)

The same expression in the Avataṃsaka
Sutra, translated by Śikṣānanda (Shicha’nantuo 實叉難陀, 652–710) and others
under the title Dafangguang fo huayan jing
大方廣佛華嚴經 (Comprehensive sutra on
the adornments of buddha), also speciﬁcally refers to the mouth:
At that time the World-Honored One,
knowing what was in the minds of the
bodhisattvas, from between the rows of
teeth in his mouth 面門 , emitted rays
of light as numerous as buddha-lands,
as numerous as grains of dust. (t 10:
269b–c)

Later the term acquired the more general meaning of “face,” with particular
reference to the sense organs, a meaning
that it seems to have here. It is possible,
however, that in Linji’s time the word was
used for the face itself, since we ﬁnd the
master saying later in the text, “Don’t have
the seal of sanction stamped haphazardly
upon your face 面門 by any old teacher
from anywhere” (see page 194).
The source of the speciﬁc phrase in our
text is a passage from the long poem Xinwang ming 心王銘 (Verses on the Mind
King), attributed to Fu Dashi 傅大士 , a
famous sixth-century lay Buddhist (for
his biography, see page 142, below). The
poem, having referred to the Mind King,
who, for all his importance, is not evident
to the senses, goes on to say:
The salt put in water / The glue put in
paint—

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 131

師下禪床、把住云、道道。其僧擬議。師托開云、無位眞人是什麼乾屎
橛。便歸方丈。

The master got down from his seat, seized the monk, and cried, “Speak,
speak!”
The monk faltered. Shoving him away, the master said, “The true man
without rank—what kind of dried piece of shit is he!” Then he returned to
his quarters.
Certainly these are present / But we cannot see their form.
The Mind King is also thus / Abiding
within the body,
Going in and out the [gate of the] face /
In response to things, according to their
feelings.
Freely and without hindrance / All his
undertakings are accomplished.
(t 51: 456c–457a)

Dried piece of shit. Editor’s note: In
the original translation Sasaki renders
the Chinese, 乾屎橛, as “shit-wiping stick,”
saying that the term literally means a
“cleaning-oﬀ-dung-stick,” a smooth stick
of bamboo used in place of toilet paper,
with 乾 being the verb “to clean.” However,
Sasaki’s chief researcher for Tang-dynasty
slang, Iriya Yoshitaka, subsequently came
to believe that the correct interpretation
is “stick-shaped piece of dung” (Iriya
1989, 21). A similar usage is found in the
Dahui Pujue Chanshi yulu 大慧普覺禪師語
錄 (Record of Chan Master Dahui Pujue),
where the two characters 屎 麼 form a
noun-compound: “I say to [such stupid
monks], ‘You’re biting on the dung-sticks
of others. You’re not even good dogs!’” (t
47: 872a). The yk has, “[A monk asked,]
‘What is Śākya’s body?’ The master (Yunmen) said, ‘A dung-wiper!’” (t 47: 550b). In
the zj 19 the passage parallel to that in the
ll reads, “What kind of ﬁlthy thing is he?”
是什麼不淨之物.

Sasaki’s other collaborator, Yanagida
Seizan, interprets the term to mean “useless dung stick,” explaining that 乾 does
not have its usual meaning of “dry,” but is
synonymous with the homophonous 閑 ,
“useless” (Yanagida 1977, 52). Regardless
of the details of the interpretation, the
intention is obviously the same.
Quarters translates 方丈, a term originally signifying a room that was one 丈
(ten Chinese feet) square in size, said to be
the size of the room in which Vimalakīrti,
through his supernatural powers, entertained a host of tens of thousands of
bodhisattvas and disciples of the Buddha,
as described in the Vimalakīrti Sutra. The
earliest description of this room in a Chan
context is in the “Chanmen guishi” 禪門規
式 (Regulations of the Chan school), a section of the biography of Baizhang Huaihai
in the jc:
One who has already become a master
in converting [men] lives in the 方丈 .
This is just like the room of Jingming
[Vimalakīrti]; it is not a personal sleeping
room. (t 51: 251a)

Later the 方丈 became the living quarters or “study” of the master in charge of
a Chan monastery. Here he received his
private guests, personally instructed individual disciples, and at times gave informal talks to his monks.

132 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

iv
上堂。有僧出禮拜。師便喝。僧云、老和尚莫探頭好。師云、
爾道落在什麼處。僧便喝。又有僧問、如何是佛法大意。師便
喝。僧禮拜。師云、爾道好喝也無。僧云、草賊大敗。

The master took the high seat in the hall. A monk came forward and
bowed. The master gave a shout.
“Venerable priest,” said the monk, “you’d better not try to spy on me.”
“Tell me what you’ve arrived upon,” the master said. The monk shouted.
Another monk asked, “What about the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?” The master shouted. The monk bowed.
“Do you say that was a good shout?” asked the master.
“The bandit in the grass has met complete defeat,” returned the monk.

iv
Venerable Priest translates 老和尚 , a
respect ful title meaning “aged priest,”
used for old and venerated monks. In
the present context, however, there is
a feeling of mock deference. In China
the shorter form 和 尚 was originally
used by a disciple when addressing his
master, a usage still current in Japanese
Zen. Ultimately the term came to mean
merely “Buddhist priest.” The etymology
of the term is uncertain, but it seems to
derive from a Khotanese corruption of
the Sanskrit “upādhyāya,” “teacher” (lit.,
“he under whom one goes over [one’s lessons]”). For a detailed explanation of the
derivation of the word, see the Mochizuki
Bukkyō daijiten 望月佛教大辭典, 1:754a–b
and 1:227c.
You’d better not try to spy on me translates 莫探頭好, a manner of expression that
demonstrates the monk’s self-assurance:
探頭 is a rude term meaning, literally, “to
poke the head out, or peer, through a curtain in order to spy on someone.” The colloquial construction 莫….好 is the equivalent of the English “you had better not….”
It is found again on page 297, below.
Tell me what you’ve arrived upon

translates 爾道落在什麼處, where 落在, “to
fall into, to settle or arrive at,” should be
considered a compound verb, with 在 having prepositional value. In the Lotus Sutra
there are a number of similar compounds,
such as 沒在, “to drown in, sink into”; 墮在,
“to fall into”; 住在, “to live in”; etc. A main
verb + 在 , however, does not invariably
form a compound.
Do you say that was a good shout translates 爾道好喝也無, the ending of which, 也
無 , is an interrogative particle that, like
麼, indicates simply that the sentence is a
question, and is used only in direct narrative, where it governs the entire sentence.
Thus the traditional interpretation of 爾
道…也無 as “tell me whether… or not” is
erroneous. The Japanese reading should
therefore be simply ya, and not ya… mata
ina ya (“is… or is not”), as Dōchū has it.
The compound has the following orthographical variants: 也不, 也否, 也未, 也摩,
以無, 以下, and 以否. In the last three cases
以 may be replaced by its homophones 已
or (less frequently) 與.
The bandit in the grass has met complete defeat. As the power of the Tang
court declined and conditions became
increasingly chaotic, bands of outlaws
and peasant insurrectionists appeared in

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 133

師云、過在什麼處。僧云、再犯不容。師便喝。是日兩堂首座
相見、同時下喝。僧問師、還有賓主也無。師云、賓主歷然。
師云、大衆、要會臨濟賓主句、問取堂中二首座。便下座。

“What’s my oﬀense?” asked the master.
“It won’t be pardoned a second time,” replied the monk. The master gave
a shout.
That same day the head monks of the two halls had met and simultaneously given shouts. A monk asked the master, “Was there a guest and a
host?”
“Guest and host were obvious,” replied the master. He continued, “If you
of the assembly want to understand the ‘guest and host’ that I speak of, ask
the two head monks of the halls.”
Then the master stepped down.
many parts of the empire. The expression
“outlaw in the weeds” or “grass bandit” 草
賊 was the official as well as the general
name for these “local rebels.” The following excerpt from the section on Emperor
Xizong 僖宗 (r. 873–88), in the Jiu Tang
shu 舊唐書 (Older chronicles of the Tang)
19, though relating events somewhat later
than the time of Linji, indicates that these
“local rebels” were a continuing problem
to the throne:
In the fourth year of Qianfu 乾符 [877],
the local rebels were extremely aggressive in Henan and Shannan…. According
to recent reports from various districts,
the number of these rebels has become
considerable in such areas as Jiangxi,
Huainan, Song, Po, Cao, and Ying. Some
of them have attacked the capitals of
counties and prefectures, and some have
plundered towns and villages. (Ershisi shi
二十四史 4, Taipei reprint, 3139b)

Not only the single term “grass bandit” 草賊 , however, but the entire phrase
“the bandit in the grass has met complete
defeat” 草 賊 大 敗 was evidently in use
among Chan people in the south prior to
Linji’s time, for we find it already in the
Pang Jushi yulu 龐居士語錄 (Record of
Layman Pang; x 69: 131b). This suggests

that the phrase may have originated in the
Yangzi Valley, where the rebels appear to
have been especially active, and to have
been introduced to the north by traveling monks such as appear in this episode.
Later, it is found in the records of many
Chan masters. Less literally, the expression here might be interpreted, “Old hand
though you are, you’ve now been completely defeated.”
Head monks of the two halls. The exact
shape of the meditation hall in Linji’s day
is unknown, but apparently a sacred image
stood in the middle, dividing the hall into
an “upper hall” and a “lower hall” (these
two terms appear in episode 6 of the
“Record of Pilgrimages,” page 322, below).
The monks were thus divided into two
groups: those who sat in the hall toward
which the image faced, and those who
sat in the hall behind it. Each division of
the hall was under the charge of a senior
monk, sometimes designated by the title
首座 , lit., “head-seat,” as here; 上座 , lit.,
“upper seat”; or 第一座, lit., “ﬁrst seat.”
Was there a guest and a host translates
還有賓主也無, an example of the construction in which 還 appears at the beginning

of an interrogative sentence; generally

134 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
還 in such cases does not have its usual

meaning of “still,” “yet,” or “even,” but simply serves to emphasize the interrogation.
The phrase “guest and host” 賓主 is frequently found in reverse order, 主賓. The
present exchange is the only occasion in
the ll where we find the master using
the form 賓主 ; in a later sermon, when
he twice describes the four aspects of the
host-guest relationship, Linji also uses the
term 主客.
One of the characteristics of Linji’s
teaching method was to set forth a doctrine in a grouped series of short cryptic
statements. By the end of the tenth century these statements had been reduced to
ﬁxed formulas with speciﬁc titles, such as
the “Four Shouts” 四喝, “Three Statements”
三句 , “Fourfold Relation of Guest and
Host” 四賓主, etc. The reduction of these
statements to named formulas, embodying doctrines of a somewhat different
character from what appears to have been
Linji’s original intention, is attributed to
Nanyuan Huiyong 南院慧顒 (860–930),
Fengxue Yanzhao 風穴延沼 (896–973), and
Shoushan Shengnian 首山省念 (926–995),
the third, fourth, and fifth patriarchs,
respectively, of the Linji school (see Introduction, notes 50 and 51).
The anecdote concerning the two head
monks ﬁrst appears in Yuanjue Zongyan’s
version of the ll text, compiled ca. 1120
(see Introduction, pages 83–85, above).
The corresponding section in the earlier
tg (compiled 1056; x 78: 466a) contains
the exchanges with the first two monks
(complete except for the master’s shout at
the end of the second exchange), but lacks
the first part of the following exchange
regarding the “head monks of the two
halls.” Both texts become identical again
with 師云 , 大衆 “Then he continued, ‘If
the assembly…’,” and remain so to the end
of the episode, except that the tg has 二
禪客 “two visiting Chan monks” for the
ll text’s 二首座 “two head monks,” thus

making the master’s ﬁnal remark refer to
the two men who had earlier questioned
him, not to monks in his own group. (The
account of this episode contained in the
Shoushan Nian heshang yulu 首山念和尚
語錄 , the recorded sayings of Shoushan
Shengnian, the ﬁfth patriarch of the Linji
school, in gy 8 [x 68: 49b], agrees with
that in the tg.)
It is possible that Linji did conclude the
exchange with the two visiting monks in
the way described in the tg, thus, perhaps, indicating his appreciation of their
understanding despite the rudeness they
showed by advising the assembly to consult with them “in the hall” on Linji’s
expression “guest and host.” If so, however,
we must ask why the lines in the ll text
as it now stands were later interpolated.
There seems to be no ready answer. Or
we may surmise that the ﬁnal line in the
tg—and the Shoushan yulu—though an
early insertion in the text, was added after
the fixed formula “Fourfold Relation of
Guest and Host” had been devised so that
the formula might be authenticated by
putting the words 賓主 in the mouth of
the master himself. Then later, when the
Zongyan edition of the ll was compiled,
the introductory lines on the “monks of
the two halls” were inserted for the purpose of clarifying the earlier interpolation
that later generations had found ambiguous. Thus the entire exchange regarding
the two head monks as it appears in the ll
would have to be considered spurious.
Curiously enough, in the ll section
of the gy the term 賓主 is found in two
passages, one of which is obviously an
expanded rewriting of the tg version (x
68: 23b), and the other of which is obviously an expansion of the version found
in the ll (x 68: 24c). At least it is clear that
from earliest times there was no deﬁnitive
version of this episode.
Assembly translates 大衆 , a term that
can also be rendered simply as “monks,” a

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 135

v
上堂。僧問、如何是佛法大意。師豎起拂子。僧便喝。師便
打。

The master took the high seat in the hall. A monk asked, “What about
the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?”
The master raised his whisk. The monk shouted. The master struck
him.
Chinese translation of the Sanskrit word
“mahāsaṅgha,” which means “great gathering” or “great council.” In China the
term came to be used for: a) the totality
of the Buddhist monastic community, or
b) the monastic community of a speciﬁc
place, usually in contrast to the master
or head of that particular community.
As Linji uses it, the term refers primarily
to his own body of student-monks, but
undoubtedly includes such persons as pilgrim monks and laymen gathered to listen
to his sermon.
Ask translates 問取 , an example of 取
used as a suﬃx after a verb. This usage was
peculiar to the colloquial language of the
Tang and Song. See Zhang 1955, 500–501.

v
Whisk translates the compound 拂子 ,
which is in turn the Chinese translation of
“vyajana,” a Sanskrit word that means “fan,”
“brush,” or “whisk.” The vyajana was produced in ancient India from the white tail
hairs of yaks, oxen, or horses. These hairs
were tied together, fastened to a handle,
and used for shooing away troublesome
insects.
It is said that for a time Śākyamuni Buddha allowed all of his monks to use such
whisks, but later decided to limit their use
to the elder monks in charge of groups,
with the white-haired whisks becoming an
insignia of authority. The body of ordinary
monks was allowed only whisks made

of dyed yarn, rags, grasses, or other such
materials. The “white whisk” 白拂 , made
from the long tail-hair of the cāmara (a
white Himalayan yak), was especially valued. References to it are found scattered
throughout the sutras, and sometimes we
read of its being held by the attendants of
a mahārāja, as in the Lotus Sutra (t 9: 16c).
Many ﬁgures in the sculpture of India and
Central Asia are represented with this
whisk in their hands.
In the Chinese Chan tradition, and also
in the Japanese Zen tradition, the whisk is
still carried as a symbol of authority by the
abbot of a monastery when he approaches
the altar or takes the high seat to present a
sermon. In the past, senior monks would
also carry white whisks when preaching
to the assembly in place of the abbot; such
occasions were therefore known as “holding the whisk” 秉拂.
Another term for the whisk in Chan
is the “stag’s tail” 鹿尾 . The term derives
from the fact that in former times hairs
taken from the tail of a stag were occasionally used in place of those from a yak’s
tail, with the implication that, since the
stag was the leader of the deer herd, his
tail symbolized authority. See the Mochizuki Bukkyō daijiten 5:4673.
In the esoteric Zhenyan 眞言 (J., Shingon) school of Buddhism, the white whisk
is considered to be, in addition to its function as a symbol of authority, a protection
against calamity and evil.

136 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
又僧問、如何是佛法大意。師亦豎起拂子。僧便喝。師亦喝。
僧擬議。師便打。師乃云、大衆、夫爲法者、不避喪身失命。
我二十年、在黃檗先師處、三度問佛法的的大意、三度蒙他賜
杖。如蒿枝拂著相似。如今更思得一頓棒喫。誰人爲我行得。
時有僧出衆云、某甲行得。師拈棒與他。其僧擬接。師便打。

Another monk asked, “What about the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?”
Again the master raised his whisk.
The monk shouted. The master also shouted.
The monk faltered; the master struck him.
Then the master said, “You of the assembly, those who live for dharma
do not shrink from losing their bodies or sacriﬁcing their very lives. Twenty
years ago, when I was with my late master Huangbo, three times I asked
him speciﬁcally about the cardinal meaning of the buddhadharma, and
three times he favored me with blows from his stick. But it was as though he
were patting me with a branch of mugwort. How I would like now to taste
another dose of the stick! Who can give it to me?”
A monk stepped forward and said, “I can.” The master held out his stick
to him. The monk tried to take it; the master struck him.
Twenty years ago, when I was with my
late master Huangbo. Editor’s note: Scholars disagree regarding the meaning of this
line. In her original translation, Sasaki
rendered the original Chinese, 二十年、
在黃檗先師處 , as “Twenty years I was at
my late master Huang-po’s place,” signifying that Linji studied with Huangbo for a
period of twenty years—a view followed
by Iriya 1989 (23–24). Yanagida, however, interprets the line to mean, as rendered in the present translation, “twenty
years ago” (1977, 71). Yanagida notes that
the words “twenty years” 二十年 are missing in the versions of this sermon in the sj
and the Song and Yuan editions of the jc.
The “twenty-year period” interpretation
emerged in the Song dynasty, Yanagida
believes, with the following passage in the
Foguo Keqin Chanshi xinyao 佛果克勤禪
師心要 (Essentials of Chan Master Foguo
Keqin):

[Nanyue Huai]rang spent eight years under
Caoxi [the Sixth Patriarch]. Mazu studied under Guanyin [Nanyue Huairang];
Deshan studied under Longtan; Yangshan
studied under Dayuan [Guishan Lingyou];
and Linji studied under Duanji [Huangbo
Xiyun]. All of these remained for a period
of not less than twenty years. (x 69: 456c)

Mujaku Dōchū, too, argues for the “twenty
years ago” interpretation in fascicle 1 of his
Rinzai Eshō zenji goroku soyaku.
It was as if he were patting me with
a branch of mugwort translates 如蒿枝
拂著相似 , meaning, of course, that Linji
felt no pain and was grateful for the beatings from Huangbo. Although the corresponding passage in the biography of Linji
appearing in the Yuan version of the jc
has this exact same expression, the Song
version has the variant 一似等閑 , “It was
just as if nothing at all had happened.”
The mugwort is a herbal plant of the

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 137

vi
上堂。僧問、如何是劍刃上事。師云、禍事、禍事。僧擬議。
師便打。

The master took the high seat in the hall. A monk asked, “What about
the matter of the sword blade?”
“Heavens, heavens!” cried the master.
The monk hesitated; the master struck him.
artemisia family, and possesses a strong
and quite distinct aroma. On the ﬁfth day
of the ﬁfth lunar month it was used ceremonially to avert or exorcise evil spirits.
The Japanese Sōtō monk Bannan Eishu 萬
安英種 (1591–1654), in his Bannan shō 萬安
鈔 (a commentary on the ll published in
1632), stated that it was a Chinese custom,
Taoist in origin, to pat little children on
the head with a branch of mugwort as a
charm against evil influences. Modern
commentators, by and large, follow this
interpretation, but no factual evidence
appears to exist in support of Bannan’s
statement.
Dose translates 一頓 , a term that was
used in several diﬀerent ways. Among its
possible meanings were “one time,” “one
interval,” or, in colloquial speech, “one
meal.” It could also refer to a single beating, or to a series of blows of unspeciﬁed
number. Old commentators deﬁned it to
mean twenty blows of the stick, but there
is no evidence in support of this view. The
“Xingfa zhi” 刑法志 (Treatise on the penal
code) in the Xin Tang shu 新唐書 (Newer
chronicles of the Tang) 56, explains the
term in the following way:
In former times, under a diﬀerent decree,
when a man was to be punished by beating, he was to suﬀer an unlimited number
of blows. In the ﬁrst year of the Baoying
寶應 era [762; the first year of the reign
of Emperor Daizong 代宗 (r. 762–779)], it
was decreed, “In general, when a beating
一頓 is prescribed, the number of blows

shall be limited to forty. When it is speciﬁed that the beating shall be administered
with a ‘heavy staﬀ ’ or a ‘painful rod’, the
number of blows shall be limited to sixty.”

I (in “I can”) translates 某甲, which originally meant “a certain person” or “a Mr.
So-and-so,” and was generally used in the
colloquial language of the Tang as the ﬁrst
person singular pronoun. Occasionally we
ﬁnd 某乙 substituting for 某甲. In the Dunhuang manuscripts, 某 is often replaced by
the homophonous character 厶, and we
ﬁnd such usages as 厶甲 or 厶乙.

vi
The matter of the sword blade refers to
a sword raised above the head and poised
to strike, a metaphor for the wisdom that
cuts through and annihilates all thought
and discrimination. In the biography of
Yangshan Huiji, in zj 18, 9, is the following
anecdote:
Someone asked: “Can the dharmakāya
explain the dharma?” The master [Yangshan] said, “I cannot explain it, but there’s
someone who can.” “Where is the one
who can explain?” the questioner asked.
The master thereupon thrust forward a
[wooden] pillow. Later, a monk brought
this up with Guishan. Guishan said,
“[Hui]ji uses a sharp blade!”

For “dharmakāya,” see page 160, below.
Heavens, heavens translates 禍 事 , a
slang expression denoting surprise, fear, or
alarm. It is also found in the db, 39: 項羽連
聲唱禍事, “Xiang Yu cried out repeatedly,

138 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
問、祇如石室行者、踏碓忘卻移腳、向什麼處去。師云、沒溺
深泉。

Someone asked, “The lay worker Shishi in treading the pestle shaft of the
rice mortar would forget he was moving his feet; where did he go?”
“Drowned in a deep spring!” the master replied.

‘Watch out!’’ The same text also has: 須達撫
掌驚嗟, 唱言禍事, 大怪出也 “Xuda clapped
his hands and cried out in alarm, ‘Good
Heavens! An extraordinary thing has
happened!’” The expression is also found
in the Shuihu zhuan 水滸傳 (Outlaws of
the marsh), Xiyou ji 西遊記 (Records of a
pilgrimage to the West), and other Ming
novels.
Someone asked. In the original Chinese, the conjunction 祇如 (with its alternate, 只如 ) resembles the English “for
instance,” “as regards,” “as in the case of.”
The adverbs 祇 and 只 emphasize 如. Less
emphatic is the similar 且如, “for instance,”
“as for,” “supposing that.”
The lay worker Shishi translates 石室
行者 (Shishi Xingzhe), another name for
Shandao 善道. Shandao was a ninth-century monk in the Qingyuan line of Chan
and an heir of the master Changzi Kuang
長髭曠 (n.d.).
According to his biography in zj 5
(15–16), during the proscription of Buddhism of 843 to 845 Shandao lived in a
stone grotto in the Yu 攸 district of Tanzhou 潭州 , in present Hunan. There he
took off his monk’s robes and assumed
the dress of a “lay worker” 行者 , a layman who lives in a temple and engages in
menial work but does not shave his head.
After the proscription was lifted, elder
monks gathered around Shandao. He did
not resume wearing his robes, however,
spending his days instead treading the
pestle shaft of the rice mortar to provide
food for his students.
Yangshan Huiji visited Shandao; so

also did Mukou 木口 (otherwise known
as Xingshan Jianhong 杏山鑑洪 [n.d.];
see Introduction, page 100, note 33; for
Xingshan’s visit to Linji, see page 302).
Shandao’s biography is also found in the
jc (t 51: 316a–b). The present anecdote is
not found in Shishi Xingzhe’s biographies.
The term “lay worker” is also associated
with Huineng, the Sixth Patriarch, who,
when he was at the Fifth Patriarch’s monastery working in the rice-threshing shed,
was known as Lu Xingzhe 廬行者, “the lay
worker Lu”; he is regarded as the ﬁrst lay
worker in Chan.
Forget translates 忘卻 , an example of
a construction widely used in Tang colloquial language in which 卻 was attached
to a verb. Generally 卻 either intensiﬁed
the verb that it suﬃxed or indicated perfected action.
Drowned in a deep spring translates
沒溺深泉, which is probably Linji’s meta-

phorical description of Shishi’s state of
mindlessness, already intimated by the
words “he would forget that he was moving his feet” 忘 卻 移 腳 . Commentators
disagree as to whether this remark was
intended as appreciation or as criticism. If
we assume the latter, the meaning would
be that, though Shishi had attained the
state of no-mind, he was unable to pull
himself out of it.
Yuanwu Keqin quotes this entire anecdote, including Linji’s comment, in his
commentary to the verse section of case
34 in the bl, but substitutes the expression “deep pit” 深坑 for “deep spring” 深
泉 (t 48: 175b). In this case Linji’s remark

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 139

師乃云、但有來者、不虧欠伊。總識伊來處。若與麼來、恰似
失卻。不與麼來、無繩自縛。一切時中、莫亂斟酌。會與不
會、都來是錯。分明與麼道。一任天下人貶剝。久立珍重。

Then he continued, “Whoever comes to me, I do not fail him; I know
exactly where he comes from. Should he come in a particular way, it’s just
as if he’d lost [himself]. Should he not come in a particular way, he’d have
bound himself without a rope. Never ever engage in random speculation—
whether you understand or don’t understand, either way you’re mistaken. I
say this straight out. Anyone in the world is free to denounce me as he will.
You have been standing a long time. Take care of yourselves.”
is clearly taken in a derogatory sense. The
Da guangming zang 大光明藏 (Treasury of
great light) of Baotan 寶曇 (1265), refers
this anecdote to the Sixth Patriarch and
also substitutes “deep pit” for “deep spring”
(x 79: 675c).
Whoever translates 但有 . The character 但 in the Tang and Song usually had
one of three distinct meanings: “only”; “if ”;
or “whatever… may,” “whoever… may,”
“whenever… may,” or “however… may.”
It did not ordinarily mean “but” or “nevertheless,” as it did in later times. When
但 formed a compound with 有, as in the
present instance, it generally meant “all,” or
“every” (analogous compounds are 所有, 諸
有, and 應有).
I know exactly where he comes from.
That is, “I shall be able to judge his true
character and the depth of his understanding.” When a monk came to a master
for instruction, usually the ﬁrst question
the master put to him was, “Where do you
come from?” The question had two meanings: a) what place—town or district—do
you come from?; b) what degree of understanding have you reached now?
In a particular way translates 與麼 , a
Tang colloquial term meaning “thus,” “like
this,” “like that,” “in this (or that) manner.”
Sometimes 與 was replaced by its homophones 異 or 伊, and 麼 by its homophones

摩 and 沒 . In the latter case, 麼 (or 摩 or
沒) did not form an interrogative expres-

sion, but was a mere adverbial suffix. In
non-Buddhist books of the Tang and the
Song there are few appearances of 與麼
and its variants, though on rare occasions
we ﬁnd its synonym 恁麼. More prevalent
in non-Buddhist Song literature were 恁
的 and 恁地 , or simply 恁 . There are two
orthographical variants for 與麼: 熠沒 and
漝麼. An example of the former is found in
the db, 88, and there are several examples
of the latter in the Mingjue Chanshi yulu
明覺禪師語錄 , the recorded sayings of
Chan Master Xuedou Chongxian 雪竇重
顯 (980–1052), e.g., t 47: 683a; 686b; and
686c. See also page 206, below.
與麼 , along with its negative 不與麼 ,
shows the Chan masters’ penchant for
giving metaphysical content to simple
everyday words. (Another good example
is 遮箇 [or 這箇], a demonstrative meaning “this” that was early used to indicate
absolute reality.) Chan masters from late
Tang times handled 與麼 and 不與麼 as
aﬃrmative and negative compounds and
attributed profound meanings to them, a
tendency reﬂected in the traditional Japanese Zen reading fuyomo ni kitareba (followed by Dōchū) for the negative form of
the expression (see the note “should he not
come in a particular way,” below).
Although we have adopted a relatively

140 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
straightforward reading of 不與麼 , the
metaphysical overtones of this and the
affirmative 與麼 in the present context
should not be overlooked. The Japanese Sōtō monk Dōgen Kigen 道元希玄
(1200–1253) devoted the entire ninth fascicle of his great work Shōbōgenzō 正法眼藏
to elucidating the metaphysics of these two
terms, there written in the variant forms
恁麼 and 不恁麼 (t 82: 124a–127a). Also, in
the section on Zhaozhou Congshen in zj
18 we ﬁnd:
[A monk] asked: “Do you associate with
the man who comes thus [ 與麼 ]?” The
master said, “I do.” “Do you associate
with the man who does not come thus
[ 不與麼 ]?” The master said, “I do.” The
monk asked: “To be sure, you are free to
associate with the man who comes thus,
but how do you associate with the man
who does not come thus?” The master
said: “Stop, stop! No need to speak. My
dharma is wonderful and diﬃcult to conceive of.”

Lost translates 失卻, another example of
the “verb + suﬃx 卻” form (see page 138,
above). Normally 失 is a transitive verb
with an expressed object; the lack of such
an object here suggests that among Chan
people the phrase was so well understood
as to make an expressed object unnecessary. The following passages taken from
eleventh-century Chan literature convey
approximately the same meaning as Linji’s
statement, i.e., that the man of true attainment looks as if he were a fool:

直饒救得眼睛, 當下失卻鼻孔: Though you

could save the pupil of your eye, at that
moment you will have lost your nostrils
(t 47: 856a).
贏得頂上笠 , 失卻 腳 下鞋 : He has gained a
straw hat on the top of his head, but lost
the straw sandals under his feet (bl, case
4; t 48: 143b).

Should he not come in a particular
way translates 不與麼來, which is read by
Dōchū as fuyomo ni kitareba, following
the traditional reading of 不與麼 as the
compound fuyomo. The construction cannot be read as a compound, however, since
the negative 不 cannot be directly attached
to the adverbial compound 與麼; instead, it
must be read with the principal verb of the
phrase of the sentence in which it appears.
Thus Dōchū’s fuyomo ni kitareba must be
discarded for yomo ni kitarazareba.
Never translates 莫 , read in Japanese
by Dōchū as nashi (a simple negative).
However, the negative imperative seems
better to fulﬁl Linji’s intention in view of
the categorical tone of the sentence.
Either way you’re mistaken translates
都來是錯 , an example of a grammatical
construction in which 來 serves as an

adverbial suffix. Though widely used in
the Tang and for some time later, this construction has been lost in modern Chinese. Other examples are 適來, “just now,”
夜來, “last night,” 春來, “last spring” or “this
spring,” and 今來, “nowadays.”

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 141

vii
上堂。云、一人在孤峯頂上、無出身之路。一人在十字街頭、
亦無向背。那箇在前、那箇在後。不作維摩詰、不作傅大士。
珍重。

The master took the high seat in the hall and said, “One person is on
top of a solitary peak and has no path by which to leave. One person is at
the busy crossroads and has neither front nor back. Which is ahead, which
is behind? Don’t make the one out to be Vimalakīrti and the other to be Fu
Dashi. Take care of yourselves.”

vii
One person is on top of a solitary peak
describes someone who has reached the
ultimate stage of practice, the realm of
suchness, in which all discrimination has
been cut off. Guishan Lingyou 潙山靈祐
(771–853), in speaking of Deshan Xuanjian
德山宣鑑 (780/82–865), said, “In the future,
this fellow will bind together a grass hut
on the summit of a solitary peak and scold
the Buddha and abuse the patriarchs” (bl
case 4; t 48: 143b).
Path by which to leave translates 出
身之路 , an expression that was ordinarily used to mean passing the civil service
examination and qualifying for a post in
the government. In the Chan tradition it
was employed as a metaphor for breaking through the ultimate stage of practice
and entering the state of enlightenment
where even practice is left behind, and
diﬀerentiation and emptiness are realized
to be identical.
One person is at the busy crossroads
describes the enlightened man who stands
“at the busy crossroads” of life in the ordinary world. Though living in the midst of
diﬀerentiation, he remains unattached to
diﬀerentiation. Therefore he is described
as having “neither front nor back.”
Neither front nor back 無向背 is also

seen in the earlier Pang Jushi yulu, but
written as 無背向:
The layman Pang and Ven. Qifeng were
walking together one day when Pang went
a step ahead and called out, “I’m better
than you by one step.” Qifeng replied,
“There is neither back nor front, yet the
old gentleman need strive to be ahead.”
(x 69: 131b)

For another variant of this expression, in
which the master Shitou Xiqian 石頭希
遷 (700–790) uses the term 非向背 rather
than 無向背, see t 51: 461c.
Vimalakīrti (C., Weimojie 維摩詰) is a
legendary Buddhist layman regarded by
Mahayana tradition as a contemporary of
Śākyamuni. He was held in especially high
regard in China, where he was considered to embody all of the characteristics
of the ideal lay Buddhist. According to the
Vimalakīrti Sutra, of which he is the central ﬁgure, Vimalakīrti lived in the Indian
city of Vaiśālī and, though a householder
of great wealth, had attained a degree of
enlightenment superior even to that of the
greatest bodhisattvas. According to some
accounts he had been a buddha called the
Golden Grain Tathāgata 金粟如來 in an
earlier lifetime (e.g., t 48: 209b).
In the Zen school, Vimalakīrti is perhaps best known for an incident that took
place when, using his miraculous powers,
he entertained a great host of bodhisat-

142 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
tvas, gods, and śrāvakas in his ten-footsquare room. At that time the bodhisattva
Mañjuśrī put to him the question, “What
is meant by the bodhisattva’s entering the
gate of nonduality?” The great layman’s
reply was a deep silence (t 14: 551c). This
episode is elaborated in case 84 of the bl
(t 48: 209b–210b).
Fu Dashi 傅大士 (the title 大士 is roughly
equivalent in meaning to “bodhisattva”) is
the most commonly used appellation for
Fu Xi 傅翕 (497–569), a famous layman of
the Liang and Chen dynasties who lived in
what is now Jinhuafu 金華府 in Zhejiang.
As a young man Fu heard the Buddha’s
teachings from a mendicant foreign monk,
and was inspired to build a small hut for
himself, his wife, and his two sons under a
pair of śāla trees at the foot of a mountain
near his village. During the day they tilled
their ﬁelds; at night Fu disciplined himself
in severe ascetic practices.
A few years later, after attaining a
degree of enlightenment, Fu took for himself the name Shanhui Dashi 善慧大士 ,
“Good Wisdom Bodhisattva.” Thereafter,
while continuing his ascetic practices, he
devoted his life to spreading the Buddhist
teachings among the people of his district
and to alleviating the widespread suﬀering of that period. To obtain money to
feed the starving he sold his ﬁelds on sev-

eral occasions and, once, went so far as to
sell his wife and sons into slavery (they
were, it is said, soon ransomed). Emperor
Wu of Liang 梁武帝 (Liang Wudi, r. 502–
549) summoned him to Nanjing for an
audience in 534. The emperor was much
impressed by Fu and attempted to keep
him in the capital, but within a year Fu
had returned to his old home.
He is credited with having invented the
revolving bookcase for sutras, the turning
of which could, like spinning a prayerwheel, assist even the most ignorant
toward salvation. After his death he was
considered an incarnation of Maitreya,
the buddha-to-be. People also called him
the Vimalakīrti of China.
An account of his teachings is found
in a four-fascicle work, alternately titled
Shanhui Dashi lu 善慧大士錄 (Record of
Shanhui Dashi) and Fu Dashi lu 傅大士錄
(Record of Fu Dashi; x 69: #1335). This
collection also contains various hymns
and religious poems ascribed to him.
There is in addition a Dunhuang manuscript associated with him, the Liang chao
Fu Dashi song jingang jing 梁朝傅大士頌
金剛經 (Verses by Fu Dashi of the Liang
dynasty on the Diamond Sutra; t 85:
1a–8c). The bl, case 67, records a sermon
on the Diamond Sutra said to have been
given by him before Emperor Wu (t 48:
197a–b).

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 143

viii
上堂。云、有一人、論劫在途中、不離家舍。有一人、離家
舍、不在途中。那箇合受人天供養。便下座。

The master took the high seat in the hall and said, “One man is endlessly
on the way, yet has never left home. Another has left home, yet is not on
the way. Which one deserves the oﬀerings of humans and gods?” Then he
stepped down.

viii
Endlessly translates 論劫 , a term that
traditionally has been read in Japanese
as gō o ronjite, which means, literally,
“discussing kalpas,” but which has been
understood by most commentators to
mean “forever,” since the discussion of
kalpas—spans of time that are limitless in
time and number—could itself go on forever. Although the meaning arrived at is
therefore correct, the process by which it
was reached is not. In the compound 論劫,
the character 論 does not possess its usual
meaning of “to discuss,” “to argue,” or “to
comment.” A similar case is the compound
論情 , meaning “in truth” or “indeed,” an
example of which is found in the Dunhuang duosuo 敦煌掇瑣 (Miscellany from
Dunhuang), 146; other examples appear
in the db, 351, 395, 403, and 457. It would
seem that in such usages the character 論
serves as a prepositional preﬁx, the function of which is to make an adverb of the
word that follows it, and that the Japanese
reading should thus be ronk ni.
Early Chan literature provides us with a
number of examples of 論劫, used always
with the meaning of “forever” or “endlessly,” as in the present text. For example,
the following exchange is found in the jc:
[A monk] asked, “During the twelve hours
[of the day], how are we to conquer the
mind?” The master [Chan Master Feng 奉
禪師] said, “[One who] seeks ﬁre by pounding ice will never succeed.” (t 51: 287b)

Several examples are also found in the zj,
e.g., fascicles 9:11, 12:1, and 12:15, etc.
On the way 途中 and home 家舍 were
common colloquial expressions employed
by Linji in a metaphorical sense. The great
Japanese Rinzai Zen master Hakuin Ekaku
白隱慧鶴 (1686–1769), in his commentary
upon the Five Ranks 五位 of Dongshan
Liangjie, says that Linji’s words “to be on
the way, yet to have never left home; to
have left home, yet not to be on the way,”
indicate the same degree of attainment as
that described in the verse on the Fourth
Rank:
The Arrival at Mutual Integration:
When two blades meet point-on / There’s
no need to withdraw.
The master swordsman / Is like the lotus
blooming in the ﬁre.
Such a man has in and of himself / A
heaven-soaring spirit. (See zd, 71)

Offerings translates 供養 , which is the
standard Chinese equivalent for the Sanskrit term “pūj,” “veneration.” Concretely, 供
養 and “pūj” both refer to oﬀerings of food,
drink, ﬂowers, clothing, and shelter made
in gratitude to religious practitioners.
Humans 人 and gods 天 are the two
highest of the six states of incarnate existence (Skr., ṣaḍ-gati), referred to in Chinese as the 六趣 or 六道. The six states are
as follows, in descending order:
1. 天; deva: (Hindu) gods; (Buddhist) heavenly beings
2. 人; manuṣya: human beings

144 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

ix
上堂。僧問、如何是第一句。師云、三要印開朱點側、未容擬
議主賓分。

The master took the high seat in the hall.
A monk asked, “What about the First Statement?” The master said:
The Seal of the Three Essentials being lifted, the vermilion impression is sharp;
With no room for speculation, host and guest are clear and distinct.
3. (阿)修羅; asura: titans, ﬁghting deities
4. 畜生; tiryagyoni: members of the animal
kingdom exclusive of human beings
5. 餓 鬼 ; preta: hungry spirits, hungry
ghosts, beings condemned to insatiable
hunger
6. 地獄 ; naraka: denizens of the various
hells, hell-dwellers.

ix
The master took the high seat in the
hall. The following discourse, one of
Linji’s most enigmatic, was later entitled
Linji’s Three Statements 三句. The sermon
is found in four early collections:
1. The Linji section of the Song and Yuan
editions of the jc. (Yüan ed., t 51: 300b)
2. The Fengxue Yanzhao section of the
tg. Fengxue, the fourth patriarch of the
Linji school, states during a sermon the
three questions and answers as given in
the ll, adding at the conclusion of each
answer a short comment of his own. (x
78: 493a)
3. The Fengxue section of cs 3, where the
exchanges are presented to Fengxue by
his teacher Nanyuan Huiyong as a type
of koan, introduced by the statement,
“Linji had Three Statements” 臨濟有三
句 . The comments recorded in the tg
are here given as Fengxue’s immediate
replies to Nanyuan. (x 79: 496c–497a)
4. In a comprehensive survey of Linji
school doctrine found in ry 1, which
includes a section on the Three State-

ments, together with comments upon
each statement by Fengxue and other
masters. The text prefaces this section
with a quotation from another of Linji’s
sermons (see below), which the compiler of the ry obviously regarded as
throwing light on the meaning of the
statements. (t 48: 301b–c)

What exactly Linji meant by the Three
Statements is diﬃcult to discern solely on
the basis of what he tells us. Later masters
have oﬀered a variety of interpretations,
but all emphasize that the Three Statements are in no way to be regarded as
three separate entities, but are mutually
related.
The passage introducing the Three
Statements in the ry is taken from sermon 19 in the present text (see page 264).
We may well question whether the three
statements spoken of there refer to the
present Three Statements, or whether
Linji was not rather speaking of students
of varying degrees of ability—one who
attains understanding at the first word
of the master, one who needs a second
opportunity, and one who fails to attain
understanding even after the master has
spoken a third time.
First Statement 第一句 . This passage
appears both in the ll and in the works
mentioned in the note above; textual variants are minor.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 145

問、如何是第二句。師云、妙解豈容無著問、漚和爭負截流
機。

“What about the Second Statement?” The master said:
How could Miaojie permit Wuzhuo’s questioning?
How could expedient means go against the activity that cuts
through the stream?
The Seal of the Three Essentials 三要印.
Here Linji uses the word “seal” 印 to represent the ultimate realization comprising the
true nature of the Three Essential States. In
Buddhism, a seal often serves to symbolize
a truth that is fixed and unchanging (as
in the term 印可, the seal of sanction conferred by a Chan master upon a disciple
who has reached true understanding).
In the ll, the ﬁrst line of Linji’s answer,
三要印開朱點側, concludes with the character 側 , “inclined toward,” while in the
other texts the ﬁnal character is 窄, “narrow,” “contracted.” However, the pronunciation of the two characters is so close
(ce and ze) that 側 may well have served
in the written colloquial of the Tang as a
homophone of 窄, and we have translated
it in this way. The jc and the cs both have
存 for 分, the last character of the second
line in the ll and ry.
Apropos of the First Statement, there
are three interesting anecdotes. The ﬁrst
is from the Zhaozhou lu 趙州錄 (Record
of Zhaozhou):
Someone asked [Zhaozhou], “What about
the First Statement?” The master coughed.
[The questioner] said, “Is that it?” The
master said, “I can’t even cough!” (x 68:
84a)

The second anecdote is from the section
devoted to a monk named Elder Taiyuan
Fu 太原孚上座 (n.d.) in the jc:
Xuefeng Yicun 雪 峯 義 存 [Taiyuan’s
teacher] once inquired of the master [Taiyuan], “I see that Linji had Three Statements. Isn’t that so?” The master said,
“Yes.” “What about the First Statement?”

Xuefeng asked. The master lifted up his
eyes and looked at Xuefeng. “That’s the
Second Statement,” said Xuefeng. “What
about the First Statement?” The master
folded his hands on his chest and retired.
Thereafter Xuefeng esteemed him highly
and placed his seal upon him in his quarters, and the two became master and disciple. (t 51: 360a)

The third of the anecdotes is from the section on the Chan master Qingping 清平
(n.d.) found in zj 12:
[Someone] asked, “What about the First
Statement?” “If you want my head, cut it
oﬀ,” was the master’s reply.

Second Statement. Commentators oﬀer
differing interpretations of Linji’s pronouncements regarding the Second Statement, depending upon whether they take
the two words miaojie 妙解 and wuzhuo 無
著 to be proper names or Buddhist technical terms. We have taken the former
approach, regarding the compound 妙
解 , which literally means “marvelous 妙
understanding 解 ,” to be a metaphorical
name for Mañjuśrī (the Bodhisattva of
Marvelous Wisdom, who is closely associated with Mount Wutai 五臺 ; see page
203, below), and the two characters 無著
to refer to a monk named Wuzhuo (who,
according to legends recorded in several
Buddhist texts, met and conversed with
Mañjuśrī on Wutai).
The story of Wuzhuo’s pilgrimage to
Mount Wutai was first recorded in the
sg (t 50: 836c–837b), according to which
Wuzhuo was a monk of the Huayan

146 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
school who climbed the sacred mountain in the year 767, encountered Mañjuśrī
in his traditional manifestation of an
old man accompanied by a young boy,
experienced most of the other marvels
associated with the mountain, and in the
end retired there for the remainder of his
life. At the conclusion of the sg account
is the statement that, during the Yuanhe
元和 era (806–819), a disciple of Wuzhuo
recorded and handed down this story of
his master’s experiences.
That the legend, with further elaborations, was widely known among Chan
people soon after Linji’s time is clear from
the fact that allusions to it may be found
in the biographies of the masters Xuefeng
Yicun (zj 7), Baofu Congzhan 保福從展 (zj
11), and Fengxue Yanzhao (t 51: 302c).
The Xuedou heshang baize songgu 雪竇
和尚百則頌古 (Xuedou’s verse comments
on one hundred old koans) contains a
koan based upon an episode in the story.
This story, together with the compiler
Xuedou Chongxian’s comment upon it,
later became case 35 in Yuanwu Keqin’s
celebrated koan collection bl:
Mañjuśrī asked Wuzhuo, “Where did
you just come from?” “From the south,”
replied Wuzhuo. “And how does the
buddhadharma fare in the south?” asked
Mañjuśrī. Wuzhuo answered, “There are
but few monks in the Final Age of the
Law who maintain the precepts.” Mañjuśrī
asked, “How many monks are there?”
Wuzhuo replied, “Some are three hundred, some are ﬁve hundred.”
Wuzhuo then asked Mañjuśrī, “How
does the buddhadharma fare here?”
Mañjuśrī said, “Worldly people and sages
live together; dragons and snakes intermingle.” “How many monks are there?”
asked Wuzhuo. Mañjuśrī answered,
“Front, three and three, back, three and
three.” (t 48: 173b–174b)

The Guang qingliang zhuan 廣清涼傳, a
history of Mount Wutai written by Yanyi
延一 and dated 1061, contains not only the

sg story (in considerably ampliﬁed form),
but also all of the episodes referred to by
the above-mentioned Chan masters. It follows the sg in giving the date of Wuzhuo’s
pilgrimage to Mount Wutai as 767 and
having him retire there, but identiﬁes him
as a monk of the Chan school rather than
as a Huayan monk.
The biographical compilation wh
(1253), however, links much of this legendary material on Wuzhuo to a certain
monk named Wenxi 文喜 (821–900), who,
according to the account recorded in the
wh, returned from Mount Wutai after
three years and became the disciple and
heir of the Chan master Yangshan Huiji (x
80: 193a–b). The identiﬁcation of Wuzhuo
and Wenxi is an error that appears to have
arisen from the fact that the title Chan
Master Wuzhuo 無著禪師 was imperially
bestowed upon Wenxi in 897. This error
entered later compilations that were based
upon the wh, including all of the older
Japanese commentaries. The wh account
overlooks the fact that the title Chan Master Wuzhuo was bestowed upon Wenxi
long after Linji’s death.
The Japanese scholar-priest Dōchū
seems to have been the ﬁrst to regard the
words miaojie and wuzhuo as the technical terms “marvelous understanding”
and “detachment.” Certain Japanese Zen
masters continue to follow him, but the
arguments in support of this theory are far
from convincing.
Since Zhenzhou, where Linji lived,
was on the direct road to Mount Wutai,
it seems very likely that Linji would have
been familiar with the tale of Wuzhuo and
his adventures, a tale that was part of the
lore surrounding the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī
at the time. It would not, therefore, have
been unnatural for him to make use of
the story in his exchanges and sermons.
Although Mañjuśrī is not referred to as
Miaojie elsewhere in the ll—Linji generally refers to the bodhisattva as Dasheng

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 147
大聖 (Great Holy One)—this would not be
the sole occasion in which Linji’s genius
created a new expression better capable
of conveying his meaning (for another
reference by Linji to Mañjuśrī and Mount
Wutai, see pages 202–203, below).
In order to more fully understand the
meaning of the Second Statement, it is
helpful to take a closer look at the terms
that appear in the verse recited by Linji.
Dōchū, in his ll commentary Rinzai
Eshō zenji goroku soyaku, discusses the
two distinct meanings possessed by the
character 負, as they apply to the line 漚
和爭負截流機 , translated here as, “How
could skillful means go against the activity that cuts through the stream?” The
respective meanings have equally distinct
Japanese pronunciations: ou 負う, meaning “to carry, to bear on the back,” and
somuku 負く, “to turn one’s back on,” “to
be at variance with.” Though his reading of
this character as owan 負わん in his Japanese text suggests that Dōchū prefers the
first meaning (thus, “How could skillful
means bear the activity that cuts through
the stream?”), in his commentary he does
not reject the possibility of its being read
with the second meaning, somuku, the
meaning that we have adopted.
There are two variants that exist for the
second section of Linji’s statement. For 漚
in the ll, the jc, and the ry, we ﬁnd 謳 in
the tg and the cs. For 負 , “to turn one’s

back on,” “to turn against,” in the ﬁrst three
texts, the latter two have 赴, meaning “to
go toward.” Both variants, being homophones for the characters they supplant,
may well be orthographic errors.
Expedient means translates the term 漚
和, which is in turn a transcription of the
Sanskrit word “upāya,” “skillful means,”
usually rendered in Chinese as 方 便 .
An early example is found in the fifthcentury Zhao lun 肇論 (The treatises of
Zhao), in the section “Zongbenyi” 宗本義
(Fundamental principles): “To adapt the
transforming doctrine to sentient beings
is called ‘expedient means’ 漚和 ” (t 45:
151a).
The activity that cuts through the
stream [of a ﬂowing river] is a statement
that is used here as a metaphor for the
activity of the “marvelous.” According to
this interpretation, the meaning of the
entire passage would be as follows: from
the standpoint of Mañjuśrī’s fundamental
and undiﬀerentiated wisdom, any process
of questioning, such as that resorted to
by Wuzhuo, is unthinkable. This wisdom
exists prior to questions and answers and
cannot be attained through them; it is to
be grasped directly. However, it manifests itself in the world through expedient
teachings—indeed, the devices of expediency are the free and unimpeded working
of this wisdom.

148 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
問、如何是第三句。師云、看取棚頭弄傀儡、抽牽都來裏有
人。師又云、一句語須具三玄門、一玄門須具三要、有權有
用。汝等諸人、作麼生會。下座。

“What about the Third Statement?” The master said:
Look at the wooden puppets performing on the stage!
Their jumps and jerks all depend upon the person behind.
The master further said, “Each Statement must comprise the Gates of
the Three Mysteries, and the gate of each Mystery must comprise the Three
Essentials. There are expedients and there is functioning. How do all of you
understand this?” The master then stepped down.
Third Statement. Textual variants
appear only in the second line of Linji’s
verse. The tg, like the ll, has 都來裏有
人 ; the jc and the cs have 全 藉 裏 頭 人
(although the Song jc substitutes 邊 for
頭 ); and the ry has 元是裏頭人 . Though
the characters diﬀer somewhat, the meaning is the same in all cases.
The Third Statement seems to offer
fewer diﬃculties than the previous two. It
may be interpreted to mean that all phenomena, including humans, are “puppets
performing on the stage.” Though their
activities appear to originate with themselves, in fact all take place in response to
the functioning of the source.
Yunmen Wenyan 雲門文偃 (862/4–949),
founder of the Yunmen school of Chan, is
also credited with Three Statements. It is
likely, however, that these were ﬁrst stated
by Yunmen’s disciple Deshan Yuanming 德
山圓明 (n.d.), since they are not included
in the yk, the record of Yunmen’s teachings, but are rather appended to the work,
together with Deshan’s comments in verse
on each statement. Yunmen’s Three Statements are as follows:
1. Enveloping heaven and earth 函蓋乾坤
2. Cutting through the myriad streams 截
斷衆流

3. Following the waves, according with the
current 隨波逐浪 (t 47: 576b)

It is interesting that the second of these
statements bears a decided resemblance
to the latter part of Linji’s verse to his Second Statement. Yunmen was obviously
acquainted with Linji’s Three Statements,
for he says in the course of one of his sermons, “Linji had Three Statements” (t 47:
573a). However, he does not enumerate or
explain them.
The master further said…. The paragraph that follows is missing in the versions of the ll included in the tg and cs,
but is found in the jc in a form identical to
that of the ll. The ry version of the text (t
48: 301c–302b) opens with the statement,
“The master was accustomed to expounding the tenets of the school” 師大凡演唱宗
乘, in place of the ll’s “The master further
said” 師又云 . Another variation between
the two texts will be discussed further
below.
Gates of the Three Mysteries 三玄門
derives from the Taoist 玄門, “dark gate.”
The last lines of the ﬁrst verse of the Taoist
Daode jing 道德經 (Classic of the Way and
its virtue) read:
This we call the Unknown
The Unknown beyond the Unknown
The gate to all wonders.

The term 玄門 was adopted early in the
history of Chinese Buddhism to refer to
abstruse teachings, and by extension to

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 149
the teachings of Buddhism itself. Later,
various schools used it for particular doctrines of their own, as with, for example,
the Ten Profound Doctrines 十玄門 of the
Huayan school. Since later masters in the
Linji school consistently dropped the word
“gate” and referred to the Three Mysteries
三玄, the term has been translated here as
the “Gates of the Three Mysteries” rather
than as the “Three Mysterious Gates.”
The Three Statements, Three Mysteries,
and Three Essential [States] have been
variously equated with the buddha, the
dharma, and the tao; with the dharmakāya,
saṃbhogakāya, and nirmāṇakāya (for
these terms, see pages 160–161, below);
and with the three basic concepts of Chinese Buddhist philosophy: principle 理 ,
wisdom 智 , and function 行 or 用 . The
most we can say is, perhaps, that the master is throughout dealing with suchness in
(1) its absolute state, (2) its manifestations
as intrinsic wisdom and the functioning
of this wisdom, and (3) its manifestation
through humans and their activities. We
may speak of the Three Statements, the
Three Essential States, and the Three Mysteries, but these are all mutually related
and in the end are but a way of observing
the one reality.
Fenyang Shanzhao, the sixth patriarch
of the Linji school (see Introduction, page
104, note 52), devoted much attention to
to commenting upon all of Linji’s formulas. For each of the Three Statements,
Three Essential States, and Three Mysteries he wrote a verse in comment, but as
these verses are no less cryptic than Linji’s
original remarks their interpretation has
engaged the attention of commentators
ever since. He concluded with this final
verse:

The Three Mysteries and Three Essentials
/ These are indeed diﬃcult to discern.
When the meaning is attained and the
words forgotten / It is easy to become
intimate with the Way.
The First Statement clearly and obviously
/ Includes the myriad forms.
On the ninth day of the ninth month /
Chrysanthemum ﬂowers bloom anew.
(ry; t 48: 302b)

Provisional expedients translates 權 ,
that which is temporary or conditional,
as opposed to 實 , that which is fundamental, absolute, or real. It is similar to
the term 方便 (see page 146, above, and
page 212, below). In contrast to the ll’s
有權有用 , the ry has 有權有實 , 有照有用 ,
“There is the provisional expedient and
there is the real; there is illumination, and
there is functioning” (t 48: 302a). Since
the expression is found in this form in
various other sources (e.g., x 64: 49a; x 68:
620c; x 80: 221c), including Linji’s successor Xinghua Cunjiang (x 67: 235c), some
commentators believe that this may have
been the original form of Linji’s remark.
On this passage a modern Zen master has
commented, “Such analysis of his Chan is
Linji’s expedient for drawing the student
into understanding. His roaring shouts
and his blows with his staﬀ are his direct
functioning.”
How do all of you understand this? The
interrogative “how” translates 作麼生. The
character 生 is a suﬃx; in non-Buddhist
Tang literature the expression is usually
written 作麼, without 生. However, 作麼生
and 作麼 diﬀer slightly in meaning, in that
the latter is often used as a rhetorical question with an implied negation, i.e., “What
is the good of…?” or “What need…?” Two
examples of this usage are found later in
the ll; see pages 306 and 316.

150 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

x
師晚參示衆云、有時奪人不奪境、有時奪境不奪人、有時人境
俱奪、有時人境俱不奪。

At the evening gathering the master addressed the assembly, saying:
“Sometimes I take away the person but do not take away the surroundings; sometimes I take away the surroundings but do not take away the
person; sometimes I take away both person and surroundings; sometimes I
take away neither person nor surroundings.”

x
Evening gathering 晚參 . We have no
definite knowledge of what this term
referred to during Tang times, but in the
Song it was an evening meeting of the
assembly held in the master’s quarters 方
丈 (see page 131, above). It was informal in
procedure, in contrast to the formal service held in the morning in the main hall,
when the master took the high seat.
Sometimes I take away the person….
The following short sermon came to be
known as Linji’s Statement Regarding the
Four Types of Classiﬁcation 四種料簡語 ,
or the Four Classifications 四料揀 . 料揀
here signifies “selecting by measuring.”
The sermon appears in the following four
early texts, where the four questions with
Linji’s verse answers are found either with
or without the master’s introductory statement as given in the ll. The few textual
variants are minor.
1. The jc, in the biography of Zhuozhou
Zhiyi 涿州紙衣 (n.d.) (t 51: 295c–296a),
where it is stated that Zhiyi asked the
four questions of Linji (the third and
fourth questions are in reverse order).
Linji’s introductory statement is not
found in this text, and the material is
untitled. But at the conclusion of Linji’s
answer to the last question it is said, “At
these words the master [Zhiyi] attained
the profound principle and entered
deeply into the Gate of the Three Mys-

teries 三玄 , the Three Essentials 三要 ,
and the Four Statements 四句.” We may
surmise that the Four Statements here
refers to the Four Classiﬁcations.
2. tg 13, in the biography of Zhuozhou
Kefu 涿州剋符 (n.d.) (x 78: 479–480b),
where there is the line, “Linji took the
high seat and offered his Four Classiﬁcations 四種料揀 ”; this is followed by
the introductory statement and the four
questions and answers. The Da guangming zang identifies Kefu with Zhiyi
(x 79: 711b); all texts that mention this
ﬁgure list him as one of Linji’s heirs.
3. cs 3, in the biography of Fengxue Yanzhao, where Fengxue is asked by his
teacher Nanyuan Huiyong, “When you
speak about Four Types of Classification 四種料簡語 , what doctrine is classified?” Fengxue replied, “Generally
speaking, when they are not restricted
by the bonds of ordinary feelings, words
fall into sacred interpretations. Students
tend to have this serious illness. The
wise men of old, out of pity for them,
provided skillful teachings [to be used]
just as one wedge is used to drive out
another.” Nanyuan then proceeds to ask
him the four questions one by one, and
one by one Fengxue answers them with
verses of his own in place of those given
by Linji (x 79: 496c–497a).
4. The ry gives the title Four Categories
四料揀 to the first section of its material on the teachings of the Linji school,
prefacing the actual Four Categories,

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 151

時有僧問、如何是奪人不奪境。師云、煦日發生鋪地錦、瓔孩
垂髮白如絲。僧云、如何是奪境不奪人。師云、王令已行天下
遍、將軍塞外絕烟塵。僧云、如何是人境兩俱奪。師云、并汾
絕信、獨處一方。

Then a monk asked, “What about ‘to take away the person and not take
away the surroundings’?”
The master said,
The spring sun comes forth, covering the earth with brocade;
A child’s hair hangs down, white as silken strands.
The monk asked, “What about ‘to take away the surroundings and not
take away the person’?” The master said,
The rule of the sovereign prevails throughout the land;
The general has laid to rest the dusts of battle beyond the frontiers.
Again the monk asked, “What about ‘to take away both person and surroundings’?” The master said,
No news from Bing and Fen,
Isolated and away from everywhere.
including the introductory statement, by
some material on Puhua 普化 and Kefu
that is not in the ll. The four questions
are each followed by Linji’s verses. The
section concludes with verses by Kefu,
Fengxue, and several later Linji masters
(t 48: 300b–301b).

This classiﬁcation may be philosophically interpreted as a division of all existence into two categories: humanity and
the surrounding world. In that case the
first statement presents the objective
world as it is, totally free from human
subjective judgment; the second statement presents the human standpoint as
central, with the objective world wiped
out; the third statement obliterates both
man and the objective world; the fourth
statement describes man and the objective
world in harmonious mutual relationship.
Although it is questionable whether Linji
himself would have subscribed to such
an analysis, in this passage he may have

been stating a series of steps by means
of which the Mahayana doctrine on the
relationship between humanity and the
universe is realized. This series resembles
in form, if not in content, the famous
Four Propositions 四句分別 of Indian
Buddhist logic, the Four Dharma Realms
四法界 of the Huayan school, and the
Five Ranks 五位 of Chan. Perhaps the
making of such classiﬁcations was a tendency current at the time.
The spring sun comes forth…. The ﬁrst
line of the verse may be taken to present
“the surroundings”; the second line eliminates “the person,” since a white-haired
Chinese child is an impossibility.
The rule of the Sovereign…. In the ﬁrst
line of this verse, the supremacy of “the
Sovereign” (person) in effect eliminates
“throughout the world” (surroundings). In
the second line “the general” (the person)

152 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
eliminates the “dusts of battle beyond the
frontiers” (surroundings).
No news from Bing and Fen. The old
districts of Bing 并 and Fen 汾 corresponded in Tang times to the northern
part of present Shanxi and the district
along the Fen River, and were thus part of
the northern provinces.
The Chinese histories record no particular event to which Linji’s comment about
Bing and Fen can be speciﬁcally related,
but by the mid-Tang the general situation
in the northern provinces was such as to
provide more than one occasion to which
the verse could refer.
The three military commissioners of
the districts north of the Yellow River,
backed by their powerful military forces,
had become virtual dictators, operating
independently of the central government
(see pages 63 and 70). In 809 and again in
816 Emperor Xianzong 憲宗 (r. 805–820)
sent expeditions against Wang Chengzong 王承宗 (d. 820), within whose area of
power lay Bing and Fen, in an attempt to
reassert the authority of the central government. The final defeat of the imperial armies in 816 by Wang’s forces all but
ended the control of the government over
the northern provinces, and further weakened the already unstable throne (Jiu Tang
shu 142; Tongjian jishi benmo 通鑑紀事本
末 [Events of the Comprehensive mirror to
aid government in their historical context]
33 and 34).
Linji’s verse may well refer to this situation. If so, his point would have been, of
course, that the area of Bing and Fen was
completely isolated from the central government, and all communication between
them was cut oﬀ.
Earlier commentators relate the verse
to the story of a certain Wu Yuanji 吳元
濟 (738–817), a rebel who made his base

in the walled city of Caizhou 蔡州, which
was regarded as impregnable. One day in
the winter of 817, after a particularly heavy
snow had formed drifts rising up to the top
of the city walls, the imperial commander,
Li Su 李愬 , succeeded in capturing Caizhou and killing Wu. There is no evidence,
however, that Wu ever controlled Bing
and Fen, which, being north of the Yellow
River, were far from Caizhou, located in
the present district of Runingfu 汝寧府 in
Henan. Consequently there seems to be
no reason to connect the isolation of Bing
and Fen mentioned in Linji’s verse with
Wu’s rebellion.
The connection with Wu appears to
have been inspired by an anecdote in the
Dahui Pujue Chanshi nianpu 大慧普覺禪
師年譜 (The chronology of Chan master
Dahui Pujue), under the date Shaoxing 紹
興 10 (1140):
His lordship [Zhang Jiucheng] then
brought up Kefu’s question to Linji, proceeding as far as, “What about ‘to take
away both person and surroundings?”,
when unconsciously he seemed quite
pleased. The master [Dahui] said, “I do
not agree.” His lordship replied, “What
is Your Reverence’s view?” The master
said, “He conquered the city of Caizhou
and killed Wu Yuanji.” At these words his
lordship attained complete freedom from
delusions. (Dai-Nippon kōtei daizōkyō 8:
10a)

It was because of Dahui’s association
with Zhang Jiucheng 張九成 (also known
by his Buddhist name of Layman Wugou
無 垢 居 士 ; 1092–1159) —one of several
important oﬃcials among the master’s lay
disciples, and a vigorous opponent of the
imperial policy of peace with the northern
Jurchen invaders following removal of the
Song court to the south—that Dahui was
laicized for a seventeen-year period (see
Introduction, page 111, note 75).

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 153

僧云、如何是人境俱不奪。師云、王登寶殿、野老謳歌。師乃
云、今時學佛法者、且要求眞正見解。若得眞正見解、生死
不染、去住自由。不要求殊勝、殊勝自至。道流、祇如自古先
德、皆有出人底路。如山僧指示人處、祇要爾不受人惑。要用
便用、更莫遲疑。

The monk asked, “What about ‘to take away neither person nor the surroundings’?” The master said,
The sovereign ascends into the jeweled palace;
Aged rustics sing songs.
Then the master said, “Nowadays, he who studies buddhadharma must
seek true insight. Gaining true insight, he is not aﬀected by birth-and-death,
but freely goes or stays. He needn’t seek the excellent—that which is excellent will come of itself.
“Followers of the Way, our eminent predecessors from of old have all
had their ways of saving people. As for me, what I want to make clear to you
is that you must not accept the deluded views of others. If you want to act,
then act. Don’t hesitate.
The sovereign 王 and aged rustics 野老
are both presented aﬃrmatively in a world
of peace.
Then the master said…. The long sermon that follows is one of the most famous
in the ll, summarizing in simple words
the basic teachings of the Linji school. The
entire sermon is included in various collections, such as zy 2 (x 67: 576a–c), gy 4
(x 68: 24a–c), tg 11 (x 78: 468a–c), zh 9 (x
79: 83b–c), in a form identical with that in
the ll except for orthographical and typographical errors. The jc (t 51: 446c–447a)
has a much-abbreviated version of the
sermon with a few interpolations, and the
zl also has a long passage from it (t 48:
943c). Important textual variations will be
noted below.
True insight 眞正見解 is one of the central concepts in Linji’s teaching. It seems
to have been original with the master,
since it is found only in the ll, or in passages in other works that quote Linji or
set forth his teaching. Later in the text

(see page 195) the master gives a detailed
explanation of the term. See also the following passage in the Wuxing lun 悟性論
(Treatise on the awakened nature), one of
the short texts traditionally attributed to
Bodhidharma:
The one who truly sees 正見 knows that
mind is empty nothingness. Such a one,
that is, transcends both delusion and
enlightenment. Only when one is without
either delusion or enlightenment can one
be said to truly understand, to truly see 正
解正見. (t 48: 371b)

Birth-and-death 生死 refers to rebirth
in one realm after another dependent
upon the karma a being acquires. It is
equivalent in meaning to, though not a literal translation of, the Sanskrit “saṃsāra,”
a more usual Chinese term for which is 輪
廻 (see page 158, below).
Freely goes or stays 去住自由 means
that one is free to stay in the world or to
leave it, as one wishes. The belief is that,
unlike ordinary people, for whom birth

154 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
and death are dictated by karma, free
persons are able to determine their own
mode of existence.
For example, when the Third Patriarch,
Sengcan, was about to die, he said:
People all esteem meeting one’s end sitting down, and are moved to wonder at
the unusual. Now I am going to pass away
standing up. I am free [to choose] life or
death 生死自由.” When his words ended,
he grasped the branch of a tree with his
hands, and immediately his breathing
ceased. (t 85: 1286b)

The Sixth Patriarch is recorded to have
addressed his disciples as follows:
If you are enlightened as to your own
nature you neither set up bodhi or nirvana, nor do you set up the wisdom born
of emancipation. When there is not a
single dharma to be affirmed, then you
are able to establish the myriad dharmas.
If you understand the meaning of this,
[this is what] is called the body of buddha,
this is what is called bodhi and nirvana,
the wisdom born of emancipation. The
person who sees into his own nature 見
性 can set these up. He is free to come or
go 去來自由, without restriction, without
hindrance. (t 48: 358c)

Baizhang Huaihai, the teacher of Linji’s
master Huangbo Xiyun, said:
Previous men of attainment entered ﬁre
and were not burned, entered water and
were not drowned. Furthermore, when
they wished to burn, they burned; when
they wished to drown, they drowned;
when they wished to live they lived; when
they wished to die, they died. They were
free to go or to stay 去住自由. Such people
possessed freedom. (gy 2; x 68: 10b)

Excellent translates the compound 殊
勝 , which is of Buddhist origin and is
found in Chinese only in the Buddhist literature, where it means “excellent,” “rare,”
or “surpassing” (in modern Japanese it
means “laudable” or “commendable”). It
seems to have been in use from at least

the ﬁfth century, as the following two passages indicate:
At that time the World-Honored One,
again desiring to admonish and arouse
the bhikkus, and furthermore because
he wished to make known to the assembly the excellent, all-embracing meritorious virtues 殊勝廣大功德 like unto his
own, which had been attained by Sthavira
Mahākāśyapa, addressed all the bhikkus,
saying…. (t 2: 302a)
At that time, in the realm of the upper
regions, was a country called “Excellent
Meritorious Virtues” 殊勝功德. The title of
the buddha of this country was “King of
Virtues.” (t 3: 589b)

Followers of the Way 道流 was originally a term applied by Taoists to themselves; in the sixth century it became also
a synonym for the tradition of Taoism
itself. Later, Chinese Buddhists adopted
the term and applied it to all of those who,
whether lay or clerical, had committed
themselves to the Buddhist path. Linji,
here and elsewhere in the ll, uses the
expression as a term of address for the
audience. Perhaps the earliest usage of
“followers of the Way” in a Chan text is
found in the preface to the Lengqie shizi ji,
where the author Jingjue 淨覺 (683–760?)
writes,
I now commit [to you] this preface,
trusting that my understanding [may be
revealed] within. I hope that those who
follow the Way 道流, as I do, will be aware
of my intention.

Ways of saving people translates 出人
底路 , a phrase that Japanese commentators have interpreted in several ways; we
have followed Dōchū, who, in his Rinzai
Eshō zenji goroku soyaku, says, “The eminent predecessors had various kinds of
skillful means for saving people. The word
出す (J., idasu) means to release people, as
from prison, or to rescue them from death
by drowning…. 路 (J., michi)… is ‘skillful
means’ 方便 (J., hōben).”

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 155

如今學者不得、病在甚處。病在不自信處。爾若自信不及、即
便忙忙地徇一切境轉、被他萬境回換、不得自由。爾若能歇得
念念馳求心、便與祖佛不別。爾欲得識祖佛麼。祇爾面前聽法
底是。學人信不及、便向外馳求。設求得者、皆是文字勝相、
終不得他活祖意。

“Students today can’t get anywhere. What ails you? Lack of faith in yourself is what ails you. If you lack faith in yourself, you’ll keep on tumbling
along, following in bewilderment after all kinds of circumstances and being
taken by them through transformation after transformation without ever
attaining freedom.
“Bring to rest the thoughts of the ceaselessly seeking mind, and you will not
diﬀer from the patriarch-buddha. Do you want to know the patriarch-buddha?
He is none other than you who stand before me listening to my discourse. But
because you students lack faith in yourselves, you run around seeking something outside. Even if, through your seeking, you did ﬁnd something, that
something would be nothing more than fancy descriptions in written words;
never would you gain the mind of the living patriarch.
The use of 底 to connect a modiﬁer with
the word it modiﬁes (a function similar to
that performed by 的 in modern Chinese)
was not frequent in the Tang, but many
examples are found in the literature of the
Five Dynasties (see Ōta 1958, 354–355).
The frequent use of 底 in the ll may oﬀer
a clue concerning the date of its compilation. This passage is missing in the jc and
zl versions of this sermon.
You must not accept the deluded views
of others 祇要爾不受人惑. Several times in
this and other sermons Linji admonishes
his students not to be led astray by the
erroneous views of others, that is, bad
teachers and ignorant fellow students.
The same idea is expressed in the following passage from the Mohe bore boluomi jing 摩訶般若波羅蜜經 (Great perfection of wisdom sutra), although the term
人惑 is not employed:
The bodhisattva-mahāsattva abides within
the state that he himself has conﬁrmed.
He does not follow the words of others,

and there is no one who can destroy [this
state]. (t 8: 343a)

(See also page 208, below)
If you want to act, then act translates
要用便用 , a phrase that has been inter-

preted by Japanese commentators in several ways, all of which seem forced. The
same injunction is found later in the text
(see page 267), but in a diﬀerent context.
Although it does not appear in the zl text,
it does appear in the jc (t 51: 446c), preceded by the words, “Today, followers of
the Way must not be bound by delusion”
如今道流且要不滯於惑.
In bewilderment translates 忙忙地, an
example of a grammatical construction
in which 地 is a suﬃx aﬃxed to an adverb.
This form was already found in the literature of the Six Dynasties, and by the Tang
it was an established usage (see Ōta 1958,
352). On rare occasions 地 is replaced by
底, as in 忽底 “suddenly,” 驀底 “in a ﬂash,”
恬底 “indiﬀerently,” 微微底 “slightly,” and
索索底 “candidly,” all found in the zj.

156 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
Without ever attaining freedom.
Editor’s note: This translates 不自信處 ,
rendered in Sasaki as “never be yourself ” (1975, 7). The translation has been
changed in accordance with the subsequent research of Yanagida (1977, 71) and
Iriya (1989, 33).
Thoughts 念念. The character 念 represents two unrelated Sanskrit terms: “smṛti,”
which indicates mindfulness, awareness,
or recollection; and “kṣana,” a “thoughtinstant,” the inﬁnitesimally short yet supposedly precise unit of time necessary
for a thought to ﬂash across the mind. 念
念 refers to the ceaseless passage of these
successive units of time, as thought after
thought uninterruptedly flows through
the mind.
Patriarch-buddha translates the compound 祖佛, a reversal of the more usual
Buddhist term 佛祖, “buddhas and patriarchs.” Although this expression generally referred to historical and semihistorical figures—“the patriarchs and the
buddhas”—it is more likely that in the ll
the master used it in an abstract or metaphysical sense, and it has thus been translated as “patriarch-buddha.”
The probability that it is being used in
an abstract sense is suggested by the manner in which the term is employed. Linji
uses both “buddhas and patriarchs” and
“patriarch-buddha,” the former ﬁve times,
the latter nine times; in seven of the latter usages the term appears in exactly the
same set phrase: 與祖佛不別, “you will not
differ from the patriarch-buddha.” This,
together with the fact that the phrase is
closely followed in the present passage by
the expression“living patriarch” 活祖—a
clearly metaphysical term—suggests that
Linji used “patriarch-buddha” in the symbolic sense of “buddha as our ancestor.”
That this metaphysical understanding of the word “patriarch” was already
present in the thought of Linji’s teacher

Huangbo may be seen from the following
extracts from the wl:
When Bodhidharma came to this land
and reached the two kingdoms of Liang
and Wei, there was only one man, Great
Teacher Ke 可大師, who secretly had faith
in his own mind, and at a word understood
that this very mind is buddha, that body
and mind are nonexistent, and that this
is what is called the Great Way. The great
Way fundamentally is universal sameness.
Therefore the faith that sentient beings
are of one and the same true nature, that
mind and this nature do not differ, that
this very nature is mind, and that mind
does not diﬀer from nature, this is what is
meant by “patriarch.” (t 48: 384b).
[Someone asked,] “What is buddha?” The
master [Huangbo] said, “Your mind, just
this is buddha, and buddha, just this is
mind. Mind and buddha are not different. Therefore it is said, ‘This very mind,
this is buddha.’ Separate from mind, furthermore, there is no buddha.” [Someone
then] said, “If one’s own mind is buddha,
then, when the Patriarch came from the
West, how did he hand down the transmission?” The master said, “When the
Patriarch came from the West he transmitted only mind-buddha. He pointed
directly to [the truth] that the minds of
all of you are none other than buddha,
and that mind and buddha do not diﬀer.
This is what is meant by ‘patriarch’.” (t
48: 385b)

The expression “patriarch-buddha” was
rarely used before the end of the Tang,
and then only in Chan, where it gradually came to replace “the buddhas and
patriarchs.” By the Song its use was almost
universal in the school.
The more general usage of the term
“patriarch-buddha” to refer to historical
and semihistorical ﬁgures is found in the
following examples from two of Linji’s
contemporaries:
When he had taken the high seat, the master [Dongshan] said, “If the words of the
patriarchs and buddhas resemble those of

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 157
a newly made enemy of your house, only
then is it proper for you to study [Chan].
If you can’t see through the patriarchs and
the buddhas, then you’ll be deceived by
them.” (t 47: 509c)
Someone asked, “Who is the man whom
neither the patriarchs nor the buddhas
can approach?” The master [Zhaozhou]
said, “He is not a patriarch or a buddha.”
(x 68: 81b)

tion to, or a relative clause modifying,
the preceding noun, in this case “you
who stand before….” The usage first
appeared during the Five Dynasties
(Ōta 1958, 355). However, in similar
sentences that appear later (see pages
160 and 216, below), “… 爾 … 底人 ,” 爾
and 人 are in apposition, “you, the men
who stand…,” and the phrase ending
with 底 is a relative clause modifying 人.

The placement of “patriarchs” before “buddhas” undoubtedly reﬂects the veneration
the Chinese felt for their ancestors in general, as well as the special reverence in
which adherents of the Chan school held
their own ancestral line.

The traditional Japanese reading of this
line, tada nanji ga menzen chōbōtei ze nari,
“he who right now in your presence is listening to my sermon,” incorrectly makes
“you” 爾 , which should be the subject, a
genitive governing “presence” 面前.

Do you want to know translates 爾欲得
識, in which 欲得 is a colloquial compound

Seeking something outside. That one
must not seek anything outside of oneself
was a constant theme in Chan (see also
the comment on “not accept the deluded
views,” page 155, above). Linji’s oft-repeated
admonition came down to him through
the three generations of teachers before
him.

verb meaning “to desire to…,” “to wish
to…”; 得 is a suffix. The usage appeared
during the Three Kingdoms era (221–279)
and was still common during the Tang
and the Five Dynasties. The traditional
Japanese reading, en to hossu, followed by
Dōchū, mistakenly divides the compound
into two words, thus giving it the meaning
of “to wish to be able to….”
He is none other than you who stand
before me listening to my discourse
translates 祇爾面前聽法底是 , a sentence
that contains two interesting grammatical
constructions:
1. The character 祇 is a particle that emphasizes the following noun, noun clause, or,
as in this case, pronoun: “this very you”
or “none other than you.” The noun, pronoun, or noun clause that 祇 precedes
is invariably in the nominative case.
2. The character 底 at the end of an
adjective or adjectival phrase forms
a noun-equivalent usually in apposi-

Mazu: “Rush about seeking outside, and
you only turn further and further away.”
(gy 1; x 68: 3c)
Baizhang: “From the beginning you have
not recognized that your own knowledge
and your own awakening, just these are
the buddha within yourself. [Instead] you
rush about seeking buddha outside.” (gy
1; x 68: 6c)
Huangbo: “Students of the Way lose sight
of their own original mind; they do not
recognize that it is buddha. So they keep
on seeking outside; by resorting to activities and utilizing practices, they hope to
attain realization step by step. Though they
seek diligently through successive kalpas,
never will they attain the Way.” (t 48: 380c)

158 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
莫錯、諸禪德。此時不遇、萬劫千生、輪回三界、徇好境掇
去、驢牛肚裏生。道流、約山僧見處、與釋迦不別。今日多般
用處、欠少什麼。六道神光、未曾間歇。若能如是見得、祇是
一生無事人。大德、三界無安、猶如火宅。此不是爾久停住
處。無常殺鬼、一剎那間、不揀貴賤老少。

“Make no mistake, worthy Chan men! If you don’t ﬁnd it here and now,
you’ll go on transmigrating through the three realms for myriads of kalpas
and thousands of lives, and, held in the clutch of captivating circumstances,
be born in the womb of asses or cows.
“Followers of the Way, as I see it we are no diﬀerent from Śākya. What do
we lack for our manifold activities today? The six-rayed divine light never
ceases to shine. See it this way, and you’ll be one who has nothing to do your
whole life long.
“Virtuous monks, ‘The three realms lack tranquility, just like a burning
house’. This is not a place we remain for long. The death-dealing demon of
impermanence comes in an instant, without discriminating between noble
and base, old and young.
Worthy Chan men 諸禪德 is an honoriﬁc term of address to the audience, equivalent in meaning to 道流 (see comment on
page 154, above).

Three realms translates 三界, the Chinese term for the Sanskrit “triloka” (or
“trailokya”). “Three realms” is a collective
term for “the world,” that is, for everything this side of enlightenment. The term
and the concepts it represents go back to
early Buddhism, and originally derived
from Brahmanic cosmology. The three
spheres comprising the triloka are:

however subtle. The inhabitants of the
kāmadhātu are those in the six states of
incarnate existence, from hell-dwellers
to gods. The state in which the gods
dwell is the highest form of incarnation
in this realm and comprises six progressively higher subdivisions.
2. 色界 (rūpadhātu): the realm of matter
just as it is, but without the usual aﬀective associations. It is the realm of pure
form, including pure thought-form. This
realm, with its seventeen or eighteen
heavens of form, may be considered
either as the abode of the gods or as a
representation of progressively finer
states of contemplation.
3. 無色界 (arūpadhātu): the world of nonform, or of pure consciousness, in which
even thought is nonexistent. Its four
states of contemplation lead through
consciousness of space only, time only,
and, finally, neither thought nor nothought.

1. 欲界 (kāmadhātu): the realm of sensuous desire, the beings of which are
permeated with desire in some form,

It should be noted that none of these states
is permanent; however long or short, all
are ﬁnite. When they end, they eventuate

Transmigrating translates 輪廻 , the
most commonly used Chinese equivalent
of the Sanskrit “saṃsāra.” Other renditions are 生死輪廻 and 流轉. 輪廻 refers to
the endless succession of lives and deaths,
likened to the infinite revolutions of a
wheel (輪廻 literally means “the turning
of a wheel”).

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 159
in reincarnation, whether in the same state
of being or in a different one. In a later
sermon (see page 239), Linji expounds
his own distinctive interpretation of the
three realms.
As I see it we are no different from
Śākya. Parallel passages in the jc and the
zl both have 古聖, “the ancient sages,” in
place of 釋迦, “Śākya,” and both have Linji
addressing 如今諸人, “now all of you.”
The six-rayed divine light 六道神光
refers to the marvelous activities of the six
sense organs (eye, ear, nose, tongue, body
[touch], and mind), which are here compared to rays of light (道 is a counter for
rays of light). The same idea is expressed
in Yongjia’s Zhengdao ge (Song of enlightenment):
The Mani-jewel—people do not know
That they themselves have received it
from the Tathāgata’s womb.
Its sixfold divine functioning is empty, yet
not empty
Its one perfect luminance embraces all
colors, yet is not color.
(t 48: 395c)

See also page 266, below.
One who has nothing to do 無事人 is
a term used to describe the fully enlightened person. Linji says, “Buddhas and
patriarchs are people with nothing to do”
(page 212). The expression may have originated with Baizhang Huaihai, who states:
Just he for whom at present, as regards
each and every external circumstance,
there is no delusion, no disturbance, no
anger, and no joy; and, as regards the gates
of his own six sense organs, has wiped and
settled them so that they are clean, this is
the one who is without anything to do. (x
68: 12c)

This expression was used by both Guishan
Lingyou and Huangbo Xiyun, the two
great disciples of Baizhang. Guishan says:
One who is like the clear stillness of
autumn water, pure, motionless, tranquil,
and unobstructed—such a one is called a

person of the Way, also a person who has
nothing to do. (t 47: 577b–c)

Huangbo writes:
One whose outer and inner feelings are
completely extinguished and who clings
to nothing, such is the one who has nothing to do. (t 48: 382c)
[Huangbo] said, ‘The hundred-odd kinds
of knowledge do not compare with nonseeking. This is the ultimate. The person of
the Way is the one who has nothing to do,
who has no mind at all and no doctrine
to preach. Having nothing to do, such a
person lives at ease. (t 48: 383b)

Virtuous monks translates 大德, a form
of address similar to the above-mentioned
“followers of the Way” 道流 and “worthy
Chan men” 諸禪德. This entire paragraph,
from “Virtuous monks” to “noble and
base, old and young,” is missing in both
the jc and the zl versions.
The three realms…. This sentence refers
to the famous parable in the Lotus Sutra,
where the world is likened to a burning
house 火宅 . Linji quotes two lines from
Kumārajīva’s translation of the sutra (t
9: 14c.22).
The death-dealing demon of impermanence translates 無常殺鬼. 無常 renders
the Sanskrit “anitya” (impermanence). In
the Chinese language, the word 無常 is
occasionally used as a synonym for “death”.
The Northern Nirvana Sutra contains one
of Śākyamuni’s famous pronouncements
on anitya: “All activities are impermanent;
they are that which is subject to birth and
extinction.” (t 12: 450a)
The first known use of the term 無常
殺鬼 is in the treatise Mohe zhiguan 摩訶
止觀 (Great calming and contemplation),
by Zhiyi 智顗 (538–597), founder of the
Tiantai school:
The death-dealing demon of impermanence 無常殺鬼 does not diﬀerentiate the
heroic and the virtuous. Everything is frail
and fragile, and cannot be relied upon.
How, then, can a man look forward to

160 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
爾要與祖佛不別、但莫外求。爾一念心上清淨光、是爾屋裏法
身佛。爾一念心上無分別光、是爾屋裏報身佛。爾一念心上
無差別光、是爾屋裏化身佛。此三種身、是爾即今目前聽法底
人。祇爲不向外馳求、有此功用。

“If you wish to diﬀer in no way from the patriarch-buddha, just don’t
seek outside.
“The pure light in a single thought of yours—this is the dharmakāya
buddha within your own house. The nondiscriminating light in a single
thought of yours—this is the saṃbhogakāya buddha within your own
house. The nondiﬀerentiating light in a single thought of yours—this is
the nirmāṇakāya buddha within your own house. This threefold body is
you, listening to my discourse right now before my very eyes. It is precisely
because you don’t run around seeking outside that you have such meritorious activities.
living a lifetime with any tranquility? He
rushes about seeking in the four directions, storing up goods and accumulating
property. But before what he has accumulated is suﬃcient, suddenly he goes on the
long journey. (t 46: 93c)

The ﬁrst Chan master to use the expression appears to have been Gui shan
Lingyou 潙山靈祐 (771–853). In the Guishan Dayuan Chanshi jingce 潙山大圓禪
師警策 (Chan master Guishan Dayuan’s
admonitions) we read:
The death-dealing demon of impermanence never for an instant desists. Life
cannot be prolonged, time cannot be
detained. (t 48: 1043a)

Instant is a translation of 剎那, which in
turn is a translation of the Sanskrit word
“kṣana,” which traditionally means the
shortest possible period of time. See also
page 156, above.
If you wish to differ in no way from
the patriarch-buddha translates 爾要與祖
佛不別, a statement similar to Linji’s comment a few lines earlier, “We are not diﬀerent from Śākya,” 與釋迦不別. This and the
following line are missing in the jc text,
but are present in the zl, where they are

identical with the ll version, except that
欲得 takes the place of 爾要. The meaning,

however, is the same.
The pure light… within your own
house. In this passage Linji speaks of the
human body as a house that is the dwelling place of the trikāya, the threefold body
of buddha 三身, which reveals its presence
through the three aspects of each instant
of human thought. The three bodies of the
trikāya are:
1. Dharmakāya 法身 : the unconditioned,
absolute buddha, beyond all form. The
dharmakāya is buddha viewed as truth
itself, and as such is the essence of wisdom and purity. Linji is referring to this
latter attribute when he characterizes
the light of the mind in its ﬁrst manifestation as 清淨 (Skr., pariśuddha), that is,
pure and free from any deﬁlement. The
dharmakāya is symbolically represented
by Vairocana Buddha.
2. Saṃbhogakāya 報身 : the “reward” or
“recompense” body. This is the body that
a buddha receives as a reward for fulﬁlling the vows taken during bodhisattvahood. It is defined under two aspects:
as the body received for the buddha’s
own enjoyment 自受用身 , and as that

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 161
received for the sake of others 他受用身.
In this second aspect the saṃbhogakāya
reveals itself to the bodhisattvas, to
whom alone it is traditionally said to be
visible, in order to enlighten and inspire
them. A typical representation of the
saṃbhogakāya is Amitābha/Amitāyus
Buddha.
3. Nirmāṇakāya 化身 or 應身: the body that
the buddha assumes when, in human
form, he appears in the world for the
purpose of bringing enlightenment to
others. A typical representation of the
nirmāṇakāya is Śākyamuni Buddha.

The doctrine of the threefold body of buddha is conﬁned to Mahayana Buddhism,
although undoubtedly its origin can be
found in ideas that arose in the older Buddhist traditions.
The Shimen bianhuo lun 十門辯惑論
(Clarifying ten questions regarding Buddhist doctrine) of Fuli 復禮 contains a
somewhat radical description of the three
bodies:
The dharmakāya is like the nature of the
empty sky. Clouds rise like steam and it is
veiled; mists disperse and it is bright. Its
nature in itself is unchanging and immutable. The saṃbhogakāya is like the sun
riding the empty sky. Its glorious radiance
illumines the high heavens; its brightness
shines everywhere. Its substance exists
eternally. The nirmāṇakāya is like reﬂections mirrored on the water. When [the
water] is still and clear, they appear; when
it flows or is turbid, they are indistinct.
Their brightness and darkness are inconstant, their coming and going ceaseless.
(t 52: 557b)

Dōchū, commenting on Linji’s description
of the saṃbhogakāya as “nondiscriminating light” 無分別光 and the nirmāṇakāya
as “nondifferentiating light” 無差別光 ,
summarizes two passages (t 45: 628c
and 629a) from the Huayan jing yihai
baimen 華嚴經義海百門 , a commentary
on the Avataṃsaka Sutra by Fazang 法藏

(643–712), third patriarch of the Huayan
school. Dōchū writes as follows:
Wisdom distinguishes the dharmas; this
is called discrimination 分別 . The dharmas have differences; this is called differentiation 差 別 . “Discrimination” is
used from the standpoint of mind; “differentiation” is used from the standpoint
of the objective world. The reason why
Saṃbhogakāya Vairocana Buddha is spoken of as bright and universally shining is
that wisdom shines everywhere. Though
it shines everywhere, it itself is without
any discrimination whatsoever. Therefore it is spoken of as nondiscriminating.
Furthermore, the nirmāṇakāya manifests
itself inﬁnitely in hundreds of millions of
different forms. Although its manifestations are inﬁnite, in itself it is without any
diﬀerentiation whatsoever. Therefore it is
spoken of as nondiﬀerentiating.

You,… right now translates 是爾即今 ,
in which 是 is a particle emphasizing the
following noun, pronoun, or noun clause,
which invariably is in the nominative case.
This usage of 是 is diﬀerent from that of
是 as a pronoun meaning “this” in written
Chinese, or as a copula in colloquial Chinese. It is similar to that of 祇, as explained
in the comment on page 157, and to that of
即, “just this,” “the very” in classical Chinese, as in the case of the ﬁrst 即 in 即心即
佛, “this very mind is the buddha.”
It is precisely because. Japanese tradition regards this sentence as conditional,
reading the first part as a subordinate
clause that expresses the condition, that is,
“If you do not seek outside, then you will
have this meritorious functioning.” There
is nothing to indicate such a nuance in the
original text, however.
Meritorious activities 功用 refers back
to the wondrous activities of the triune
body functioning through the human
mind.

162 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
據經論家、取三種身爲極則。約山僧見處、不然。此三種身是
名言、亦是三種依。古人云、身依義立、土據體論。法性身、
法性土、明知是光影。

“According to the masters of the sutras and śāstras, the threefold body is
regarded as the ultimate norm. But in my view this is not so. The threefold
body is merely a name; moreover, it is a threefold dependency. A man of old
said, ‘The [buddha-]bodies are posited depending upon manifested meaning; the [buddha-]lands are postulated in keeping with essential substance.’
Therefore we clearly know that ‘dharma-natured bodies’ and ‘dharmanatured lands’ are no more than shimmering reﬂections.
Masters of the sutras and śāstras was
a disparaging term used in Chan to refer
to scholars of other Buddhist schools who
emphasized the written word of the Buddhist canon, whereas Chan stressed the
“separate transmission outside the scriptures.” The same expression is found in a
sermon by Nanquan Puyuan:

Zhaozhou Congshen we ﬁnd, “Bodhi, nirvana, bhūtatathatā (essential suchness),
buddha-nature—all are but garments that
are attached to the body” (t 51: 446b).
Editor’s note: Yanagida glosses 依 as 立
場, “standpoint.” He also indicates the substitution of 依 for 衣 in a number of texts,
including the sy (Yanagida 1977, 76).

The masters of the sutras and śāstras say
that the dharmakāya is the ultimate norm,
and call it the “samādhi of the extinction
of the principle” 理盡三昧 or “samādhi of
the extinction of the signiﬁcation” 義盡三
昧. As for this old monk, in the past I was
taught by them “to go back to the origin,
to return to the source.” How awful that I
should nearly have come to understand in
this way! (gy 12; x 68: 69c)

A man of old 古人. Most commentators
identify this as Ci’en Dashi Kuiji 慈恩大師
窺基 (632–682), a Faxiang 法相 monk who
studied under the great translator-monk
Xuanzang and who was, after Xuanzang
himself, the most famous Chinese exponent of the Yogācāra (Weishi 唯識) school.
In the Dasheng fayuan yilin zhang 大乘法
苑義林章, Kuiji’s treatise on issues central
to Faxiang-school doctrine, in the section entitled “Fotu zhang” 佛土章 (Buddha
lands), there is a passage that Linji appears
to have paraphrased:

Threefold dependency 三種依 implies
that the “threefold body” of the buddha
is no more than a concept, a hypothetical viewpoint postulated for purposes
of discussion. 依 , or 依倚 , means something dependent on theory, and hence
not absolutely true or constant. It should
be noted that here, and in a number of
subsequent passages (e.g., sections 10 and
17), 依 (dependent) is meant to suggest its
homophone 衣 (robe), and that a play on
words is intended: “The threefold body is
merely a triple set of robes.”
This notion was not exclusive to Linji,
for in a sermon by Linji’s contemporary

The self-natured bodies and self-natured
lands are none other than the principle of
bhūtatathatā. Although in substance these
bodies and lands are undiﬀerentiated, yet,
because from the standpoint of buddha
and dharma there is a distinction between
manifestation [the phenomenal aspect]
and nature [the noumenal aspect], the
term “body” is given to the manifestation
of meaning, and the term “land” to the
nature of substance; or the term “body” is
given to the manifested form of enlight-

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 163

大德、爾且識取弄光影底人、是諸佛之本源、一切處是道流歸
舍處。是爾四大色身、不解說法聽法。脾胃肝膽、不解說法
聽法。虛空不解說法聽法。是什麼解說法聽法。是爾目前歷歷
底、勿一箇形段孤明、是這箇解說法聽法。若如是見得、便與
祖佛不別。但一切時中、更莫間斷、觸目皆是。祇爲情生智
隔、想變體殊、所以輪回三界、受種種苦。若約山僧見處、無
不甚深、無不解脫。

“Virtuous monks, you must recognize the one who manipulates these
reﬂections. ‘He is the primal source of all the buddhas,’ and the place to
which every follower of the Way returns.
“This physical body of yours, composed of the four great elements,
can neither expound the dharma nor listen to it; your spleen and stomach,
liver and gallbladder can neither expound the dharma nor listen to it; the
empty sky can neither expound the dharma nor listen to it. Then what can
expound the dharma and listen to it? This very you standing distinctly
before me without any form, shining alone—just this can expound the
dharma and listen to it! Understand it this way, and you are not diﬀerent
from the patriarch-buddha. Just never ever allow interruptions, and all that
meets your eyes will be right. But, because ‘when feeling arises, prajñā is
barred, and when thinking changes, the substance varies,’ people transmigrate through the three realms and undergo all kinds of suﬀering. As I see
it, there are none who are not of the utmost profundity, none who aren’t
emancipated.
enment and the term “land” to the dharma-nature itself. Although the substance
embraces the countless meritorious virtues of the principle of the bhūtatathatā,
the buddha-bodies and buddha-lands do
not fall into the category of matter, nor are
they mind or mental conditions. We can
speak of them only by depending upon
the signiﬁcation of diﬀerentiation within
the One Reality. (t 45: 370b)

“Dharma-natured bodies” and “dharma-natured lands.” Buddha-bodies and
buddha-lands are postulated upon the
“dharma-nature” 法性 (Skr., dharmatā),
a synonym for bhūtatathatā. Buddhist
doctrine distinguishes various “bodies”
身 (kāya) and “lands” 土 (kṣetra), but the

“dharma-natured body” 法性身 and the
“dharma-natured land” 法性土 are fundamental since they are the bhūtatathatā
observed as “embodiment” and as “place,”
that is, as the subject and as the sphere in
which the subject functions.
He is the primal source of all the buddhas. Linji is repeating a phrase spoken by
Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會, an important heir
of the Sixth Patriarch (see Introduction,
note 62). In Shenhui’s biography in the jc
we ﬁnd:
Another day, when the Patriarch was
addressing the assembly, he said, “I have
something that has neither head nor tail,
neither name nor designation, neither
back nor front. Do you recognize it?”

164 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
The master [Shenhui) stepped forward
and said, “It is the primal source of all the
buddhas and Shenhui’s buddha-nature as
well!” The Patriarch said, “I have just told
you that it has neither name nor designation, yet you now call it ‘the primal source
of the buddhas and buddha-nature’!” The
master bowed deeply and retired. (t 51:
245a)

The place to which every follower of
the Way returns translates 一切處是道流
歸舍處, which means, more literally, “every
place is the home to which the follower of
the Way returns.”
However, this does not seem to follow
from the first part of the sentence, “He
is the primal source of all the buddhas.”
The ll version undoubtedly represents
a textual corruption; the corresponding
passage in both the jc (t 51: 446c) and
the zl (t 48: 943c) reads 是一切道流歸
舍處: “[He is the primal source of all the
buddhas and] the home to which all the
followers of the Way return.” This makes
better sense, and is probably the original
wording of the sentence.
The four great elements 四大 (Skr.,
catvāri mahābhūtāni) are, according to
traditional Indian thought, the four basic
constituents of all things: earth, water, ﬁre,
and wind (or air). These are associated
respectively with four qualities (solidity,
liquidity, heat, and motion) and four functions (maintaining, gathering, ripening,
and causing to grow).
The entire sentence, “This physical body
of yours, composed of the four great elements” 是爾四大色身, is another example
of 是 used as an emphasizing particle; see
page 161, above. Here 是 emphasizes the
noun clause 爾四大色身. 是什麼, 是爾…底,
and 是這箇 …, which follow in the next
few lines, use 是 in the same way.
This very you standing distinctly before
me 是爾目前歷歷底 is another example
of a noun phrase ending with 底 , which
functions as the subject of the sentence;

see page 157, above. Dōchū punctuates the
continuation of this line 勿一箇形段孤明,
是這箇, giving it the Japanese reading, ikko
no gyōdan nōshite kōmyō naru ze nari;
shako…. Here 是 is taken to be the copula
of the ﬁrst clause, rather than as a particle
attached to 這箇.
When feeling arises…. Linji is here
quoting from the introductory lines of the
Xin Huayan jing lun 新華嚴經論 (Treatise
on the new translation of the Avataṃsaka
Sutra), by Li Tongxuan 李通玄, a famous
lay Buddhist scholar.
As to the origin of sentient beings, they
have the Sea of Prajñā as their source; conscious beings have the total dharma-body
as their essential substance. But when
feeling arises prajñā is barred, and when
thinking changes the substance varies. If
the origin is penetrated, feeling vanishes;
if mind is known, the substance becomes
uniﬁed. (t 36: 721a)

“When thinking changes the substance
varies” may mean that when thought
occurs, undivided reality (bhūtatathatā)
becomes diﬀerentiated.
“When feeling arises prajñā is barred”
is also used by Huangbo in the cf, in the
course of a dialogue with a person whom,
at the end of the discussion, he characterizes as “a man who can’t understand
what is said to him.” Huangbo has been
telling this person to seek dharma within
himself, not from teachers outside. The
unnamed person continues:
“Can this dharma be the same as the
empty sky?” The master said, “When has
the empty sky ever spoken to you of ‘same’
or ‘diﬀerent’? Provisionally I speak in this
way, and straightaway you produce [your
own] interpretation from my words.”
“Do you mean that one should not interpret for others?” The master said, “I have
never prevented you. After all, interpretation belongs to [the realm of] feeling,
and when feeling arises, prajñā is barred.”
“Then not to arouse feeling toward this
[dharma] is right?” The master said, “If

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 165

道流、心法無形、通貫十方。在眼曰見、在耳曰聞、在鼻嗅
香、在口談論、在手執捉、在足運奔。本是一精明、分爲六和
合。一心既無、隨處解脫。

“Followers of the Way, mind is without form and pervades the ten directions.
In the eye it is called seeing, in the ear it is called hearing.
In the nose it smells odors, in the mouth it holds converse.
In the hands it grasps and seizes, in the feet it runs and carries.
Fundamentally it is one pure radiance; divided it becomes the six harmoniously united spheres of sense. If the mind is void, wherever you are, you are
emancipated.
you don’t arouse feeling, who will speak of
[right]?” (t 48: 382b)

In the eye it is called seeing… runs
and carries. This passage is a quotation
of all but the ﬁrst two lines of a four-couplet poem, presently found in the jc (t
51: 218b). The verse is there ascribed to a
certain Boluoti 波羅提 (n.d.), allegedly a
disciple of Bodhidharma while the latter
was still living in India.
The jc text was undoubtedly taken
originally from the bz, compiled ca. 801
and one of the earliest works to present
an Indian lineage of the Chan school. It
begins with the six buddhas said to have
preceded Śākyamuni and continuing
through the ﬁrst six Chinese patriarchs.
The jc draws heavily upon the bz for the
material in its ﬁrst four fascicles; unfortunately, the extant sections of the bz do
not include fascicle 7, in which Boluoti’s
verse would have appeared. Since from
the mid-Tang the bz circulated widely
among members of the Chan school, Linji
was undoubtedly well acquainted with its
contents. The opening couplet omitted by
the master reads, “Within the womb it is
termed a body. / Born in the world, it is
called a man.” It should also be mentioned
that for the third character in the third
couplet, the ll has 嗅 for 辨 in the jc.

Fundamentally it is one pure radiance…. An almost identical statement is
found in the Shouleng’yan jing 首楞嚴經
(Śūraṅgama Sutra):
All illusory [dharmas] are utterly without
self-nature; the six sense organs are also
like this. Originally they depend upon one
pure radiance, which, divided, becomes
the six harmoniously united spheres of
sense. (t 19: 131a–b)

In the cf, Huangbo elaborates on this
same statement:
It is said, “Likewise, it is one pure radiance
that, divided, becomes the six harmoniously united spheres of sense.” The “one
pure radiance” is the One Mind. The “six
harmoniously united spheres of sense” are
the six sense organs [Skr., indriya, mūla].
These six sense organs unite severally
with the six objects of sensory perception [guṇas]: the eye unites with color,
the ear unites with sound, the nose unites
with odor, the tongue unites with ﬂavor,
the body unites with touch, the mind
unites with objective existences [dharmas]. Between [each sense organ and its
corresponding object of sensory perception] arise the six kinds of consciousness [vijñāna], making a total of eighteen
sense-realms [dhātu]. If you have understood that the eighteen sense-realms are
not really existent, you will combine the

166 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
山僧與麼說、意在什麼處。祇爲道流一切馳求心不能歇、上他
古人閑機境。道流、取山僧見處、坐斷報化佛頭、十地滿心、
猶如客作兒、等妙二覺、擔枷鎖漢、羅漢辟支、猶如厠穢、菩
提涅槃、如繋驢橛。何以如此、祇爲道流不達三祇劫空、所以
有此障礙。

“What is my purpose in speaking this way? I do so only because you followers of the Way cannot stop your mind from running around everywhere
seeking, because you go clambering after the worthless contrivances of the
men of old.
“Followers of the Way, if you take my viewpoint you’ll cut oﬀ the heads
of the saṃbhogakāya and nirmāṇakāya buddhas; a bodhisattva who has
attained the completed mind of the tenth stage will be like a mere hireling;
a bodhisattva of equivalent enlightenment or a bodhisattva of marvelous
enlightenment will be like pilloried prisoners; an arhat and a pratyekabuddha will be like privy-ﬁlth; bodhi and nirvana will be like hitching-posts for
asses. Why is this so? Followers of the Way, it is only because you haven’t yet
realized the emptiness of the three asamkhyeya kalpas that you have such
obstacles.
six harmoniously united spheres of sense
together into one pure radiance, and this
one pure radiance, just this is mind. Students of the Way all know this, but cannot
keep from putting their own interpretations on “one pure radiance” and “six
harmoniously united spheres of sense.” In
the end they are bound fast by objective
existences and cannot tally with original
mind. (t 48: 382a–b)

If the mind is void, wherever you are,
you are emancipated 一心既無隨處解脫 .
Both the zl and the zj versions have 心若
不生 , “if mind is not produced,” in place
of 一心既無 , while the jc has 心若不在 ,
“if mind does not exist.” The zl version
ends with this line. The same passage,
though in reverse order, is found near the
end of Yuanwu’s commentary on case 1
of the bl. For a similar statement, see the
tomb inscription allegedly composed by
Emperor Wu of Liang for Bodhidharma
and recorded in bz 8:

心無也, 剎那而登妙覺, 心有也, 曠劫而滯凡
夫

When mind is nonexistent, in a kṣana of
time one ascends to Marvelous Awakening; when mind is existent, throughout
countless kalpas one stagnates as an ordinary person.

Worthless contrivances of the men of
old 古人閑機境 . The Chinese, with their
strong veneration of the past, tended to
regard the classics and the sayings of the
ancients as the embodiment of all wisdom. Linji is here criticizing this attitude,
referring in particular to the sutras, commentaries, and records of the Buddhist
and Chan masters of earlier times.
The jc version lacks the entire passage
from “what is my purpose” to “worthless
contrivances of the men of old.”
Followers of the Way, if you take my
viewpoint 道流取山僧見處. The jc version
of this sermon introduces this section with
merely 山僧見處, “my view is,” thus causing

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 167
the remaining statements to be Linji’s personal views. The ll text, however, makes
all of the statements that follow contingent
upon the initial “if ” clause.
Cut oﬀ translates 坐斷, a curious word
not found outside of Chan literature,
where it is fairly frequent. One interpretation holds that the first character, 坐 ,
usually meaning “to sit,” is here equivalent
to 挫 or 剉, meaning “to cut,” and that the
compound is thus synonymous with 截
斷. As will be seen in the examples given
below, 截 斷 was used interchangeably
with 坐卻, which, in turn, was used interchangeably with 坐斷. It would seem, then,
that the three words 坐斷, 截斷, and 坐卻
were synonymous.
1. 截斷 / 坐坐
a. According to zj 9, Jiashan Shanhui
made the following remark in his ﬁrst
interview with Lepu Yuan’an, who later
became his heir: “Easy, easy, reverend
sir! Each mountain and each valley is
diﬀerent. Though you may cut oﬀ 截斷
the tongue of everyone in the world,
what are you going to do about those
who can talk without a tongue?”
b. The account of this same remark as
given in Lepu’s biography in the jc
is as follows: “Stop, stop, reverend
sir! Don’t be so quick and hasty! The
clouds and the moon are ever the
same, but each valley and mountain
is different. Reverend sir, you might
cut oﬀ 坐卻 the tongues of men in the
world, but how are you going to make
the man without a tongue talk?” (t 51:
331a)
2. 坐斷 / 坐斷
a. In the ll, when Huangbo gave to Linji
the and the armrest used by his own
teacher Baizhang, thus acknowledging
Linji as the heir of the transmission,
he said, “Hereafter you will cut oﬀ 坐
卻 the tongues of men in the world”
(page 327, below).
b. The jc version of this event is identical, except for the substitution of 坐斷
for 坐卻.

The two earliest Japanese commentaries
on the ll understood 坐斷 to mean the
same as 截斷, “to cut oﬀ.” The Bannan shō
萬安鈔 (1632) says, “ 坐斷 means to have
gotten rid of something. 坐斷 is equivalent
in meaning to 截斷” (31a). The Kassan shō
夾山鈔 (1654) says, “The explanation of 坐
斷 is ‘a strong man seizing a person and
holding him down under his knees’ [i.e.,
a kind of wrestling move]. But really 坐
斷 means 截斷 ” (18a). Nevertheless, over
time the Japanese Rinzai tradition came
to interpret it as “to sit ﬁrmly upon.” This
interpretation continues till this day,
although there is no basis for it linguistically or otherwise.
Saṃbhogakāya and Nirmāṇakāya
Buddhas. Chan teachers liked to emphasize that the saṃbhogakāya and the
nirmāṇakāya did not constitute the true
buddha. See, for example, the cf, where
Huangbo states, “Therefore it is said, the
saṃbhogakāya and the nirmāṇakāya are
not the true buddha, nor are they the ones
who preach the dharma” (t 48: 382a).
This statement, in turn, seems to have
been quoted from the Jin’gang bore boluomi jing lun 金剛般若波羅蜜經論 (Treatise on the Diamond-cutter perfection
of wisdom sutra), a work translated by
Bodhiruci (Putiliuzhi 菩提流志; ﬂ. 6th c.)
from an original ascribed to Vasubandhu
(Tianqin 天親):
The [Body] of Transformation
(nirmāṇakāya) is not the true buddha,
Nor is it the one who preaches the
dharma.
Preaching the dharma is taken to be the
nondual [dharma],
[But] the [dharma preached] without
preaching is far apart from verbal
forms. (t 25: 784b)

Thus the sutra states that only the nirmāṇakāya is not the true buddha, while the
cf says the same of both the saṃbhogakāya
and the nirmāṇakāya. From the earlier
passage in which Linji says that, in his

168 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
opinion, “the threefold body is merely a
name” (page 162), it is apparent that he
took the dharmakāya to be as unreal as the
other two bodies of the buddha.
The completed mind of the tenth
stage 十地滿心. According to the original
bodhisattva doctrine, there are ten stages
地 (Skr., bhūmi) between the arising of the
will to attain the enlightened mind 發菩
提心 (bodhi-citta-utpāda) and the attainment of buddhahood itself. The Indian
traditions are in disagreement with regard
to details. In China the various schools,
with their syncretistic tendencies, devised
their own systems, combining elements
from the Indian tradition and even adding to them. The apex was reached in
the Tiantai school, where the course of
enlightenment is said to consist of ﬁftytwo stages:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.

The ten [degrees of] faith 十信
The ten abodes 十住
The ten actions 十行
The ten goals 十廻向
The ten stages 十地
Equivalent enlightenment 等覺
Marvelous enlightenment 妙覺

Equivalent enlightenment and marvelous
enlightenment, though listed as the concluding stages of the bodhisattva’s career,
are, at the same time, regarded as the initial and completed stages of buddhahood,
respectively.
In some schools the tenth of the ten
stages is further divided into three degrees
三心 , namely: entering mind 入心 , abiding mind 住心, and completed mind 滿心.
Completed mind is, in eﬀect, the stage to
which Linji refers: “the completed mind of
the tenth stage.”
Regarding this final degree, see the
Yuqie shidi lun lüezuan 瑜伽師地論略纂
(Outline of the Treatise on the stages of
yoga practice) by Ci’en Dashi Kuiji: “The
tenth stage has three [degrees of] mind:
the first is entering mind, the second is
abiding mind, and the third is completed

mind” (t 43: 165a). For an explanation of
the fifty-two stages (but in which these
three degrees are not mentioned) see
Mochizuki Bukkyō daijiten 2:1214.
Two other terms often found in connection with the ﬁfty-two stages are:
a. The four fruits [of sagehood] 四果, i.e.,
the four grades of attainment in the
Hinayana scheme of enlightenment
(Skr., catvāri phalāni): 1) entering the
stream 須陀洹 (srota-āpanna); 2) one
more birth 斯陀含 (sakṛdāgāmin); 3)
no rebirth 阿那含 (anāgāmin); and 4)
enlightened 阿羅漢 (arhat).
b. In Tiantai doctrine, the three worthy
states [of a bodhisattva] 三賢, i.e., the ten
abodes, the ten actions, and the ten goals,
mentioned above.

Outside of Chan, in spite of the diﬀerences among the various schools, there
is common agreement that the ﬁfty-two
stages bring the student progressively
closer to buddhahood, which is attained
upon completion of the final stage. In
Chan, however, there is a tendency to
regard the fifty-two stages as representing useless levels of enlightenment. See,
for example, the cf, where, having quoted
Baozhi 寶(保)志(誌) (418–514) to the eﬀect
that buddha is a creation of the mind and
that there is no point in looking for him
in written words, Huangbo goes on to
say, “Though you were to study until you
had attained the three worthy states, the
four fruits, and the completed mind of
the tenth stage, still you would only be
sitting within the secular and the sacred”
(t 48: 383b).
Deshan Xuanjian expresses himself
in the same fashion, though even more
forcefully, in words that much resemble
the present passage in the ll:
The viewpoint of this old fellow Deshan is
not at all like this. Here there is no buddha,
no patriarch. Bodhidharma was a sandpaper-chinned barbarian. The bodhisattvas
of the ten stages are dung carriers. Those
who have attained equivalent enlighten-

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 169
ment are precept-breaking louts; bodhi
and nirvana are hitching-posts for asses.
The twelve divisions of the teachings are
the census-records of demons and spirits,
paper [ﬁt only] for cleaning running sores.
[Those who have attained] the four fruits
and those who have attained the three
worthy states, those who have aroused
bodhicitta, and those who have completed
the ten stages are all ghosts guarding old
graves. Can any of them save even himself? Buddha is the old barbarian’s dungwiper. (zh; x 79: 173a)

Hireling translates 客作兒, a term that
originally referred to a person employed
by another, then became a general designation for a menial. See the Lotus Sutra,
“Xinjie pin” 信解品 (Chapter on belief
and understanding), which presents the
famous parable of a beggar who is the lost
son of a rich man. The son has come by
chance to the estate of his father, who recognizes him as his long-lost son, while the
son remains unaware that the rich man is
his father. At ﬁrst the father puts his son to
work as a menial in his household. Then,
after some time has passed, the father
announces a plan to adopt him. “At this
time the poor man, although he rejoiced
at his good fortune, still regarded himself as a hired laborer 客作兒” (t 9: 17a).
Also, the Chuogeng lu 輟耕錄 (Notes while
resting from farm work) (1366), fascicle
7:11, states that “in the slang of the Jiangxi
region, one curses people by calling them
‘hireling’ 客作兒.”
A bodhisattva of equivalent enlightenment or a bodhisattva of marvelous
enlightenment. The term in the ll, 等妙二
覺, is a collective reference to the two highest degrees of bodhisattvahood: equivalent enlightenment 等覺 and marvelous
enlightenment 妙覺. Neither term can be
restored to a convincing Sanskrit original;
both are probably Chinese inventions.
The Yuqie shidi lun lüezuan, cited above,
speaks of the two degrees as follows:

One who is within this [degree of] completed mind is called a bodhisattva of
equivalent enlightenment. [The state of]
tathāgata is called marvelous enlightenment. The [degrees of] entering and abiding-in are not called equivalent enlightenment. One who is in either of these two
[degrees of] mind is called one who has
not yet manifested equivalent enlightenment; but one who is in the [degree of]
completed mind is called one who has
already manifested equivalent enlightenment. Also, he who is in [the state of]
equivalent enlightenment is a buddha; he
is not necessarily a bodhisattva of equivalent enlightenment.
In other words, this bodhisattva in
the present stage, [though] he has not
yet achieved [the state of buddha of ]
equivalent enlightenment, can transform
himself into whatsoever body is required
and preach the dharma as a cloud showers down rain in abundance. If he has
achieved [the state of] a buddha of equivalent enlightenment, he can also transform
himself into whatsoever body is required
and preach the dharma as a cloud showers
down rain. That is to say, he both resembles a buddha and is like a bodhisattva of
equivalent enlightenment.

The ﬁnal stage of the bodhisattva, the stage
of marvelous enlightenment, is described
as follows by Zhiyi, founder of the Tiantai
school, in his Si jiao yi 四教義 (The meaning of the four teachings):
The stage of marvelous enlightenment is
the [state of] mind that follows the diamond [samādhi] [another term for 等覺].
It is the clear and bright great enlightenment. It is the ultimate source of marvelous wisdom wherein all the remaining inﬂuences of illusion are completely
exhausted, so it is called true emancipation. It is awe-inspiring and free from vexations, utterly still and eternally shining,
so it is called marvelous enlightenment.
(t 46: 759c)

Bannan, using a metaphor taken from
Tendai sources, comments, “Equivalent

170 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

enlightenment is like the fourteenth-night
moon, marvelous enlightenment is like
the ﬁfteenth-night moon [i.e., completely
full].”
Pilloried prisoner refers to a prisoner
whose body is chained and whose head
and hands are locked in a wooden cangue.
The Guanyin yishu 觀音義疏 , by Guanding 灌頂 (561–632], which records the
sermons of Zhiyi on the Lotus Sutra chapter “Guanshiyin pusa pumen pin” 觀世音
菩薩普門品 (Chapter on the universal gate
of Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara), contains a
passage quite similar in concept:

e. 應眞, “the worthy true one”;
f. 應儀, “the one of worthy mien.”

The status of arhat is the fourth of the four
fruits of sagehood (see note, page 168),
and constitutes the ﬁnal stage of a process
of enlightenment that commences with
listening to the instructions of a buddha.
辟支 is an abbreviation of the compound
辟支佛, which is a rough transliteration of
the Sanskrit “pratyekabuddha” (see note,
page 122).

is a transliteration into Chinese of a word
such as “arahan,” a Prakritic form of the
Sanskrit “arhan,” from ARH, “to be able, to
be worthy.” Speciﬁcally, the word means
“one who is able [to break the bonds of
birth-and-death].” In addition to a number of other transliterated versions, the
Chinese gave several equivalents in translation, including:

Emptiness of the three asaṃkhyeya
kalpas 三祇劫空. The characters 祇劫 are
an abbreviation of the expression 阿僧
祇劫, which, in turn, is a transcription of
the Sanskrit term “asaṃkhyeya-kalpa, ”
or “incalculable eons.” The character 三 ,
“three,” refers to the three eons of incalculable length that are traditionally regarded
in Buddhism as necessary for bodhisattvas to reach the end of their practice and
become buddhas. The complete phrase, 三
祇劫空 , is found only in Chan literature,
and refers to the Chan view that all stages
accomplished by the bodhisattva, including the attainment of buddhahood itself,
are void and empty.
The passage traditionally quoted to substantiate this view is from the Yuanjue jing
圓覺經 (Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment),
a text held in high regard in the Chan
school during the middle and late Tang,
but which is, in all probability, a spurious
work produced in China toward the end
of the seventh century:

a. 應供, “the one worthy of oﬀerings”;
b. 殺賊 , “the slayer of his enemies (based
upon a mistaken etymology, apparently
of Indian origin, that traces the word
“arhan” back to “ari,” “enemy,” and HAN,
“to kill”);
c. 無生 , “[he who shall be] without [re]
birth”;
d. 離惡, “the one separated from evil”;

Good men, the marvelous and perfectly
enlightened mind of all the tathāgatas
intrinsically possesses neither bodhi nor
nirvana, neither the attainment of buddhahood nor the nonattainment of buddhahood, neither false revolving on the
wheel [of transmigration] nor the nonrevolving on the wheel [of transmigration].
(t 17: 915c)

Delusion regarding the temporal and the
real is known as hand-fetters; delusion
regarding samādhi 定 and prajñā 慧 is
known as [foot-]fetters; delusion regarding the middle way is known as a cangue;
delusion regarding the dharmakāya is
known as chains. Such things bind the
practicer, who cannot release himself. (t
34: 928a)

An arhat and a pratyekabuddha 羅漢辟
支. Here the compound 羅漢 is an abbreviation of the term 阿羅漢. This, in turn,

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 171

若是眞正道人、終不如是。但能隨緣消舊業、任運著衣裳、要
行即行、要坐即坐、無一念心希求佛果。緣何如此。古人云、
若欲作業求佛、佛是生死大兆。

“A true follower of the Way is never like this; conforming with circumstances as they are he exhausts his past karma; accepting things as they
are he puts on his clothes; when he wants to walk he walks, when he wants
to sit he sits; he never has a single thought of seeking buddhahood. Why is
this so? A man of old said:
If you seek buddha through karma-creating activities,
Buddha becomes the great portent of birth-and-death.
A true follower of the Way is never like
this. The jc text of this sermon ends here,
except for two short concluding lines, perhaps added by the compiler.
Conforming with circumstances as
they are he exhausts his past karma. Editor’s note: The original translation renders the Chinese 隨緣消舊業 as “according with circumstances he makes use of
his past karma”; a note explains, “Though
the classical meaning of the word 消 as
a transitive verb is ‘to disperse, to get rid
of, to put an end to,’ in colloquial usage
the word means ‘to use, to make use of,
to spend.’” However, both Iriya (1989, 42)
and Yanagida (1977, 81) later recognized
that the classical meaning of 消 was, in
fact, intended.
Yanagida, for example, while taking
note of the “to make use of ” meaning,
concluded that here the sense was more
that of “put an end to,” since Linji almost
certainly used the term in the same way as
his teacher Huangbo, who in the cf writes
as follows:
Therefore, from the beginning bodhi
and all such dharmas have not existed.
Whatever the Tathāgata preached was
only [an expedient] for converting people.
Just as one gives yellow leaves in place
of gold to stop the tears of a little child.
Therefore, in reality no dharma called
samyaksaṃbodhi (unsurpassed, perfect

enlightenment) exists. When you have
understood this, what need have you to
concern yourself with such petty things?
Simply conforming with circumstances as
they are, exhaust 消 your past karma, and
above all don’t create new misfortunes.
Then your inner mind will be completely
bright. (t 48: 386c)

Accepting things as they are translates 任運 . In the Taoist view, the course
of nature should be accepted without
attempting to interfere with it in any way.
Only by putting full trust in the flow of
life can one return to the state of complete
naturalness, and thus attain true freedom.
This concept plays an important part in
early Chan. For example, in the Xin ming
心銘 (Mind verse), Farong 法融 (594–657),
ﬁrst patriarch of the Niutou 牛頭 school,
comments:
Mind does not have diﬀerent (various)
minds;
It does not cut oﬀ greed or licentiousness.
Its nature is empty and of itself apart;
Accepting things as they come it sinks or
ﬂoats.
It is neither clear nor muddy, neither is it
shallow or deep. (t 51: 457c)

Mazu is recorded to have said:
That which is produced by mind is called
form. Since we know that form is empty,
whatever is produced is unproduced.
When you understand this thoroughly,

172 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
in accordance with the occasion simply
put on your robe, eat your food, or “nourish the sacred fetus” 長養聖胎; accepting
things as they come 任運, pass your days.
What more is there to do? (Mazu yulu 馬
祖語錄 [Recorded sayings of Mazu], as
quoted in Ui 1939–1943, 2: 523.6–8):
Do not misconstrue the past, the present,
or the future. The past has not gone, the
present does not stay, the future has not
come. Tranquilly sitting erect, accepting
things as they come 任運 , but not being
bound, this is indeed what is called emancipation. (cf; t 48: 384a)

When he wants to walk he walks. This
describes the complete freedom of action
possessed by the man of the Way. See the
poem entitled Ledao ge 樂道歌 (Song of
enjoying the Way) by Nanyue Mingzan 南
嶽明瓚 (n.d.), found in both the jc and zj
3: “When I want to go I simply go / When
I want to stay I simply stay” (t 51: 461b).
The Ledao ge seems to have been widely
known. It is quoted in its entirety in zj 3,
as well as in the jc (t 51: 461b–c).
Of Nanyue Mingzan himself little is
known. He joined the assembly of Puji
普寂 (651–739), second patriarch of the
Northern school of Chan, who was teaching on Mount Song 嵩 , not far from the
city of Luoyang 洛陽, and became one of
Puji’s heirs. Later Mingzan lived in a hut
on Mount Nanyue 南嶽 in southeastern
Hunan. There he was known as Lanzan 懶
贊. A short biography is found in the xg (t
50: 834a–b); zj 3 mentions him as an heir
of Puji. Mingzan appears in an episode
related by Yuanwu Keqin in his comment
on the verse in bl case 34:
Lanzan lived in seclusion in a stone
cave on Mount Heng 衡 [i.e., Nanyue].
Emperor Dezong 德宗 [r. 779–805] heard
his name and dispatched a messenger to
summon him to the court. When the messenger reached the cave he announced the
command of the Son of Heaven, then said,
“Your Reverence should rise and acknowledge the Imperial Benevolence.”

Zan, who at the time was poking a ﬁre
of cow-dung, pulled out a roasted root and
began to eat. As it was wintertime, mucous
was dripping down onto his chin, and he
made no answer. The messenger laughed
and said, “May I suggest that Your Reverence wipe the mucous away?” “Why should
I go to that bother for a common man?”
Zan replied. In the end he did not rise. The
messenger returned and reported to the
throne. Dezong was ﬁlled with admiration.
(t 48: 173b)

A man of old refers to Baozhi 寶誌 (or
保誌) (418–514), also known as Liang Baozhi 梁寶志 and Zhigong 誌公. Baozhi has
a biography in gz 10 (t 50: 394a–395b),
as well as a brief notice appended to the
biography of Tao Hongjing 陶弘景 (456–
536) in Nan shi 南史 (History of the southern dynasties) 76.
Both biographical notices are essentially catalogues of strange and wonderful
tales associated with Baozhi; indeed, a
biographical notice about him appears
in the Fayuan zhulin 法苑珠林 (Precious
grove of the dharma garden), an encyclopedic compilation of scriptural passages
and Buddhist miracle stories by Daoshi
道世 (591–683), which mentions Baozhi
as one of thirteen persons alleged to have
experienced a “supernatural response” 感
應 from buddha (t 53: 519b–520a; 感 is the
human dynamic of faith in buddha, while
應 is buddha’s response to that faith). In
jc 27 he is listed as one of ten Chan masters who, though they did not teach, were
nevertheless widely renowned (t 51: 429c–
430a). Baozhi’s verses and hymns were
singled out by Chan teachers from early
times for use in their sermons, as may be
seen from quotations found in the bg, the
zl, and the cf (see page 168, above). See
Makita 1957 for a detailed modern study
of Baozhi.
If you seek buddha…. The passage Linji
quotes here is from the ﬁrst of ten poems
by Zhigong collectively entitled Dasheng
zan 大乘讚 (In praise of the Mahayana):

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 173

大德、時光可惜。祇擬傍家波波地、學禪學道、認名認句、求
佛求祖、求善知識意度。莫錯、道流。爾祇有一箇父母、更求
何物。爾自返照看。古人云、演若達多失卻頭、求心歇處即無
事。大德、且要平常、莫作模樣。

“Virtuous monks, time is precious. And yet, hurrying hither and thither,
you try to learn meditation, to study the Way, to accept names, to accept
phrases, to seek buddha, to seek a patriarch, to seek a good teacher, to think
and speculate.
“Make no mistake, followers of the Way! After all, you have a father
and a mother—what more do you seek? Turn your own light inward upon
yourselves!
A man of old said,
Yajñadatta [thought he had] lost his head,
But when his seeking mind came to rest, he was at ease.
“Virtuous monks, just be ordinary. Don’t put on airs.
If you seek buddha through karmacreating activities / Karma is the great
portent of birth-and-death.
Birth-and-death karma always accompanies you / As in a dark prison where day
never dawns. (t 51: 449b)

In the above quotation, “the great portent
of birth-and-death” is said to be “karma,”
not “buddha” as in the ll. Commentators are divided as to which is the original
version, some holding that the “karma” of
the poem is a copyist’s error influenced
by the appearance of the same word just
above, while others maintain that Linji
altered the passage to suit his own particular views.
Hurrying hither and thither translates
傍家 , an expression found several times

in the ll. In the colloquial language of
the Song and Yuan, 家 (or sometimes its
homophone 價) was often used as a suﬃx,
in most cases adverbial.
You try to…. In the traditional Japanese reading of this sentence, zenchishiki
o motomen to gi shite itaku su, the word
擬 , “to try,” applies only to the verbal

phrases—learning meditation, studying
the Way, accepting names, etc.—that precede 意度 , “to speculate.” The character
擬, however, governs every verb that follows it, including 意度 ; thus the correct
Japanese reading is, zenchishiki o motomete itaku sen to gi su (“You try… to seek a
patriarch, to seek a good teacher, to think
and speculate”).
To learn meditation 學禪學道; to study
the Way 學禪學道. The two terms 禪 (with
the meaning of “meditation”) and 道 (with
the meaning of “the Way”) were often used
together in this way by the Chan masters
of the late Tang. The not-infrequently disparaging connotation refers, of course, to
the attempts of students to “study” these
intangibles, as in the following passages:
Now every hour of the day, while you are
walking, standing, sitting, or lying, just
concentrate on no-mind, and eventually
you are sure to attain [it]…. But since you
can’t do this, you think you must study
meditation and study the Way 學禪學道
with your mind. What has the buddhadharma to do with this? (cf; t 48: 383c)

174 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
Going about with a staﬀ over your shoulder, you say, “I am practicing meditation,
I am studying the Way” 參禪學道 . Thus
you seek a principle that will surpass buddha and outstrip the patriarchs. (yk; t
47: 551a)
Each of you should himself seek the place
where you entrust your life. Don’t wander vainly from province to province
and from country to country. But all you
want to do is to play about with trifling
words. As soon as this old monk moves
his mouth, you inquire about meditation,
inquire about the Way 問禪問道 , up and
down, what about, how about! (yk; t 47:
552a)

To accept names, to accept phrases 認
名認句. The verb 認, when used, as in the
ll, with words like “names” 名 or “phrases”
句 as its object, refers to the act of believing (concluding) that such names and
phrases are in themselves real, and, as a
result, becoming attached to them. Later
in the text, Linji speaks speciﬁcally of this
when he says, “They are just empty names,
and these names also empty. All you are
doing is taking these worthless names to
be real” (see pages 221–222).
A good teacher translates 善知識, from
the Skr. “kalyāṇamitra,” literally “good
friend.” This is a word found only in Buddhist literature, where it means “good
friend” in the specific sense of a person
who helps another to achieve the goal of
buddhahood. The following passage from
the Nirvana Sutra describes at length the
attributes of the kalyāṇamitra:
Good people! By “good friend” is meant a
bodhisattva, a buddha, a pratyekabuddha,
or one among the śrāvakas who believes
in the universal doctrine. Why is such
a person called “good friend”? A “good
friend” can teach sentient beings to break
away from the ten evils and practice the
ten virtues. Therefore he is called a “good
friend.”
Furthermore, a “good friend” preaches
in accordance with the dharma and acts in

accordance with what he preaches. What
is meant by “preaches in accordance with
the dharma and acts in accordance with
what he preaches”? It includes everything
from not taking life himself and teaching
others not to take life to practicing correct
view himself and teaching others to practice correct view.
One who is like this can be called a true
“good friend.” He himself cultivates bodhi
and can instruct others in how to cultivate
and practice bodhi. Therefore is he called
a “good friend.” He himself can cultivate
and practice faith, discipline, almsgiving,
wide learning, and transcendental wisdom, and can also instruct others in faith,
discipline, almsgiving, wide learning, and
transcendental wisdom. For this reason,
too, is he called a “good friend.” Because
a “good friend” has good dharmas. What
good dharmas? In whatsoever he does
he does not seek his own joy, but always
seeks joy for the sake of sentient beings.
When he sees that others have faults, he
does not talk of their shortcomings, but
always makes known their good qualities.
Therefore is he called “good friend.” (t 12:
510c–11a)

You have a father and a mother 爾祇有
一箇父母. This common colloquial expression implies that having been born, one is
complete, with nothing lacking. The same
implication is found in the statement, “But
you, weren’t you born of a mother?” (see
below, page 223).
Editor’s note: Iriya translates 父 母 ,
“father and mother,” as “master” 主人公
(1989, 44); Yanagida explains its meaning
as “the original source of the self ” 自己の
本源 (1977, 82).
Turn your own light inward upon yourselves translates 返照 , a word Guifeng
Zongmi deﬁnes in terms of the philosophy
of the dq. His analysis appears in his Yuanjue jing lüeshu chao 圓覺經略疏鈔 (Subcommentary to the Yuanjue jing lüeshu):
One must say that all sentient beings possess original enlightenment 本覺, and that

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 175
original enlightenment is brightness 明 .
Why, then, speak of “without brightness”
無明 [avidyā]? The answer is that the completed illumination 照了 of initial enlightenment 始覺 is absent 無 . The meaning
is as follows: it is just like a mirror that,
though originally bright, when temporarily soiled by dust is called dull 不明, but,
when cleaned, shines forth and is then
called bright. So, too, in the Chan school
返照 means “to illuminate one’s own original enlightenment by initial enlightenment.” Therefore we say 返, “to return to.”
(x 9: 882c)

The term is found frequently in both Chan
and other Buddhist writings. An example
of the former is found in the Wuxing lun
悟性論, attributed to Bodhidharma:
If he who hears this dharma causes the
mind of faith to arise for an instant of
time, this person, by setting in motion
the Great Vehicle, will transcend the three
realms. The three realms are greed, anger,
and ignorance. When greed, anger, and
ignorance are overturned, they become
discipline, samādhi, and prajñā, respectively. This is called “surmounting the three
realms.” But greed, anger, and ignorance
have no real nature. It is only on account
of sentient beings that these names are
used. He who can return to and illuminate
返照 [his own mind] with perfect clarity
sees that the nature of greed, anger, and
ignorance is none other than buddhanature. Besides greed, anger, and ignorance there is no other buddha-nature. (t
48: 370c)

Also, the Yuan edition of the Platform
Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch has the monk
Huiming 慧明 , after attaining enlightenment through the words of the Sixth
Patriarch, further ask,
“Besides the hidden words and hidden
meanings [you conveyed to me] just now,
are there yet more secret meanings?”
Huineng said, “That which I have told you
is not secret. If you return to and illumine
[your own mind] 返照, [you will ﬁnd] the
secret within.” (t 48: 349b)

And finally, Chan master Mazu says
in one of his sermons, “If you can for an
instant of time return and illumine 返照
[your own mind], the total body is the
sacred mind” (x 68: 4a).
A man of old. Neither the “man of old”
nor the poem from which Linji quotes can
be identiﬁed. The lines apparently refer to
a passage in the Śūraṅgama Sutra (t 19:
121b). In this passage the Buddha instructs
his disciple Purṇa that the mind is from
the beginning perfectly enlightened, but
that due to delusion we are unaware of
this and seek enlightenment outside.
When the causes of delusion are cut off
delusion ceases, and this cessation itself
is enlightenment. To illustrate this teaching the Buddha relates the story of Yajñadatta, a man of Śrāvastī, who one morning
caught a glimpse of his face in a mirror.
He fell in love with his beautiful features
and became enraged one day when, for
some reason, he was unable to see them.
He believed that a goblin had taken his
head away, and ran about madly searching
for it. When he discovered that his head
had always been on his own body, his mad
search came to an end.
Be ordinary 平常 as used here and elsewhere in the ll derives from the famous
saying “the ordinary mind is the Way” 平
常心是道 , which Linji later quotes. For a
detailed discussion, see page 219, below.
Don’t put on airs 莫作模樣). The original meaning of 模樣 is “style, appearance,
air, manner,” and of 作模樣 , “to keep up
appearances, to put on airs.” See the following passage from a sermon by Deshan
Xuanjian in zh 20:
There is another lot, who by threes and
twos put their heads together and consider as follows: “Now where’s a nice
comfortable palace to pass the winter and
spend the summer, to hear pleasant talks
about the Way of Chan, to be instructed
in and acquire abstract principles?” Young
sirs, if you think like this you are always

176 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
有一般不識好惡禿奴、便即見神見鬼、指東劃西、好晴好雨。
如是之流、盡須抵債、向閻老前、吞熱鐵丸有日。好人家男
女、被這一般野狐精魅所著、便即捏怪。瞎屡生、索飯錢有日
在。

There’re a bunch of shavepates who can’t tell good from bad; they see spirits,
they see demons; they point to the east, they point to the west; they like fair
weather, they like rain. The day will come when such men as these, every one
of them, will have to repay their debts in front of Old Yama by swallowing
red-hot iron balls.
“[You] sons and daughters of good families, bewitched by this pack of
wild foxes, lose your senses. Blind idiots! Some day you’ll be made to pay up
for the vittles you’ve eaten!”
seeking your own ease. What a ﬁne kind
of principle this is! There’ll come a day
when you’ll all land in hell, and don’t say
I didn’t warn you! No matter where you
are, you never pick a single stalk of greens
or carry a single bundle of ﬁrewood. One
ﬁne morning, when your luck gives out,
you’ll have nothing but grass to eat, that’s
all! Uselessly you squander the oﬀerings
of believers, unwarrantedly you call yourselves parties to learning. Furthermore,
you put on the airs of Chan masters 作禪
師摸樣 . You are of no beneﬁt to anyone!
(x 79: 174a)

Bunch translates 一般 , an indefinite
plural that means the same in the colloquial Tang language as 一班, 一等, and 一
輩, all of which were used from the Song
period onward.

intended to criticize esoteric Buddhist and
Taoistic practices adopted from or closely
related to shamanism. Deshan Xuanjian
says:
Young sirs, don’t seek buddha. Buddha is
a big murderer. How many men has he
tricked into entering the pit of the demon
of lust! Don’t seek Mañjuśrī or Samantabhadra [see page 184, below]. They are
rascally field hands. What a pity that a
ﬁne young fellow, having swallowed their
poison, tries to put on the face and nostrils
of a Chan master. He sees spirits, he sees
demons 見神見鬼; then later, having lost
his reason, he runs hither and yon looking
for a witch who divines by thumping a
tile! (zh; x 79: 173c–174a)

Shavepates translates 禿奴, which could
be more literally rendered as “bald rascal,”
a term of contempt for Buddhist monks.

They point to the east, they point to the
west 指東畫西 seems to mean to indulge in
quibbles and avoid giving direct answers.
zj 14, in the section on Mazu’s disciple
Shanshan 杉山 (n.d.), says:

They see spirits, they see demons 見
神見鬼. The entire sentence of which this
phrase is a part is couched in very colloquial terms, and its exact meaning is
rather obscure. “They see spirits, they see
demons” seems to refer to people who
utter various pronouncements when in a
state of trance or delirium, and is probably

Once, when Shanshan and Nanquan
[Puyuan] were sitting around the fire,
Nanquan said to Shanshan, “Don’t give
me any pointing to the east and pointing to the west 指東指西. Just say directly
what the essential point is.” Thereupon
Shanshan flung down the fire-tongs he
was holding. Nanquan said, “Even if you
behave that way, you are still inferior to

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 177
old teacher Wang, but with a hair’s breadth
of diﬀerence.”

They like fair weather, they like rain
好晴好雨 is the most obscure of the three

phrases, but it seems from other examples
to mean to praise or flatter everything
or everyone present in order to create a
favorable impression. The phrase may be
interpreted as a verb-plus-object, “to like
fair weather, etc.,” which seems preferable in the present ll passage, or as an
adjective-plus-noun, “lovely weather, etc.,”
in which case the Japanese reading would
be yoki hare. The following passage, from
Jingqing Daofu, is an example of the latter
reading:
Addressing the assembly, the master
[Jingqing] said, “Lovely weather! Lovely
rain!” Then he continued, “Not because it
is [really] lovely weather do I say ‘lovely
weather!’ nor because it is [really] lovely
rain do I say ‘lovely rain!’ If you just accept
the words literally, you will go astray as
regards the secret pivot.” (zj 10)

The same phrase is also used by Deshan:
He asks, “What was the meaning of
the Patriarch’s coming from the West?”
Whereupon the old shavepate thumps
his rope-bottomed chair, strikes a pose,
and raises his whisk. “Lovely weather!
Lovely rain! Lovely lantern!” he says. By
skillfully manipulating words, he goes on
producing one complication after another.
According to his words, there would seem
to be “the Abstruse Path,” “the Bird’s Way,”
and “the Extended Hand.” To accept such
explanations is like ﬁlling a jeweled vessel
with excrement, or making sandalwood
incense from human dung. (x 79: 174a)

Old Yama (Yanlao 閻老, lit. “Yama the
Elder”) is an honoriﬁc title for the deity
popularly believed to preside over hell.
“Yan” 閻 is an abbreviation of Yanmo 閻魔,
the transcription of the Sanskrit “Yama,”
the name of an Indian god who, along
with his sister Yamī, is mentioned in the
Vedas. In Brahmanic mythology, Yama is
the Guardian of the South, ruler of the

Yamadevaloka, and judge of the dead;
taken into Buddhist mythology, he became
Regent of Hell. He is said to have originally been a warlike king of Vaiśālī, who,
as a result of having expressed the wish to
rule hell after his death, was reborn there
together with eighteen of his generals and
eighty thousand soldiers. At regular intervals he and his subordinates have boiling
copper poured down their throats until
such time as their sins are expiated.
According to some Chinese Buddhist
sources, Yanmo is the ruler of the fifth
of the eight hells; according to others, he
presides over a court of eighteen judges
who determine the punishments to be
meted out to all those who, because of
their misdeeds, have been destined for
rebirth in hell.
Swallowing red-hot iron balls is the
punishment inﬂicted in hell upon persons
who, while alive, spoke falsehood or evil.
A vivid description of this punishment is
found in the dl, Kumārajīva’s translation
of Nāgārjuna’s Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā
śāstra, where the terrors peculiar to the
Avīci, the lowest and most terrible of the
hells, are graphically narrated:
[The warders of hell,] having pried open
[the victim’s] mouth with tongs, pour into
it molten copper. They force him to swallow red-hot iron balls that on entering
the mouth scorch the mouth, on entering
the throat scorch the throat, on entering
the belly scorch the belly, and, when the
five vital organs have been completely
charred, immediately pass out and fall to
the ground. (t 25: 176c)

The reason for such punishment is
explained in the same text:
These people, in their former lives, were
much given to committing great evils,
[including] the five deadly sins [killing
one’s father, killing one’s mother, killing
an arhat, shedding the blood of a buddha, and destroying the harmony of the
sangha] and many other inequities. They
severed all roots of goodness, saying

178 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xi
師示衆云、道流、切要求取眞正見解、向天下橫行、免被這一
般精魅惑亂。無事是貴人。但莫造作、祇是平常。爾擬向外傍
家求過、覓腳手。錯了也。

The master addressed the assembly, saying, “Followers of the Way, it
is urgently necessary that you endeavor to acquire true insight and stride
boldly [here] under the heavens, not losing your senses owing to that bunch
of spirits. [He who has] nothing to do is the noble one. Simply don’t strive—
just be ordinary. Yet you look outside, searching side paths and seeking help.
You’re all wrong!
that that which is the dharma is not the
dharma and that that which is not the
dharma is the dharma, negating causation
and negating the fruits [of causation], and
hating and envying good men. Because of
these sinful deeds they enter this hell and
suﬀer punishments severe in the extreme.
(t 25: 176c)

Bewitched by this pack of wild foxes
translates 被 這 一 般 野 狐 精 魅 所 著 . This
phrase contains a form of the passive voice
in which 被 + agent + 所 + verb merges the
two forms 爲 + agent + 所 + verb and 被
+ agent + verb. Both forms were common in archaic Chinese. This construction
appeared in the Sui (571–618) and is still
rather frequently used in present-day colloquial Chinese (see Ōta 1958, 246).
Blind idiots 瞎屢生. In this term of contempt, the second character, 屢, is equivalent to one of the meanings of 婁, that is,
“stupid, benighted.” 生 has here the colloquial meaning of “fellow.” A similar term
of contempt is 禿屢生, “bald idiots,” which
appears later in the text.
Some day you’ll be made to pay up for
the vittles you’ve eaten translates 索飯
錢有日在 . Here the word 在 has a colloquial usage in which it has no meaning
of its own, but is employed for emphasis,
both affirmative and negative, in much

the same way as 呢 in present-day Chinese. This usage of 在 ﬁrst appeared in the
verse and prose of the Tang, but gradually
dwindled until, by the end of the Song, it
had almost entirely disappeared. The Tang
novel Youxian ku 遊仙窟 (Realm of the
amorous goddesses), by Zhang Zhuo 張
鷟 , contains the earliest known example
of this usage: 他家解事在未肯輒相瞋, “She
really knows the world and won’t easily
get mad.”

xi
[He who has] nothing to do is the noble
one 無事是貴人. This sentence oﬀers some
diﬃculties. Traditionally it is believed to
have been taken from the Baozang lun 寶
藏論 (Treatise on the treasure storehouse),
a work attributed to Sengzhao but which
in all probability is a spurious text composed at or before the beginning of the
Tang dynasty by a scholar-monk learned
in Chan, and then credited to Sengzhao
in order to assure its recognition. Since
the Baozang lun was widely read and
much quoted by Chan people at the end
of the Tang and during the Five Dynasties
(907–960), it would seem more than likely
that Linji was acquainted with it. The lines
relating to the above passage are part of
the apotheosis of the Great Way, written
in rhyme:

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 179
The very Way is without roots
Empty, clear, yet ever existent.
The very Way is without substance
Obscure, mysterious, yet ever real.
The very Way is without anything to do
Yet from past to present worthy of
esteem.
The very Way is without mind
Yet the ten-thousand things are embraced
within it.
Hence the Way is without characteristics,
without form
Without anything to do, without intent,
without mind.
Yet excellently it beneﬁts all things.
(t 45: 144c)

This passage is quoted in the zl, where
it is commented upon at some length (t
48: 649c). See also page 159, above, for the
related term 無事人.
Simply don’t strive translates 但莫造
作, in which the verb 造作, here rendered
as “to strive,” means to make intentional
efforts to accomplish something. Such
effort is of necessity artificial, and thus
contrary to activities performed naturally
and with no conscious intent or purpose.
The Chan masters constantly warned their
students against “striving,” as the following
passages indicate:
The question was asked, “What is the cultivation of the Way?” The master [Mazu]
said, “The Way is unrelated to cultivation.
If you speak of gain through cultivation,
then what is gained can be lost. That is the
same as the śrāvakas. If you speak of no
need for cultivation, that is the same as the
common person.” [Again] the question
was asked, “Through what understanding
can we penetrate the Way?” The master
said, “Your own nature is originally complete. Only one unimpeded by good and
evil can be said to cultivate the Way. To
cling to good and reject evil, to contemplate emptiness and enter samādhi—these
are all concerned with striving 造作. Furthermore, if you run around seeking outside, you will only get further and further
away.” (gy 1; x 68: 3c)

The master [Dazhu Huihai 大珠慧海, n.d.],
having taken the high seat, said, “You
men have the good fortune to be men
who have nothing to do. Yet you work
yourselves to death, striving 造作 , only
in order to fall into hell wearing a cangue
on your shoulders. What for? Every day
from morning to night you travel restlessly about, saying, ‘I practice meditation, I study the Way, I comprehend the
buddhadharma!’ Thus you more and
more lose contact with it. In the end this
is only pursuing sensory pleasures. When
will you ever take your ease!” (Zhufang
menren canwen yulu 諸方門人參問語錄
[Record of questions asked by disciples
from everywhere]; x 63: 25c)
[Someone] asked, “What is buddha?”
The master [Huangbo] said, “Mind, just
this is buddha. No-mind, just this is the
Way. Only when nothing arises in the
mind—no agitating thoughts about existence and nonexistence, long and short,
he and I, doing and what is done, and such
like—then fundamentally mind is buddha, and buddha intrinsically is the Way.
Mind is like the empty sky. Therefore it
is said, ‘Buddha’s true dharmakāya is like
the empty sky.’ There is no need to seek
elsewhere; all seeking is suffering. Even
if, through practices as numerous as the
sands of the Ganges—the six pāramitās
and the ten thousand practices—you were
to attain buddhahood and bodhi, this
would not be the ultimate. Why is this so?
Because these would depend upon causes
and conditions and upon intentional
striving 造作. When causes and conditions
are fully exhausted, you would return to
impermanency.” (wl; t 48: 384b)

See also pages 185 and 215, below.
Yet you look outside, searching side
paths and seeking help. Editor’s note:
The original translation, “But you go on
and run hither and thither outside and
make enquiries, looking for some helper,”
has been revised on the basis of further
research by Iriya (1989, 47–48) and
Yanagida (1977, 92).

180 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
祇擬求佛、佛是名句。爾還識馳求底麼。三世十方佛祖出來、
也祇爲求法。如今參學道流、也祇爲求法。得法始了。未得、
依前輪回五道。云何是法。法者是心法。心法無形、通貫十
方、目前現用。人信不及、便乃認名認句、向文字中、求意度
佛法。天地懸殊。

“You keep trying to ﬁnd buddha, but buddha is merely a name. Don’t
you know what it is that you are running around seeking? The buddhas
and the patriarchs of the three periods and the ten directions appear only
in order to seek the dharma. You followers of the Way who are studying
today—you, too, have only to seek the dharma. Attain dharma and you’re
all done. Until then, you’ll go on transmigrating through the ﬁve paths of
existence just as you have been.
“What is dharma? ‘Dharma’ is the dharma of mind. Mind is without
form; it pervades the ten directions and is manifesting its activity right
before your very eyes. But because people lack suﬃcient faith [in this] they
turn to names and phrases, attempting to grasp the buddhadharma through
written words. They’re as far away as heaven from earth!
The three periods and the ten directions. The “three periods” 三世 are the past,
present, and future; the “ten directions” 十
方 are the eight points of the compass plus
the nadir and the zenith.

existent. Silently understand, no more.
This is beyond all thinking. Therefore it
is said, “Words or speech are cut oﬀ, the
mind and its activity are extinguished.”
(cf [t 48:380b])

The five paths of existence 五道 ; also
written 五趣 (Skr., pañca-gataya) represent the ﬁve conditioned states of incarnate existence. Strictly speaking, there are
six such states, known as the six paths 六道
or the six states 六趣 (ṣaḍ-gati), for which
see pages 143–144, above. The “ﬁve paths”
are arrived at by omitting the third of the
six states, namely that of the asura [阿]修
羅, or titans.

Therefore, when Bodhidharma came from
the Western Land he transmitted only the
dharma of mind 心法. He pointed directly
to [the truth that] all sentient beings are
fundamentally buddha, and need not
[make use of] religious practices. At this
very moment just grasp the understanding of your own mind and see into your
own nature. There is nothing else to seek.
(wl [t 48: 386b])

Dharma of mind 心法. See the following passages written by Linji’s teacher,
Huangbo:

They’re as far away as heaven from
earth 天地懸殊 is reminiscent of a line in
the opening section of the famous Xinxin
ming 信心銘 of Sengcan, the Third Patriarch of Chan:

This dharma, just this is mind; apart from
mind there is no dharma. This mind, just
this is dharma; apart from dharma there
is no mind. Mind in itself is no-mind,
also there is no no-mind. When mind is
annihilated by mind, mind then becomes

The ultimate Way is without diﬃculty /
Just be without picking and choosing.
Do not hate and do not love / And it will
be utterly clear.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 181

道流、山僧說法、說什麼法。說心地法。便能入凡入聖、入淨
入穢、入眞入俗。

“Followers of the Way, when I, this mountain monk, expound the
dharma, what dharma do I expound? I expound the dharma of mindground, which enters the secular and the sacred, the pure and the deﬁled,
the real and the temporal.
A hair’s breadth of divergence / And you
are as far from it as heaven from earth.
If you want it to appear / Be neither for
nor against. (t 48: 376b)

For Daoxin, see Introduction, note 58.
Mind-ground 心地 . This term seems
ﬁrst to have appeared in the Fanwang jing
梵網經 (Brahma-net sutra), also known
as the Fanwang jing lushe’nafo shuo pusa
xindi jie pin 梵網經盧舍那佛說菩薩心地
戒品 (The Brahma-net sutra, chapter on
the bodhisattva mind-ground precepts as
preached by Vairocana Buddha). Although
the mind-ground doctrine, as a doctrine,
is not explicitly expounded in this sutra, it
is assumed as the basis for the bodhisattva
precepts, with which the work is largely
concerned.
The mind-ground doctrine underwent extended development in another
work, perhaps spurious, the Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing 大乘本生心地觀經
(Mahayana sutra on contemplation of the
mind-ground of essential nature), said
to have been translated into Chinese by
Prajñā (Bore 般若 ), a Kashmirian monk
who worked in Chang’an circa 785–810.
The following passage from this sutra
states the doctrine in brief:
Within the three realms, mind is the master. He who can introspect his mind in the
end is emancipated; he who cannot introspect his mind in the end is engulfed [in
the sea of transmigration]. The mind of
sentient beings is like the great earth. The
five cereals and five fruits are produced
from the great earth. The mind-dharma
is just like this, producing the world, what

is beyond the world, good and evil, the
five ways of existence, the learned one
[śaikṣa], the one who has gone beyond
learning [aśaikṣa], the pratyekabuddha, the bodhisattva, and the tathāgata.
Because of these causal relations, the three
realms are only mind, and mind is called
the ground. (t 3: 327a)

For further details on the Fanwang jing
see Mochizuki Bukkyō daijiten 5: 4711c; for
the Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing see
4: 3283a.
The concept of the mind-ground also
appears in the so-called transmission
verses, a series of gāthā said to have been
composed by each of the successive Chan
patriarchs, beginning with Bodhidharma,
at the time they transmitted the dharma to
their respective heirs. The verse attributed
to Bodhidharma, which seems to be the
earliest of the six and to have been composed independently of the others, acts as
a kind of introduction to the remaining
ﬁve, which are obviously the products of
a single author.
These gāthā became associated with
Huineng sometime during the last two
decades of the eighth century. All are contained in what is now known as the Dunhuang text of the Platform Sutra of the
Sixth Patriarch.
Although the term 心地 does not yet
appear in the verses attributed to the four
earlier patriarchs, it is found in the verses
associated with Hong ren and Huineng.
Hongren’s verse reads:
When a sentient being sows seed
From nonsentience ﬂowers appear.

182 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
With no sentience there is no seed
Without the mind-ground nothing
appears.

Huineng’s verse reads:
The mind-ground holds the seeds of
sentiency;
With the dharma-rain the ﬂowers appear.
When the ﬂowers’ seeds of sentiency selfawaken
The fruit of enlightenment naturally
matures.

When the bz, the earliest of the traditional Chan “histories,” was compiled in
801, it contained not only the six transmission verses already mentioned but also
an additional twenty-eight verses that
were attributed to Śākyamuni and the
twenty-seven succeeding “Indian patriarchs” of Chan, from Śākyamuni’s disciple
Mahākāśyapa to the ﬁnal Indian patriarch
(and first Chinese patriarch) Bodhidharma. These verses are believed to have
formed part of bz fasicles 9 and 10, which,
unfortunately, are missing in the text as it
now exists. The bz presented this series in
order to establish an unbroken transmission of the Chan dharma from Śākyamuni
to the Sixth Patriarch.
The bz is known to have had a wide
circulation among Chan people of the late
Tang; of the Dasheng bensheng xindi guan
jing we are less certain, but nevertheless it
seems likely that the doctrine of the mindground entered Chan through one or both
of these works.
Linji’s teacher Huangbo Xiyun speaks
of this doctrine only once in the cf:
As for the so-called dharma-gate of the
mind-ground, the ten-thousand dharmas
are established depending upon this mind.

When external circumstances are encountered, they are existent; when external circumstances are not existent, the dharmas
are nonexistent. You must not, as regards
the pure nature, formulate interpretations based upon external circumstances.
[This is] what is meant by “the illuminating activity of samādhi and prajñā, utterly
clear, utterly still, and penetratingly bright.”
(t 48: 381)

It is impossible to say whether Linji’s
understanding of the doctrine of the
mind-ground stemmed directly from his
teacher Huangbo or from his own familiarity with the bz, which is reputed to
have been considerable. Linji mentions
the term only once more in the ll, and
that merely in passing.
zj 3 contains the following episode in
the section on Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷
讓 (677–744):
Ma z u , h av i n g h e a rd t h e m a s t e r’s
[Nanyue’s] discourse, rose from his seat
and, after bowing reverently, asked, “How
am I to handle my mind so as to unite
with the Chan samādhi of formlessness?”
The master said, “Study the doctrine of
the mind-ground. It is like the planting of
seeds. My discourse on the essentials of
dharma is like heaven’s beneﬁcent [rain].
When, for you, causes and conditions
meet, you should see the Way.”

Since the zj was compiled in 952, this episode seems to indicate that the doctrine of
the mind-ground had entered Chan prior
to the appearance of either the Dasheng
bensheng xindi guan jing or the transmission verses. But the fact that it appears in
no other compilation suggests it may well
be apocryphal and of later origin.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 183

要且不是爾眞俗凡聖、能與一切眞俗凡聖、安著名字。眞俗凡
聖、與此人安著名字不得。道流、把得便用、更不著名字、號
之爲玄旨。

But your ‘real and temporal,’ your ‘secular and sacred,’ cannot attach labels to
all that is real and temporal, secular and sacred. The real and the temporal,
the secular and the sacred, cannot attach a name to this person. Followers
of the Way, grasp and use, but never name—this is called the ‘mysterious
principle.’
But your ‘real and temporal’… ‘secular
and sacred’ 要且不是爾眞俗凡聖能與一切
眞俗凡聖安著名字. This sentence presents
several problems, both in grammar and
interpretation.
In the expression 要且, the character 且
is an adverbial suffix having no specific
meaning of its own; it merely softens the
tone of the sentence. This usage is nearly
analogous to that in 姑且 , “for the time
being,” and 權且, “tentatively.”
The sentence as a whole has traditionally been regarded as having the pronoun
爾, “you,” as its subject. In this case, however, 爾 should not be read in this way, but
should be read as the possessive “your.”
By “‘your real and temporal,’ ‘your secular
and sacred,’” Linji means the differentiated states that a person chooses to deﬁne
as real and temporal, secular and sacred.
“Real and temporal, secular and sacred,”
furthermore, may be seen as representative of dualism in general—Linji could
just as well have said “pure and impure,”
“good and evil,” “inside and outside,” etc.
The sentence could therefore be restated
as, “You are mistaken if you think that the
differentiated states that you have chosen can be the standard by which you can
deﬁne every diﬀerentiated state.”
This person 此 人 . Linji means speciﬁcally one who has realized the mindground, but with the implication that such
a person might be anyone right there, listening to his sermon.

The central meaning of these lines is that
this person, this concrete reality, cannot be
deﬁned by such labels as “real” and “temporary,” “secular” and “sacred,” for names
all emerge from differentiation. What is
important is just this immediate activity,
this pure and direct functioning of reality.
Although the traditional Japanese reading
of the character 與 in this line is no tame
ni, and the usual translation is “for the
sake of,” here 與 is, grammatically, merely
the preposition “to”.
Grasp and use, but never name translates the lines 把得便用、更不著名字. The
principal diﬃculty involved in interpreting this may be the logical ambiguity
caused by the fact that the two verbs, 把
得, “grasp,” and 便用, “use,” have no following objects. Almost exactly the same lines
appear in a later section of the ll (see page
244), where again the object of the verbs
is not deﬁned. In both cases, however, this
idiosyncracy serves to lend the sermon
an air of heightened vividness, perhaps in
compensation for the ambiguity.
It is problematic to make “this person”
the object of “grasping and using,” as traditional commentators have usually done.
It is similarly arbitrary to assign as the
object the preceding term “dharma of the
mind-ground.” In his commentary on the
text Dōchū explains the phrase as follows:
“As for the real, we grasp it as it is but do
not give it a name; as for the secular, we
grasp it as it is but do not give it a name.”

184 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
山僧說法、與天下人別。祇如有箇文殊普賢、出來目前、各現
一身問法、纔道咨和尚、我早辨了也。老僧穩坐、更有道流、
來相見時、我盡辨了也。何以如此。祇爲我見處別、外不取凡
聖、內不住根本、見徹更不疑謬。

“My discourse on dharma is diﬀerent from that of every other man on
earth. Supposing Mañjuśrī and Samantabhadra were to appear before me,
manifesting their respective bodily forms for the purpose of questioning
me about dharma. The moment they said, ‘Venerable Priest, what …,’ I
would have discerned them through and through. And if a follower of the
Way comes for an interview as I sit quietly here, I discern him through and
through. Why is this so? Just because my way of viewing things is diﬀerent;
outside, I make no distinction between the secular and the sacred; inside,
I do not dwell in the absolute; I see right through, and am free from all
doubt.”
This, again, is only one of several possible
interpretations, but, perhaps, a slightly
better one than the others.
Mysterious principle translates 玄旨, a
term that Linji uses several times in the
course of his sermons. It indicates the
fundamental principle of Buddhism. It
appears already in Sengcan’s Xinxin ming:
The conﬂict between “for” and “against” /
This is the disease of the mind.
When the abstruse principle 玄旨 is not
understood / How vain is the struggle
for quietness of thought! (t 48: 376b)

In the jc the “mysterious principle” is
the subject of an exchange between an
unnamed monk and Mazu’s disciple
Zhichang 智常 of the temple Guizong si 歸
崇寺 on Mount Lu 廬:
[A monk] asked, “What is the abstruse
principle?” The master (Zhichang) said,
“No one can understand it.” “What about
going toward it?” the monk asked. “Who
is it that is seeking the abstruse principle?” was the master’s response. (t 51:
255c–256a)

Mañjuśrī (Wenshu 文殊) and Samantabhadra (Puxian 普賢 ) are, in Mahayana

Buddhism, the two principal bodhisattva
attendants of Śākyamuni Buddha.
Mañjuśrī, whose name is translated
into Chinese as Miaode 妙德 , “Marvelous Virtue,” represents prajñā wisdom.
The older translation of the Huayan jing
華嚴經 (Avataṃsaka Sutra) says that the
bodhisattva lives on Mount Qingliang 清
凉, beyond the ten thousand lands to the
east, and that he gives sermons to the myriad bodhisattvas that surround him.
In China, Mañjuśrī is identified with
Mount Wutai in the province of Shanxi.
This belief was established among the
people after the mid-Tang era in concert
with the spread of the esoteric school.
Mañjuśrī is also the bodhisattva whose
image is always enshrined in the Chan
meditation hall. From the time of the
Tang dynasty it became customary to put
the image of Mañjuśrī, instead of that of
Piṇḍola (Bintoulu 賓頭盧), in the monastery dining hall.
Samantabhadra represents the principles of truth, teaching, practice, and salvation. His Chinese names Puxian 普賢
“All-pervading Good” and Puji 普吉 “Allpervading Beneﬁcence” express the belief

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 185

xii
師示衆云、道流、佛法無用功處、祇是平常無事。屙屎送尿、
著衣喫飯、困來即臥。愚人笑我、智乃知焉。

The master addressed the assembly, saying, “Followers of the Way, as to
buddhadharma, no eﬀort is necessary. You have only to be ordinary, with
nothing to do—defecating, urinating, wearing clothes, eating food, and
lying down when tired.
Fools laugh at me,
But the wise understand.
that he appears throughout the world to
save all living beings. He is associated with
the buddha Vairocana. In China, Mount
Emei 蛾眉 in the province of Sichuan is
traditionally regarded as the place where
Samantabhadra abides. Along with Mount
Wutai for Mañjuśrī and Mount Putuo
普陀 in Zhejiang 浙江 for Guanyin 觀音 ,
Mount Emei became a popular pilgrimage
site where people would go to see incarnations of the bodhisattvas.

xii
As to buddhadharma, no eﬀort is necessary 佛法無用功 . Here again there is a
stress on making no intentional or special
eﬀorts toward the attainment of the buddhadharma (see page 179, above). This
emphasis is seen from the earliest times in
Chan. Farong 法融 (594–657), ﬁrst patriarch of the Niutou 牛頭 school, says in his
poem Xin ming:
When producing is without the marks of
producing / Producing and illuminating are one and the same.
One who would achieve purity of mind /
Should have no intention of making
eﬀort. (t 51: 457b–c)

And likewise, Nanyue Mingzan says in
his Ledao ge 樂道歌 (Song of enjoying the
Way):
Eﬀortfully to make eﬀort / Is to spin
deeper and deeper in darkness.
To grasp after is never to gain / Not to

grasp after is to naturally succeed.
(t 51: 461b–c)

Defecating, urinating, wearing clothes:
these activities are representative of everyday life. Huayan 華嚴, a monk in the district of Wei 魏, says in a sermon,
Buddhadharma is our everyday life.
Where you walk or stop, drink tea or eat,
talk or ask, there is the buddhadharma. If
you make conscious eﬀorts for something,
it is not good for you. (See jc 30, Supplement, Ming edition.)

Yunmen Wenyan is recorded to have
used almost the same words in one of his
sermons:
If you haven’t yet gained the place of
entrance, then look within and carefully
observe yourself. Other than putting on
clothes, eating food, defecating, and urinating, what else is there for you to do?
What’s the good of stirring up so many
erroneous thoughts for no reason? (t 47:
548b)

Fools laugh at me…. Linji is here both
paraphrasing and quoting from Nanyue
Mingzan’s Ledao ge (see following note).
I have no wish for rebirth as a god / Nor
do I cling to ﬁelds of merit.
When hungry, I eat / When tired, I sleep.
Fools laugh at me / But the wise understand.
It is not stupidity and dullness / But original nature as it is. (t 51: 461b)

186 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
古人云、向外作工夫、總是癡頑漢。爾且隨處作主、立處皆
眞。境來回換不得。縱有從來習氣、五無間業、自爲解脫大
海。

A man of old said,
Those who make work for themselves outside
Are just a bunch of blockheads.
“Just make yourself master of every situation, and wherever you stand is
the true [place]. No matter what circumstances come they cannot dislodge
you [from there]. Though you bear the inﬂuence of past delusions or the
karma from [having committed] the ﬁve heinous crimes, these of themselves become the ocean of emancipation.
A man of old refers to Nanyue Mingzan,
and the text quoted is the Ledao ge. Linji
seems to have been fond of this poem, as
he has already quoted from it three times
(see pages 172 and 185, above), and continues to do so later. The lines quoted are in
the beginning section, which establishes
the mood of the entire poem:
Obdurate, I do nothing
What’s there to alter?
When I am doing nothing
What’s there to say?
The true mind is without confusion
No need to cut oﬀ external things.
The past is already past and gone
As for the future, don’t bother about it.
Obdurate, I sit doing nothing
Who, after all, is there to call me?
Those who look outside themselves for
something to work upon
Are just a bunch of blockheads.
(t 51: 461b)

Linji has substituted the verb 作, “make,”
for the 覓, “look for,” of the original text.
Wherever you stand is the true [place]
立 處 皆 眞 . This line comes from the
“Buzhenkong lun” 不眞空論 (Treatise on

the emptiness of the unreal), a work in
Sengzhao’s Zhao lun 肇論:
A sutra says, “How marvelous, WorldHonored One! Without moving from

the realm of the true, you establish the
standing place of all dharmas.” It is not
that apart from the true there is a standing place, but that the very standing place
itself is the true. (t 45: 153a)

It is unclear what sutra Sengzhao is quoting
from. W. Liebenthal, in a footnote to this
passage, suggests that the passage refers to
a section in fascicle 20 of the Fangguang
bore jing 放光般若經 (The light-emitting
perfection of wisdom sutra), a Chinese
translation of the Pañcaviṃ-śatisāhasrikāprajñā-pāramitā Sutra done in around 291
by Mokṣala (Wuluocha 無羅叉) (t 8: 141c),
or to the analogous passage in fascicle 25
of Kumārajīva’s translation of the same
text, the Mohe bore boluomi jing 摩訶般
若波羅蜜經 (t 8: 401a) (see Liebenthal
1968, 66, note 235).
The jc contains a long sermon by the
master Mazu Daoyi, in which Mazu discourses at length on the term 立處, “standing place,” and in conclusion quotes the
ﬁnal lines of the above passage from the
Buzhenkong lun:
If you establish the bhūtatathatā 眞如
[suchness] then everything without exception is the bhūtatathatā. If you establish
the principle 理, then everything without
exception is the principle. If you establish
phenomena 事, then everything without
exception is phenomena. When one is

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 187
brought forward, thousands follow. The
principle and phenomena are not diﬀerent. All is marvelous activity, and there is
no other principle. All is the movement
of mind. Just as, for example, the reﬂections of the moon are many but the true
moon is one; spring waters are many, but
the nature of water is one; phenomena
are many but empty space is one—just so
explanations of the principle are many but
unhindered wisdom is one. Everything
established depends upon One Mind.
Whether you establish or whether you
sweep away—all is marvelous activity, and
all marvelous activity is one’s own self. “It
is not that apart from the true there is a
standing place, but that the very standing
place itself is the true.” It is all one’s own
being. (t 51: 440a)

the crimes themselves. The Hell of Uninterrupted Torment is the Avīci Hell, the
eighth of the eight hot hells, where punishment is continuous.
The five heinous crimes, also known
by the term 五逆罪, “ﬁve deadly sins,” are
matricide, patricide, killing an arhat, shedding the blood of a buddha, and destroying the harmony of the sangha. They
are common to both the Hinayana and
Mahayana traditions. Though all brought
the same retribution, the crimes were
considered to increase in severity as one
moved down the list, with the last being
the most heinous. Also, it should be noted
that in Chinese Buddhism the position of
the ﬁrst two crimes is reversed, matricide
following patricide.

Linji’s acquaintance with these lines
most likely came through Mazu’s teachings rather than directly from the Zhao
lun, though there is no way of knowing
this for certain. It should be noted that
here, as elsewhere, Linji has slightly altered
a quotation, perhaps better to ﬁt the context in which he was using it, substituting
皆 for the 即 of the Sengzhao and Mazu
texts.

These of themselves become the ocean
of emancipation. The idea that the karma
resulting from the five heinous crimes
could become the “great sea of emancipation” is suggested in the following passage
from the Vimalakīrti Sutra:

The inﬂuence of past delusions translates 習氣 , which in turn translates the
Sanskrit “vāsan,” a scent or perfume that
becomes attached to or clings to other
objects. In Buddhism the word is used
for the subtle inﬂuences that remain from
delusions after the delusions themselves
have been overcome or destroyed, i.e.,
the residue remaining in the unconscious
from past conscious actions, beliefs, or
perceptions.
The five heinous crimes translates 五
無間業 , the Chinese translation of the
Sanskrit term “pañcānantaryakarmāni.”
The original expression means, literally,
“the karma resulting from committing
any of the ﬁve crimes that cause rebirth
in the Hell of Uninterrupted Torment,”
but is usually, as here, used to designate

Then Mañjuśrī questioned Vimalakīrti,
saying, “How is the bodhisattva to fully
realize 通達 the enlightenment of Buddhahood?” Vimalakīrti said, “When the
bodhisattva practices the non-Way he is
said to fully realize the buddha-way.” Again
Mañjuśrī asked, “How does the bodhisattva practice the ‘non-Way’?” Vimalakīrti
replied, “When the bodhisattva commits
the ﬁve heinous crimes he does so without passion or hate. On entering hell he
is without any taint of sin; on entering
the realm of the beasts he is without such
faults as avidyā [ignorance] and arrogant
pride; on entering the realm of the hungry
ghosts he is endowed with [the power of]
meritorious virtue…. Mañjuśrī, when the
bodhisattva can, in this manner, practice
the non-Way he is said to realize fully the
buddha-way.” (t 14: 548c–549a)

For Linji’s developed statement of this
view, see Discourses 22; for other expressions of like views, see comment on pages
274–276.

188 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
今時學者、總不識法、猶如觸鼻羊、逢著物安在口裏。奴郎不
辨、賓主不分。如是之流、邪心入道、鬧處即入。不得名爲
眞出家人、正是眞俗家人。夫出家者、須辨得平常眞正見解、
辨佛辨魔、辨眞辨僞、辨凡辨聖。若如是辨得、名眞出家。若
魔佛不辨、正是出一家入一家。喚作造業衆生、未得名爲眞出
家。祇如今有一箇佛魔、同體不分、如水乳合、鵝王喫乳。如
明眼道流、魔佛倶打。爾若愛聖憎凡、生死海裏浮沈。

“Students nowadays know nothing of dharma. They’re just like sheep
that take into their mouths whatever their noses happen to hit against. They
neither discriminate between master and slave, nor distinguish host from
guest. Such as these, coming to the Way with crooked motives, readily enter
bustling places. They cannot be called true renouncers of home. True
householders are what they are.
“Renouncers of home must possess true insight at all times, distinguishing between the Buddha and Māra, between true and false, between secular
and sacred. If they can do this, they may be called true renouncers of home.
But those who cannot distinguish Māra from Buddha have only left one
house to enter another. They may be described as karma-creating beings, but
they cannot be called true renouncers of home.
“Now suppose there were Buddha-Māra, inseparably united in one body
like a mixture of water and milk. The King of Geese would drink only the
milk, but an open-eyed follower of the Way would handle Māra and Buddha equally.
If you love the sacred and hate the secular,
you’ll ﬂoat and sink in the sea of birth-and-death.”
They’re just like sheep…. Old commentaries cite the view of Yishan Yining
一山一寧 (1247–1317) that this refers to
the notion that sheep have weak sight and
swallow whatever touches their noses. A
similar statement is seen in the sayings of
Linji’s contemporary Zhaozhou:
If mind does not vary, everything also is
just as is. Since it cannot be obtained from
outside, what is there to concern yourself with? What’s the good of picking up
things hit and miss and putting them into
your mouths, like sheep? (x 68: 83b)

Bustling places 鬧處 is a term that usually refers to markets and other places where

crowds gather, but here it alludes to large,
pros perous, well-known monasteries
where life was easy for the monks. Zhaozhou Congshen is said to have regarded
the assembly under Xuefeng Yicun to be a
community of this type.
Renouncers of home translates 出家
(Skr., śramaṇa). A śramaṇa is a person
who has renounced the worldly life (symbolized by the household) to seek the
Way. The śramaṇa ideal is described in
the Sishi’er zhang jing 四十二章經 (Sutra in
forty-two chapters), a short text that sets
forth the essential teachings of Buddhism,
and that is traditionally regarded as the

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 189
first Buddhist sutra to have been translated into Chinese, in 67 c.e. The translation is ascribed to Kāśyapa Mātanga
(Jiashe Moteng 迦葉摩騰 , n.d.) and Zhu
Falan 竺法蘭 (n.d.), although scholars now
believe the text to be an apocrypha produced in China.
The Buddha said, “Those who take leave
of their parents and go forth from their
homes, who know their minds and understand its source, and who penetrate to
unconditioned dharma, are called
śramaṇas. They constantly uphold the two
hundred and ﬁfty precepts, they value and
abide in purity. By practicing the four true
paths, they become Arhats….”
The Buddha said, “Those who renounce
home and become śramaṇas sever their
desires, leave behind their cravings, and
perceive the source of their minds. They
penetrate the profound principles of the
buddha and awaken to unconditioned
dharma. They cling to nothing inside and
they seek nothing outside; their minds
are neither tied by the Way nor bound by
karma. With no thought and no action,
no cultivation and no attainment, and no
passing through the various stages, they
reach the ultimate. This is the meaning
of the Way.”
The Buddha said, “They shave their hair
and beard and become śramaṇas, accepting the dharma of the Way. They renounce
worldly wealth, and in receiving alms
accept only what is enough. They eat one
meal a day and sleep beneath the trees.
They seek no more than that. Craving and
desire make people stupid and dull.” (t 17:
722a–b5)

Left one house to enter another. That
is, they have simply left the “house” of lay
life to enter the “house” of organized religious life.
Karma-creating beings are sentient
beings that endlessly produce the karma
of death and rebirth. The Wuxing lun 悟性
論, attributed to Bodhidharma, comments
on the matter as follows:

Sentient beings create karma; karma creates sentient beings. When sentient beings
create karma in the present life, in the next
life they receive retribution, and there is
no chance of escaping it. It is only the
perfected person who, within this body,
creates no karma whatsoever and therefore receives no retribution. A sutra says,
“When no karma whatsoever is created,
the Way is naturally attained. How can
these words be false? People can create
karma, but karma cannot create people.
If a person creates karma, karma will be
born together with the person. If a person
creates no karma, karma will disappear
together with the person.” From this we
know that the creation of karma depends
upon people, and that the birth of people
depends upon karma. If people created
no karma, then it would be impossible for
karma to be born of people. (t 48: 372c)

The King of Geese…. Linji alludes to
an ability ﬁrst mentioned in the Zhengfa
nianchu jing 正法念處經 (Sutra on contemplating the true dharma): “It is just as
when milk and water are poured into the
same bowl and the King of Geese drinks.
He drinks only the milk and leaves the
water” (t 17: 379c).
If you love the sacred…. This verse is
from the second of the ten poems that
make up Zhigong’s Dasheng zan (see page
172). The entire poem reads:
When an unreal body standing before a
mirror casts a reﬂection / The reﬂection
and the unreal body are not diﬀerent.
If you want only to discard the reﬂection
and retain the body / You don’t know
that the body is fundamentally the same
as emptiness.
The body in itself doesn’t diﬀer from the
reﬂection / There is no possibility that
one exists and the other does not exist.
If you want to keep the one and let the
other go / You’ll be eternally estranged
from the True Principle.
If you love the sacred and hate the secular /
You’ll sink and ﬂoat in the sea of birthand-death.

190 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xiii
問、如何是佛魔。師云、爾一念心疑處是魔。爾若達得萬法無
生、心如幻化、更無一塵一法、處處淸淨是佛。然佛與魔、是
染淨二境。

Someone asked, “What is Buddha-Māra?”
The master said, “One thought of doubt in your mind is Māra. But if you
realize that the ten thousand dharmas never come into being, that mind is
like a phantom, that not a speck of dust nor a single thing exists, that there is
no place that is not clean and pure—this is Buddha. Thus Buddha and Māra
are simply two states, one pure, the other impure.
Since the deﬁling passions exist depending upon mind / When there’s no mind,
where can they abide?
Don’t weary yourself holding onto forms
through discrimination / And you’ll
attain the Way naturally in a moment of
time. (t 51: 449b)

The same point is made in a slightly diﬀerent way in another of the poems:
To look within, to look without—both
are wrong / The buddha-way and the
demon-way, both are amiss.
If samsara is understood to be empty in
its substance / Then where can buddha
and demon ﬁnd a place to dwell?
(t 51: 449c)

Huangbo says the same thing in the cf:
Therefore it is said, “Everything the Tathāgata preached was for the sake of converting men, just as one pretends that yellow
leaves are gold in order to stop the tears of
a little child.” It is certainly not the real. If
someone were to have obtained the real,
he would not be the guest of our school,
and what would it have to do with his
original substance? Thus the sutra says,
“In truth there is not the least dharma to
be obtained, and that is why it is called
supreme, perfect enlightenment.” If you
understand the meaning of this, you know
that the buddha-way and the demon-way
are both amiss. (t 48: 383c)

xiii
The master said… Māra. Here Māra
魔, as found in the Taishō, has been used,
rather than Buddha-Māra 佛魔, as in the
ll texts of the tg (tg 11; x78: 469a) and gy
(gy 4; x 68: 25a).
In connection with this passage, see the
dl:
Allow doubt to rise in your mind,
And the King of Hell’s jailers will bind
you.
Like the deer upon which the lion
springs,
Never again will you gain your freedom.
(t 25: 185a)

Also see the cf:
The student of the Way who, for a single
thought-instant, conjectures about samsara falls into the māra-way. (t 48: 381b)

But if you realize…. An alternative
reading would be:
If you understand, then the ten thousand
dharmas never come into being, the mind
is like a phantom, not even a single grain
of dust or a single dharma exists, and
there is no place whatsoever that is not
immaculate and pure. This is buddha.

Either reading is possible, but here we
prefer to see 達得 as governing the entire
phrase that follows. We must read the two
phrases 萬法無性 and 心如玄化 as a con-

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 191

約山僧見處、無佛無衆生、無古無今、得者便得、不歷時節。
無修無證、無得無失。一切時中、更無別法。設有一法過此
者、我說如夢如化。山僧所說皆是。

“In my view there is no buddha, no sentient beings, no past, no present. Anything attained was already attained—no time is needed. There is
nothing to practice, nothing to realize, nothing to gain, nothing to lose.
Throughout all time there is no other dharma than this. ‘If one claims there’s
a dharma surpassing this, I say that it’s like a dream, like a phantasm.’ This
is all I have to teach.

In my view there is no buddha….
Compare these words with the following
passage from the Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment:

hundreds and thousands and millions and
billions of buddha-realms, countless as
the sands of the Ganges, are like ﬂowers in
the sky that appear at random and at random disappear. They are not in this nor
are they separate from it; there is nothing
that binds them and nothing for them to
be released from. Thus it is apparent that
from the beginning sentient beings have
attained buddhahood, and that samsara
and nirvana are like yesternight’s dream.
Excellent young man! Because they are
like yesternight’s dream, you must know
that samsara and nirvana never arise and
never disappear, never come and never go.
What is realized is without anything to
be gained or anything to be lost, without
anything to be grasped or anything to be
rejected. One who realizes has nothing
to do and nothing to refrain from doing,
nothing to let be as it is and nothing to
get rid of. Within this realization there is
no one who realizes and nothing that is
realized. After all, there is no realization
and no realizer, for the nature of all dharmas is universality and indestructibility.
(t 17: 915a)

Excellent young man! Those bodhisattvas and sentient beings of the period of
the decline of the dharma who achieve
this attainment by practicing and cultivating this mind, have nothing to practice and nothing to attain. The universal
luminance of perfect awakening, the nonduality of utter stillness—within this the

If one claims there’s a dharma surpassing this, I say that it’s like a dream,
like a phantasm. Linji’s words here are not
his own, but are adapted from the last sentence of the following passage in the Mohe
bore boluomi jing, Kumārajīva’s translation of the Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra,

tinuous whole, from the standpoint of the
metrical symmetry of these two phrases.
Thus Buddha and Māra are simply two
states, one pure, the other impure translates 然佛與魔、是染淨二境. Dōchū’s reading of the ﬁrst character in this line, 然, is
shikaredomo (“however,” “nevertheless”).
The word shikaredomo, however, always
functions to connect two phrases with
opposite meanings, while in this particular case 然 simply helps to continue the
aﬃrmative sense of the preceding phrase;
“then” or “thus” are better choices.
Wang Yinzhi (1766–1834), explaining
diverse usages of 然 in his Jingzhuan shici
經傳釋詞 (Explanation of words in the
classics), notes that this character is almost
synonymous with 則 (then, thence), and
he supports this point with examples from
Mozi 墨子 and Zhuangzi 莊子. This usage
of 然 is also found in the bianwen literature discovered at Dunhuang.

192 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
道道流流、即今目前孤明歷歷地聽者、此人處處不滯、通貫十
方、三界自在。入一切境差別、不能回換。一剎那間、透入法
界、逢佛說佛、逢祖說祖、逢羅漢說羅漢、逢餓鬼說餓鬼。向
一切處、游履國土、敎化衆生、未曾離一念。隨處淸淨、光透
十方、萬法一如。

“Followers of the Way, the one who at this very moment shines alone
before my eyes and is clearly listening to my discourse—this man tarries nowhere; he traverses the ten directions and is freely himself in all
three realms. Though he enters all types of situations with their various
diﬀerentiations, none can confuse him. In an instant of time he penetrates
the dharma realms, on meeting a buddha he teaches the buddha, on meeting a patriarch he teaches the patriarch, on meeting an arhat he teaches the
arhat, on meeting a hungry ghost he teaches the hungry ghost. He travels
throughout all lands bringing enlightenment to sentient beings, yet is never
separate from his present mind. Everywhere is pure, light illumines the ten
directions, and ‘all dharmas are a single suchness.’
where, however, the statement is made in
reference to nirvana:
At that time the various gods questioned
Subhūti, saying, “You say that the enlightenment of buddhahood is like a phantom
or a dream. Do you say that nirvana also
is like a phantom or a dream?” Subhūti
replied to the gods, “I say to you that the
enlightenment of buddhahood is like a
phantom or a dream. I say to you that nirvana is like a phantom or a dream. Even if
there were some dharma that surpassed
nirvana, I say to you that it, too, would be
like a phantom or a dream.” (t 8: 276b)

cept in this passage is already expressed in
the Wangsheng lun zhu 往生論註 (Commentary on the Treatise on the Pure Land)
of the Pure Land patriarch Tanluan 曇鸞
(476–542), in a description of the activities
of Dharmakāya Bodhisattva:

The sentence in its original form is also
found, without reference to its source, in
the section of the jc (t 51: 228b) devoted
to Zhiyan 智巖 (d. 677), second patriarch
of the Niutou 牛頭 school of Chan, as
well as in Guifeng Zongmi’s Chanyuan
zhuquanji duxu 禪源諸詮集都序 (Preface
to the “Anthology of essential writings on
the origins of Chan”; t 48: 402c).

[Dharmakāya] Bodhisattva gains the
requiting-birth samādhi. By the spiritual
power of this samādhi, in a single place,
in a single thought, in a single instant of
time, he is able to penetrate all the worlds
of the ten directions and make all varieties of oﬀerings to all the buddhas and to
all the buddhas’ great congregations of
believers. He is able to penetrate the numberless worlds where buddha, dharma,
and sangha are unknown, and, by all
varieties of manifestations and religious
teachings, to bring salvation to all sentient beings and unceasingly engage in
the work of buddha. Yet from the ﬁrst he
has no thought of coming or going, no
thought of making oﬀerings, no thought
of bringing salvation. (t 40: 840a)

This man tarries nowhere… never
separate from his present mind. The con-

All dharmas are a single suchness 萬法
一如). The quote is from the Xinxin ming:

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 193

道流、大丈夫兒、今日方知本來無事。祇爲爾信不及、念念馳
求、捨頭覓頭、自不能歇。如圓頓菩薩、入法界現身、向淨土
中、厭凡忻聖。如此之流、取捨未忘、染淨心在。

“Followers of the Way, right now the resolute man knows full well that
from the beginning there is nothing to do. Only because your faith is insuﬃcient do you ceaselessly chase about; having thrown away your head you go
on and on looking for it, unable to stop yourself. You’re like the Bodhisattva
of Complete and Immediate [Enlightenment], who manifests his body in
any dharma realm but within the Pure Land detests the secular and aspires
for the sacred. Such ones have not yet left oﬀ accepting and rejecting; ideas
of purity and deﬁlement still remain.
If the eyes do not close in sleep / All
dreams of themselves vanish;
If the mind does not diﬀerentiate / All
dharmas are a single suchness.
(t 48: 376c)

Only because your faith is insufficient…. A reference to the story of Yajñadatta; see page 175, above.
The Bodhisattva of Complete and
Immediate [Enlightenment] 圓頓菩薩 )
is a being who has attained the highest
Mahayana enlightenment, an enlightenment that, in Linji’s view, does not yet
approach that of the Chan school. This
enlightenment is termed “complete and
immediate” since it is said to be allembracing in content and to be attained
suddenly, although not without the student having passed through many gradual
stages. The term is particularly important in the Tiantai school, which is also
known as the “Complete and Immediate
One Vehicle” 圓頓一乘 , and the precepts
of which are termed the “Complete and
Immediate Precepts” 圓頓戒.
The passage below the section of the
jc devoted to Hengyue Huisi 衡嶽慧思
(515–577), suggests the possible source
of the term as later used in the Tiantai
school. Huisi, the heir of Huiwen 慧文
(n.d.), founder of the Lotus school (pre-

cursor of the Tiantai school), was the
leading authority of his time on the Lotus
Sutra and the one who instructed Zhiyi,
founder of the Tiantai school, in the doctrines and meditation practices based
upon that scripture.
When he [Huisi] was given donations
by monks and laypeople, he made goldlettered copies of the Prajñāpāramitā and
Lotus sutras. Then, having been requested
by the people to expound the two sutras,
the master disclosed their meaning line by
line. He also ordered Zhiyi to lecture in his
stead. When Zhiyi reached [the line] “the
One Mind embraces the ten thousand
activities,” he had doubts and requested an
answer. The master said, “That on which
you are in doubt is the gradual doctrine
of the Dapin jing 大品經 (Mahā-prajñāpāramitā Sutra). It is not the complete and
immediate 圓頓 principle of the Lotus.
As for me, in the past, during a summer
retreat, a single instant of thought suddenly revealed all the dharmas before my
eyes. Since I have already experienced this
in my own person, I do not weary myself
with doubts.” Thereupon Zhiyi asked for
instruction in the Lotus practice, and after
three weeks attained enlightenment. (t
51: 431.b)

A slightly longer version of this episode is
found in the biography of Huisi in the xg
(t 50: 563a–b). On Huisi and his relation

194 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
如禪宗見解、又且不然。直是現今、更無時節。山僧說處、皆
是一期藥病相治、總無實法。若如是見得、是眞出家、日消萬
兩黃金。道流、莫取次被諸方老師印破面門、道我解禪解道。
辯似懸河、皆是造地獄業。若是眞正學道人、不求世間過、切
急要求眞正見解。若達眞正見解圓明、方始了畢。

“For the Chan school, understanding is not thus—it is instantaneous,
now, not a matter of time! All that I teach is just provisional medicine,
treatment for a disease. In fact, no real dharma exists. Those who understand this are true renouncers of home, and may spend a million gold coins
a day.
“Followers of the Way, don’t have the seal of sanction stamped haphazardly upon your face by any old teacher from anywhere, then go around
saying, ‘I understand Chan, I understand the Way.’ Though your eloquence
is like a rushing torrent, it is nothing but hell-creating karma.
“The true student of the Way does not search out the faults of the world,
but eagerly seeks true insight. If you can attain true insight, clear and complete, then, indeed, that is all.”
to Zhiyi, see Hurvitz 1962, 86–99 and
108–109. On the origins and development
of the ideas of “sudden” and “gradual”
enlightenment in Chinese Buddhism, see
Demiéville 1956 and Gregory 1988.

The following passage is to be found in
the Genben shuo yiqie you bu nituona
根 本 說 一 切 有 部 尼 陀 那 (Vinaya of the
Mūlasarvāstivādin school), translated in
703 by Yijing :

Those who understand this are true
renouncers of home, and may spend a
million gold coins a day. In early Indian
Buddhism a bhikku was forbidden by
the precepts to accept more than the four
necessities 四事: food, bedding (or lodging), clothing, and medicine, and, in the
case of the ﬁrst two items, only that for a
single day. The acceptance of money was
prohibited, and still is according to the
Theravada rules. Yet even the schools of
Indian Buddhism recognized a standpoint
very much like that of Linji.
The Chinese monk and translator Yijing
義 淨 (635–713), for example, brought
back to China from his long pilgrimage in India the vinaya (precepts) of the
Mūlasarvāstivādin school, one of the later
subdivisions of the Sarvāstivādin school.

The Buddha said, “If all of you, with a
believing mind, having taken your refuge
in me and gone forth from your homes,
sincerely seek nirvana and cultivate pure
conduct, even though all of you bhikkus
were to wear robes valued at a hundred
million pieces of gold, were to live in
dwellings valued at ﬁve hundred pieces of
gold, and were to eat and drink your ﬁll of
food of the hundred ﬂavors, though you
were to do such things as these, I permit
them all. You may spend all this.” (t 24:
423a–b)

Though Linji may have been familiar with
this passage, it would appear more likely
that the immediate model for his utterance here was a statement by Baizhang
Huaihai, the teacher of Linji’s own master
Huangbo Xiyun, as it is to be found in the
“Baizhang” section of the gy:

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 195

xiv
問、如何是眞正見解。師云、爾但一切入凡入聖、入染入淨、
入諸佛國土、入彌勒樓閣、入毘盧遮那法界、處處皆現國土、
成住壞空。

Someone asked, “What is ‘true insight’?”
The master said, “You have only to enter the secular, enter the sacred,
enter the deﬁled, enter the pure, enter the lands of all the buddhas, enter the
Tower of Maitreya, enter the dharma realm of Vairocana and all of the lands
everywhere that manifest and come into being, exist, decay, and disappear.
Someone asked, “Nowadays the śrāvakas
all say, ‘Depending upon the teaching of
the Buddha, we study the sutras, study
the śāstras, study meditation, study the
precepts, study knowledge, study understanding. So are we qualified to receive
the dānapatis’ oﬀerings of the four necessities? May we make use of these?’” The
master said, “He who, right now, actively
illumines sound, color, odor, and taste,
and at the same time is without the slightest vestige of stain from all the dharmas
of existence and nonexistence or from
any circumstances whatsoever, and does
not adhere to the state of nonstaining nor
to the state of nonadherence to knowledge and understanding, then, though
this person eats food to the amount of ten
thousand pieces of gold every day, he may
spend this.” (x 68: 10a)

Seal of sanction 印 is the teacher’s
acknowledgement that the student has
attained enlightenment and received
transmission of the teacher’s dharma. It is
more usually termed 印可.
The true student of the Way does not
search out the faults of the world. Compare the passage in the Xiaopin bore boluomi jing 小品般若波羅密經 , the Chinese
translation by Kumārajīva of one of the
Prajñāpāramitā sutras:
Also, then, Subhūtī, this foolish person
gains evil friends. He does not rejoice, nor
does he take pleasure, in cultivating the

good dharma. Furthermore, being profoundly jealous, he is always seeking the
faults of others. Naturally he exalts himself and disparages others. (t 8: 551b)

Also pertinent are the better-known lines
from the Dunhuang text of the Platform
Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch:
The one who truly cultivates the Way
Does not see the faults of the world.
If you see the faults of the world,
Your own faults are the more despicable.
(t 48: 342a)

If you can attain true insight, clear and
complete, then, indeed, that is all translates 若達眞正見解圓明、方始了畢. For the
usual Japanese reading of this passage,
moshi shinshō no kenge ni tasseba, enmyō
ni shite masa ni hajimete ryōhitsu sen, the
translation would be, “When he attains
true understanding [insight] he will have
complete clarity, and then there is nothing
more.” However, the two characters 圓明
should be read not with the second phrase
of the sentence, but with the ﬁrst, as has
been done in the present translation.

xiv
You have only to enter… disappear.
Linji’s statement is undoubtedly based
upon a doctrine expounded in the “Ru
fajie pin” 入法界品 (Chapter on entering the dharma realm; t 10: 319–444)
of Śikṣānanda’s “new” translation of the

196 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
佛出于世、轉大法輪、卻入涅槃、不見有去來相貌。求其生
死、了不可得。便入無生法界、處處游履國土、入華藏世界、
盡見諸法空相、皆無實法。

“The Buddha appeared in the world, turned the Wheel of the Great
Dharma, then entered nirvana, yet no trace of his coming and going can be
seen. Though you seek his birth and death, you will never ﬁnd it
“Then, having entered the dharma realm of no-birth and traveled
throughout every country, you enter the realm of the lotus-womb, and there
see through and through that all dharmas are characterized by emptiness
and that there are no real dharmas whatsoever.
Avataṃsaka Sutra, according to which all
the realms of the secular and the sacred
are products of the individual’s own mind.
This view was generally accepted by the
Chan school.
The extensive “Ru fajie pin” chapter is
devoted to an account of the visits made
to fifty-three teachers by the young pilgrim Sudhana (Shancai tongzi 善財童子),
under the guidance of the bodhisattva
Mañjuśrī. According to the sutra, for his
ﬁfty-second visit Sudhana travels south to
a country known as the Seacliﬀ Land 海
安國, and once there to the Grove of the
Storehouse of Splendid Adornments 大莊
嚴藏園林, in which is situated the magniﬁcent tower of Vairocana Buddha.
Vairocana, whose name means “omnipresent light,” is a symbolic representation
of the dharmakāya, the essential body of
buddha, which, like light, pervades everywhere, and of which Maitreya (Mile 彌
勒 )—the buddha of the future—and all
other buddhas are manifestations
When he reaches the Seacliff Land,
Sudhana enters the great tower of Vairocana, where all of its wonders are revealed
to him. There also Maitreya, attended by a
great company, comes to give him further
instruction.
Although there is some discrepancy
between Linji’s words and those in the
sutra, it is obvious that the master had this

section of the Avataṃsaka Sutra in mind
when he spoke.
The Wheel of the Great Dharma is a
metaphor for the teaching of Śākyamuni
Buddha; entered nir vana refers to
Śākyamuni’s death.
The dharma realm of no-birth is the
realm of nonduality beyond birth and
death, sometimes also referred to as the
realm of principle 理.
The realm of the lotus-womb is the
Pure Land created through the vows
and practices of Vairocana Buddha, as
described in the Avataṃsaka Sutra. The
name “realm of the lotus-womb” derives
from the fact that, just as the ﬂower of the
lotus contains already within it the lotus’s
seeds, in Vairocana Buddha’s realm of the
lotus-womb, cause is simultaneous with
eﬀect.
No real dharmas whatsoever is an
expression from the Vimalakīrti Sutra.
The scene is the visit of Bodhisattva
Mañjuśrī, attended by a large company, to
Vimalakīrti, the famous layman of Vaiśālī,
who is lying ill in his home:
Mañjuśr ī s aid, “Sir, how shou ld a
bodhisattva who is ill conquer his mind?”
Vimalakīrti replied, “A bodhisattva who is
ill should reﬂect thus: My present illness
has been caused by the delusions, errors,
and passions in my previous existences.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 197

唯有聽法無依道人、是諸佛之母。所以佛從無依生。若悟無
依、佛亦無得。若如是見得者、是眞正見解。學人不了、爲執
名句、被他凡聖名礙、所以障其道眼、不得分明。祇如十二分
敎、皆是表顯之說。學者不會、便向表顯名句上生解。皆是依
倚、落在因果、未免三界生死。

“There is only the man of the Way who depends upon nothing, here listening to my discourse—it is he who is the mother of all buddhas. Therefore
buddhas are born from nondependence. Awaken to nondependence, then
there is no buddha to be obtained. Insight such as this is true insight.
“Students do not understand this, and, because they adhere to names
and phrases and are obstructed by such terms as ‘secular’ and ‘sacred’,
becloud their Dharma Eye and cannot obtain clarity of vision. Take for
instance the twelve divisions of the teachings—all are nothing but surface
explanations. Not understanding this, students form views based on these
superﬁcial words and phrases. All such students are dependent and thus fall
into causation; they haven’t escaped birth-and-death in the three realms.
No real dharma exists 無有實法; who then
is it that is ill? Because the four great elements coalesce, temporarily we speak of a
body. The four great elements are without
a master; the body, also, is without an ‘I’.
Furthermore, this illness arises entirely
because of attachment to an ‘I’.” (t 14:
544c–545a)

The man of the Way who depends
upon nothing. Linji’s expression brings
to mind the words of the master Baizhang
Huaihai:
Buddha is one who has nothing to be
attached to, nothing to seek, and nothing
upon which to be dependent (gy 2; x 68:
10a).

Buddhas are born from non dependence. In the zl, the compiler Yanshou 延
壽 (904–976) quotes a certain Taiyuan 太
原 (n.d.):

The sutra says further, “Nondependence is
the mother of buddhas. Buddhas are born
from no-place.” (t 48: 942b).

The passage in the zl gives no indication, however, from which sutra Taiyuan
is quoting.
There is no buddha to be obtained
translates the expression 佛亦無得; which
can also be rendered, “Even buddha
cannot be obtained.” See the words of
Huangbo Xiyun as recorded in the Ming
version of the wl:
Originally there is nothing to be obtained,
and “nothing to be obtained” also cannot
be obtained. Therefore it is said, “There is
not a single dharma that can be obtained.”
(x 68: 20c)

The second sentence of the quote is from
the Diamond Sutra.

198 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
爾若欲得生死去住、脫著自由、即今識取聽法底人。無形無
相、無根無本、無住處、活撥撥地。應是萬種施設、用處祇是
無處。

“If you want to be free to live or to die, to go or to stay as you would put
on or take oﬀ clothes, then right now recognize the one listening to my discourse, the one who has no form, no characteristics, no root, no source, no
dwelling place, and yet is bright and vigorous. Of all his various responsive
activities, none leaves any traces.
Bright and vigorous translates 活撥撥
地, a term that Linji uses to describe the
vigorous manner in which ﬁsh splash and
leap about in the water. Though the Taishō
writes the character 撥 with the hand 手
radical, its usual form is with either the
water 水 or ﬁsh 魚 radicals.
A suspiciously similar passage is to be
found in the section devoted to Linji’s
contemporary Deshan Xuanjian in zh 20.
Here Deshan is recorded as saying in the
course of a sermon to his monks:
Many of you have knowledge and understanding. But do you know his countenance? [Though everyone], from the
home-renouncer to the bodhisattva who
has attained the completed mind of the
tenth stage, looks for his traces they cannot find them. Therefore all the gods
rejoice, the deity of the soil lifts his feet
reverently in his hands, all the buddhas of
the ten directions praise him, and the king
of the demons weeps copious tears. Why?
Because of this emptiness he is bright and
lively, without any roots and without any
dwelling place. (x 79: 173c)

All his various responsive activities
translates 應是萬種施設, where 應是 means
“all” or “every,” and is the equivalent of 應,
應有 , or 一應 (see Jiang 1962, 179–181).
This compound is invariably followed
by a noun or noun-equivalent that usually serves the function of a nominative
absolute. The traditional Japanese reading,
kono banshu no sesetsu ni ōjite, missing

this grammatical point, yields a meaning
something to the eﬀect of “in accordance
with these myriad circumstances.”
The term 施設 , a Chinese translation
of the Sanskrit word “prajñapti,” is much
used in the philosophy of the Yogācāra
(Weishi 唯識 ) school, where it indicates
primarily a provisional or hypothetical
teaching used as a skillful means. From
the context here it would seem that Linji
is using the term in a less technical sense,
and it has therefore been translated as
“responsive activities,” with the meaning
that all the activities of the man of the
Way are provisional or seeming, not real,
and take place in response to whatever
circumstances arise. Thus, in the sense of
being suitable for the occasion, they carry
the implication of being expedient. The
term is also seen on page 273, with much
the same meaning.
Editor’s note: The original translation for
this entire line was, “As for all his manifold
responsive activities, the place where they
are carried on is, in fact, no-place.” However, subsequent research by Sasaki’s colleagues, Yanagida and Iriya, suggests that
the present translation is preferable. The
original Chinese, 應是萬種施設, 用處祇是
無處, is translated by Yanagida into modern Japanese as subete no hōben tedate
wa, donna ni katsudō shite mo ato o todomenu, “All of his skillful means and expedients, no matter how actively pursued,
leave no traces” (1977, 106). Iriya has sono

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 199

所以覓著轉遠、求之轉乖。號之爲祕密。道流、爾莫認著箇夢
幻伴子。遲晚中間、便歸無常。爾向此世界中、覓箇什麼物作
解脫。覓取一口飯喫、補毳過時、且要訪尋知識。

Thus the more you chase him the farther away he goes, and the more you
seek him the more he turns away; this is called the ‘Mystery’.
“Followers of the Way, don’t acknowledge this illusory companion, your
body—sooner or later it will return to impermanence. What is it you seek in
this world that you think will bring you emancipation? You hunt about for
a mouthful to eat and while away time patching your robe. You should be
searching for a good teacher!
hito ga katsudō suru samazama no hōben
wa subete, hataraki to shite no atokata o
issai todomenu, “All of the various skillful means employed by that person leave
absolutely no traces of their functioning”
(1989, 63). Regarding the term 無處, Sasaki
quotes a passage from the zl:
All places are no-place—just this is the
place of the dharmas. The place where
activity is carried on is the place of noactivity and of the dharma of no-activity—just this is seeing buddha. (t 48: 939c)

This passage originally appears in the
Anxin famen 安心法門 (Dharma gate for
pacifying the mind), one of the works in
the Xiaoshi liumen 小室六門 (Bodhidharma’s six gates), a compilation of six short
treatises attributed to Bodhidharma. The
analogous passage in the presently existing Xiaoshi liumen version of the Anxin
famen is:
All places are no-place, and the place of
activity is without any dharma of activity—just this is seeing buddha. (t 48:
370b)

Thus the more… the more he turns
away. Editor’s note: Yanagida suggests that
this was a common proverb in China at
the time of Linji (1977, 106).
Sooner or later translates 遲晚中間. In
the colloquial language of the Tang, the
compound 中間 was appended to various

adverbs that indicate time relations. In the
Youxian ku 遊仙窟 we ﬁnd 俄爾中間 and
俄頃中間 , both meaning “in an instant,”
or “soon.” In the db we find numerous
examples: 頓食中間, “during, or after, the
interval of a meal,” i.e., “for, or after, a little
while”; 不經旬日中間, “not until ten days
have passed”; 時向 (or 食向 or 日向) 中間,
“after a little while.”
It will return to impermanence. A
similar idea is expressed by Linji’s teacher,
Huangbo, in the wl:
All practice [activities] in the end return
to nought; all efforts have a final limit.
Just as an arrow shot into the sky falls to
the earth when its power is spent, so you,
after all, will return to the round of birthand-death. (t 48: 386b–c)

Robe translates the character 毳, deﬁned
in the Zuting shiyuan as “a garment of ﬁne
wool cloth.” Later it came to be used for
monks’ robes in general.
You should be searching for a good
teacher translates 且要訪尋知識 . In the
traditional Japanese reading of this line,
ikku no han o miyakushu shite kisshi, zei
o oginai toki o sugoshite, shibaraku o bōjin
sen koto o yōsu, the imperative yōsu 要す
is the main verb of the sentence, which
would thus be translated, “Look for a
mouthful of food to eat, pass the time
patching your robe, and then search for a

200 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
莫因循逐樂。光陰可惜、念念無常。麁則被地水火風、細則被
生住異滅四相所逼。道流、今時且要識取四種無相境、免被境
擺撲。

Don’t just drift along pursuing comfort. Value every second. Each successive thought-moment passes quickly away. The grosser part of you is at the
mercy of [the four elements:] earth, water, ﬁre, and wind; the subtler part
of you is at the mercy of the four phases: birth, being, decay, and death.
Followers of the Way, you must right now apprehend the state in which the
four elements [and four phases] are formless, so that you may avoid being
buﬀeted about by circumstances.”
good teacher.” However, the emphasis of
Linji’s statement is that the monk’s life of
asceticism and poverty, although generally considered praiseworthy in and of
itself, is not what is centrally important in
the monk’s vocation—the sincere student
must ﬁnd a teacher and devote his time
and eﬀorts to carrying on his practice and
attaining enlightenment.
Much the same idea is to be found in
a passage from the Xuemai lun 血脈論
(Treatise on the transmission), another
of the short treatises attributed to Bodhidharma:
Therefore know that the phenomenal dharmas are like dreams and illusions. If you do not quickly search for
a teacher you will pass your lifetime in
vain. Although all have of themselves the

buddha-nature, if one does not rely upon
a teacher, in the end one’s understanding
will not reach completion. It is rare to ﬁnd
a single person among ten thousand who
has attained awakening without relying
upon a teacher. (t 48: 373c)

Interesting similarities are also seen in the
following lines in Yongjia’s long poem, the
Song of Enlightenment:
Wandering over rivers and seas, traversing streams and mountains / I sought a
teacher to ask about the Way, regarding
this as studying Chan.
From the moment I recognized the road
of Caoxi [the Sixth Patriarch] / I knew
I had no relationship with birth-anddeath. (t 48: 396a)

Buﬀeted about translates 擺撲, a Tang
colloquial word meaning “to knock down,
to beat up, to push around.”

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 201

xv
問、如何是四種無相境。師云、爾一念心疑、被地來礙。爾一
念心愛、被水來溺。爾一念心嗔、被火來燒。爾一念心喜、被
風來飄。若能如是辨得、不被境轉、處處用境。東涌西沒、南
涌北沒、中涌邊沒、邊涌中沒、履水如地、履地如水。

Someone asked, “What is the state in which the four elements [and four
phases] are formless?”
The master said, “An instant of doubt in your mind and you’re obstructed
by earth; an instant of lust in your mind and you’re drowned by water; an
instant of anger in your mind and you’re scorched by ﬁre; an instant of joy
in your mind and you’re blown about by wind. Gain such discernment as
this, and you’re not turned this way and that by circumstances; making use
of circumstances everywhere—you spring up in the east and disappear in
the west, spring up in the south and disappear in the north, spring up in the
center and disappear at the border, spring up at the border and disappear in
the center, walk on the water as on land, and walk on the land as on water.

xv
What is the state in which the four elements [and four phases] are formless?
Although Linji mentions the “four elements and the four phases” in his statement at the end of the previous section,
and although the questioner obviously
refers to this, in his answer Linji speaks
only of the four elements 四種.
You spring up in the east… and disappear in the center. The phrases that Linji
employs here to depict the free use of
circumstances by the enlightened person
are adapted from the stereotyped formula
describing the “six earth-shakings” 六
種振動 , the six ways in which the earth
shakes on the occasion of some momentous event, such as the enlightenment of a
buddha. This formula is found in a number of the earlier as well as later sutras,
and undoubtedly would have been well
known to the members of Linji’s audience.
An example of this formula is found in

the following passage from the Da bore
boluomiduo jing 大般若波羅蜜多經, Xuanzang’s translation of the complete Mahāprajñā-pāramitā Sutra. The “six earthshakings” here are said to have taken place
on the occasion of the Buddha’s entering
the Samādhi of the Joyful Play of the Lion
師子遊戲:
The universe shook in six ways, springing
up in the east and sinking down in the
west, springing up in the west and sinking
down in the east, springing up in the south
and sinking down in the north, springing
up in the north and sinking down in the
south, springing up in the center and sinking down on the borders, springing up
on the borders and sinking down in the
center. (t 6: 642c)

Walk on the water as on land, and walk
on the land as on water. This expression,
which further portrays the free use of circumstances by the enlightened person,
may have been inspired by the following
passage in the Mohe bore boluomi jing 摩

202 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
緣何如此。爲達四大如夢如幻故。道流、爾祇今聽法者、不是
爾四大、能用爾四大。若能如是見得、便乃去住自由。約山僧
見處、勿嫌底法。爾若愛聖、聖者聖之名。有一般學人、向五
臺山裏求文殊。早錯了也。五臺山無文殊。爾欲識文殊麼。祇
爾目前用處、始終不異、處處不疑、此箇是活文殊。

“How is this possible? Because you have realized that the four elements
are like dreams, like illusions. Followers of the Way, the you who right now
is listening to my discourse is not the four elements; this you makes use
of the four elements. If you can fully understand this, you are free to go or
to stay [as you please]. From my point of view, there is not a thing to be
disliked. If you love the ‘sacred’, what is sacred is no more than the name
‘sacred’.
“There’s a bunch of students who seek Mañjuśrī on Mount Wutai.
Wrong from the start! There’s no Mañjuśrī on Wutai. Do you want to know
Mañjuśrī? Your activity right now, never changing, nowhere faltering—
this is the living Mañjuśrī.
訶般若波羅蜜經, Kumārajīva’s translation

of the Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra:
When the Bodhisattva Mahasattva practices the prajñā pāramitā he cultivates the
prajñā pāramitā of supernatural power. By
means of this prajñā pāramitā of supernatural power he receives various things
according to his desire. He can shake the
great earth, he can change one body into
innumerable bodies and innumerable
bodies into one body. He is free to conceal or reveal himself. As for mountains
and trees, he passes through them as if
walking in the void. He walks on water
as though he were on the land, soars into
the sky as though he were a bird, comes
forth from and disappears into the earth
as though going in and out of water. His
body emits smoke and ﬂames like a great
conﬂagration, and from within his body
ﬂows forth water like the coursing streams
of the Himalayas. (t 8: 228b)

There is not a thing to be disliked. This
statement brings to mind the description
attributed to Bodhidharma in bz 8 of the

person who has attained complete realization:
On seeing evil he feels no hatred
On observing good he is not encouraged.
He neither turns away the stupid nor
invites the wise
Neither renounces delusion nor seeks
awakening.
Proﬁcient in the Great Way, he is beyond
measure
Having penetrated the buddha-mind, he
is beyond degree.
Following after neither the secular nor
the sacred
Transcendent, he is called the patriarch.

If you love the ‘sacred’…. Here again
there is a remarkable similarity between
the words used by Linji and those recorded
for his contemporary, the Chan master
Deshan Xuanjian, in zh 20:
Do not love the sacred; “sacred” is just an
empty name. If, in the three realms and
the ten directions, there is an atom of dust
or a single dharma that can be obtained,
or anything to which you attach an arbitrary explanation or protect as valuable,

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 203
you will irretrievably fall into the hands
of Māra Deva and the way of the heretics.
(x 79: 173a)

Mount Wutai 五臺 is a famous mountain located in Wutaixian 五臺縣, Shanxi
Province. The name Wutai, literally “ﬁve
terraces,” derives from the fact that the
mountain consists of ﬁve rounded summits. Huayan doctrine identifies it with
Mount Qingliang 清 凉 , “Mount Clear
and Cool,” the home of the bodhisattva
Mañjuśrī (Wenshu 文殊), as described in
the “Pusa zhusuo pin” 菩薩住所品 (Chapter on the bodhisattvas’ dwelling places)
of the Avataṃsaka Sutra. It was believed
that Mañjuśrī frequently appeared on the
mountain to preach the Law, and through
the centuries many laypeople and monks
have made pilgrimages to the mountain to
pay their respects to the bodhisattva.
From early times Mount Wutai has been
regarded as the most sacred of China’s
four great Buddhist mountains, the others being Mount Putuo 普陀 in Zhejiang
浙江 , which is sacred to the bodhisattva
Avalokiteśvara (C., Guanshiyin 觀世音 );
Mount Jiuhua 九華 in Anhui 安徽, which
is sacred to Kśitigarbha (C., Dizang 地
藏); and Mount Emei 蛾眉 in Sichuan 四
川, which is sacred to Samantabhadra (C.,
Puxian 普賢 ). In the early Tang dynasty
Mount Wutai served as an important center of the Huayan school.
The biography of the Kashmirian monk
Buddhapāli (Fotuoboli 佛陀波利, n.d.) in
the xg mentions that Buddhapāli journeyed from northern India to Mount
Wutai in China in order to worship
Mañjuśrī. When he arrived on the mountain in 676 the bodhisattva appeared to
him and instructed him to transmit to
the world the text of the Foding zunsheng
tuoluoni jing 佛頂尊勝陀羅尼經 (Sutra of
the victorious Buddha-crown dhāraṇī; t
19: #967).
There are many works relating to the
geography and history of Mount Wutai

and to the cult of Mañjuśrī there, among
the most famous of them being the Gu
qingliang zhuan 古清凉傳 (Old “Tales of
[Mount] Qingliang”; t 51: #2098) by the
Tang monk Huixiang 慧祥 (n.d.), who
visited the mountain in 667; the Guang
qingliang zhuan 廣清凉傳 (Comprehensive “Tales of [Mount] Qingliang)”; t 51:
#2099), written in 1060 by the Song monk
Yanyi 延一 (n.d.), who lived on the mountain; and the Xu qingliang zhuan 續清凉傳
(Supplementary “Biographies of [Mount]
Qingliang”; t 51: #2100) by the Chinese
oﬃcial (and later prime minister) Zhang
Shangying 張商英 (1043–1121), a devoted
student of Chan, whose Buddhist name
was Layman Wujin 無盡居士. Among the
tales related in these works is that of the
Huayan monk Wuzhuo and his pilgrimage to the mountain in 767, as related in
the note on the Second Statement (see
pages 145–147, above).
The Japanese Tendai monk Ennin 圓
仁 (794–864), who made a long pilgrimage to Tang-dynasty China during the
ninth century, left a vivid account of his
visit to Wutai (see Reischauer 1955a).
Edwin Reischauer, the translator of
Ennin’s account, also has many interesting
remarks to make on this portion of the
diary in his Ennin’s Travels in T’ang China
(Reischauer 1955b), 194–211.
The English writer John Blofeld also
visited Wutai in the middle of the present
century. His account of the mountain, its
temples, and ceremonies in recent times,
but prior to the suppression of Buddhism
following the Communist takeover in
1949, is contained in his autobiographical The Wheel of Life (Blofeld, 1959),
111–155.
Your activity right now… the true
Samantabhadra. Compare the following
passage from the master Huangbo Xiyun,
as recorded in the cf:
Mañjuśrī represents principle, Samantabhadra represents activity. By principle

204 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
爾一念心無差別光、處處總是眞普賢。爾一念心自能解縛、隨
處解脫、此是觀音三昧法。互爲主伴、出則一時出。一即三、
三即一。如是解得、始好看敎。

Your single thought’s nondifferentiating light—this indeed is the true
Samantabhadra. Your single thought that frees itself from bondage and
brings emancipation everywhere—this is the Avalokiteśvara samādhi. Since
these [three] alternately take the position of master and attendants, when
they appear they appear at one and the same time, one in three, three in one.
Gain understanding such as this, and then you can read the sutras.”
is meant the principle of the truly void
and unimpeded; by activity is meant the
inexhaustible activity beyond the sphere
of form. Avalokiteśvara represents great
compassion…. All the qualities typified
by the great bodhisattvas are inherent in
humans. They are not separate from One
Mind. Awaken to this and that is all. (t
48: 380a)

These [three] alternately… one in
three, three in one. Linji may have developed his idea from the following passage in the Xin Huayan jing lun 新華嚴
經論 (Treatise on the new translation of
the Avataṃsaka Sutra), since his words
resemble those of the author, the Huayan
lay scholar Li Tongxuan 李通玄 (639–734),
who expounds another, though related,
point:

For this reason the three virtuous
beings, Mañjuśrī, Samantabhadra, and
Avalokiteśvara, alternately act as master
and attendants to complete the rules of
dharma…. These three bodies alternately
make up the body and functions of the
single dharmakāya. (t 36: 739b)

The same general idea is later set forth
in greater detail by the fourth Huayan
patriarch, Qingliang Chengguan 清凉澄
觀 (737–838), in his San sheng yuanrong
guanmen 三聖圓融觀門 (Contemplation
of the perfect identity of the three holy
ones), though the “three sages” in this case
are not Mañjuśrī, Samantabhadra, and
Avalokiteśvara, but the typical Huayan
trinity of Vairocana Buddha, Mañjuśrī,
and Samantabhadra (t 45: 671a–672a).

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 205

xvi
師示衆云、如今學道人、且要自信。莫向外覓。總上他閑塵
境、都不辨邪正。祇如有祖有佛、皆是敎迹中事。有人拈起一
句子語、或隱顯中出、便即疑生、照天照地、傍家尋問、也大
忙然。

The master addressed the assembly, saying, “You who today study the
Way must have faith in yourselves. Don’t seek outside or you’ll just go on
clambering after the realm of worthless dusts, never distinguishing true
from false. [Notions] like ‘there are buddhas, there are patriarchs’ are no
more than matters in the teachings. When someone brings forward a phrase
or comes forth from the hidden and the revealed, you are at once beset
by doubt. You appeal to heaven, appeal to earth, run to question your neighbors, and are utterly perplexed.

xvi
Realm of worthless dusts translates
the term 閑塵境 , which was apparently
original with Linji. It is almost identical in
meaning with another term ﬁrst encountered in the ll, 閑機境, for which see comment on page 166.
Brings forward translates 拈 起 , an
expres sion often used in Chan texts to
speak of a master picking up his stick or
other object to “show it as it is,” without
words. Here what Linji is speaking about
“showing as it is” is a word or phrase,
which is done by demonstrating or actualizing it rather than talking about it.
The hidden and the revealed translates
隱顯 , a technical term that was much in

use in the Chan school at this time. See the
“transmission verses” attributed to the eleventh Indian patriarch of Chan, Punyayaśas
(Funayeshe 富那夜奢), as given in bz 3:
Delusion and awakening are like the
hidden and the revealed / Brightness
and darkness are not separate from one
another.
Now I transmit to you the dharma of the
Hidden and the Revealed / It is not one,
neither is it two.

The term is used many times by Fa zang 法藏 (643–712), the third patriarch
of the Huayan school; a representative
example is found in his important work
Huayan jing yihai baimen 華嚴經義海百
門 (One hundred issues relating to the
meaning of the Avataṃsaka Sutra), t 45:
627c. It is also found in the Huayan fajie
xuanjing 華嚴法界玄鏡 (Profound mirror
on the Avataṃsaka dharma realm; e.g., t
45: 679b), a work by the fourth Huayan
patriarch, Qingliang Chengguan 清凉澄
觀 (737–838).
Utterly perplexed translates 也大忙然.
The frequent use of the intensive adverb 大
“very,” “much,” which may be followed by
either an adjective, adverb, or verb, is one
of the characteristics of Tang colloquial
language. Common examples include 大
難, 大似, and 大有.
Earlier instances of this usage can be
found in fascicle 18 of the Soushen ji 搜神
記 (Investigations of the supernatural), a
book on “the strange” 怪 by Gan Bao 干寶
(ﬂ. 323): “[He was] very much frightened”
大恐怖 (140); “[He was] really quick to
decide” 大有才決 (141; twenty-fascicle edition, Shanghai, 1931).

206 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
大丈夫兒、莫祇麼論主論賊、論是論非、論色論財、論說閑話
過日。山僧此間、不論僧俗、但有來者、盡識得伊。任伊向
甚處出來、但有聲名文句、皆是夢幻。卻見乘境底人、是諸佛
之玄旨。佛境不能自稱我是佛境。還是這箇無依道人、乘境
出來。若有人出來、問我求佛、我即應淸淨境出。有人問我菩
薩、我即應慈悲境出。有人問我菩提、我即應淨妙境出。有人
問我涅槃、我即應寂靜境出。境即萬般差別、人即不別。所以
應物現形、如水中月。道流、爾若欲得如法、直須是大丈夫兒
始得。若萎萎隨隨地、則不得也。

“Resolute men, don’t pass your days in idle chatter this way, talking of
rulers and talking of outlaws, discussing right and discussing wrong, speaking of women and speaking of money. As for me, whoever comes here,
whether monk or layman, I discern him through and through. Regardless
of where he comes from, his words and phrases are all just dreams and illusions. On the other hand, it’s obvious that one in control of every circumstance [embodies] the mysterious principle of all the buddhas. The state of
buddhahood does not of itself proclaim, ‘I am the state of buddhahood!’
Rather, this very man of the Way, dependent upon nothing, comes forth in
control of every circumstance.
“If someone comes and asks about seeking buddha, I immediately appear
in conformity with the state of purity; if someone asks about bodhisattvahood,
I immediately appear in conformity with the state of compassion; if someone
asks me about bodhi, I immediately appear in conformity with the state of
pure mystery; if someone asks me about nirvana, I immediately appear in
conformity with the state of serene stillness. Though there be ten thousand
diﬀerent states, the person does not diﬀer. Therefore,
According with things he manifests a form,
Like the moon [reﬂecting] on the water.
“Followers of the Way, if you want to accord with dharma, just be men
of great resolve. If you just shilly-shally spinelessly along, you’re good for
nothing.
This way translates 祇麼, also rendered
as “thus,” “like that.” The word 麼 does
not function as an interrogative but as an
adverbial suﬃx, as in compounds like 恁
麼 and 與麼 (see page 139, above). In the
Dunhuang manuscripts and the zj, 麼 is
replaced by its homophones 沒 or 摩.
Talking of rulers and talking of out-

laws…. The tg text of the ll has the character 王 , meaning “king,” instead of the
present text’s 主, translated here as “rulers.”
The tg version is probably correct.
There are several possible sources for
Linji’s list of subjects that constitute “idle
talk.” The Da bore boluomiduo jing, for
example, says that the bodhisattva does

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 207
not enjoy talking about such matters
as kings, outlaws, military affairs, men,
women, villages, or towns (t 6: 675a). A
similar list is found in the Fo lin niepan
ji fazhu jing 佛 臨 涅 槃 記 法 住 經 (Sutra
of the abiding dharma, recorded as the
Buddha was about to enter nirvana), the
Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra as translated by
Xuanzang.
In this text the Buddha, after describing the decline, century by century, of the
dharma following his death, states that
in a thousand years the usual subjects
of discussion will be “kings and outlaws,
battles, food, drink, clothing, vehicles, self,
debauchery, men, women, various countries, rivers, seas, and diverse heresies” (t
12: 1113b–c).
A third list is found in the Da baoji
jing 大寶積經 (Sutra of the great treasure
collection), compiled by Bodhiruci (t 11:
11c–12a); a shorter list is found in the Da
piluzhe’na chengfo jing shu 大毘盧遮那成佛
經疏 (Commentary on the Mahāvairocana
Sutra), a work by the Chinese Zhenyan
monk Yixing 一行 (d. 727) (t 39: 761c).
According with things… on the water.
Here Linji is quoting a pair of lines from
the metrical section of the “Si tianwang”
四天王 (Four heavenly kings) chapter of
the Jinguangming jing 金光明經 (Golden
light sutra), in which the kings extol the
virtuous characteristics of the Buddha.
The entire four-line gatha reads:
The true dharmakāya of buddha / Is just
like empty space;
In response to the thing it manifests the
form/ Like the moon [reﬂecting] on the
water. (t 16: 344b.3–4)

The last two lines appear to have been
popular in Chan, as they are often quoted
in the school’s writings.
Accord with dharma 如法. The famous
Chan poet Layman Pang 龐居士 (740–
808) composed the following verse concerning conscious eﬀorts to “accord with
dharma”:

When you sit erect and seek accordance
with dharma / Accordance-withdharma turns the other way.
When you discard dharma with no intent
to grasp it / Then of itself it returns.
Don’t seek to leave the three realms /
Cherishing such thought simply makes
you a fool.
Imploring buddha for emancipation / Is
not being a resolute man. (x 69: 140b)

Just be translates 直須…始得, where 直
is an emphatic adverb. Analagous examples of this usage are 直是, 直宜, 直饒, 直
得, and 直要 (the last of these appears on
page 208, below). 直須…始得 means literally “(you) should… then (you are) all
right,” and is equivalent to 總得…才好 in
modern Chinese. Numerous examples of
this expression are found in the zj.
Shilly-shally spinelessly along translates 萎萎隨隨地, another of Linji’s originals. 萎 萎 is usually used to describe
drooping or withered plants, but it can
also mean to be tame, gentle, obedient,
meek, etc. 萎萎隨 means to go irresolutely
this way and that, indicating a state of
being timid, or scrupulous and devoid
of spirit.
The Yaoshan Weiyan 藥山惟儼 section
of zj 4 has the similar phrases 癒癒拳拳
and 臝臝垂垂 , whose literal meaning is
“going about things meekly and timidly, in
a trembly, shaky manner.” In the following
quotation, however, the phrases are used
in a laudatory sense to describe an attitude
that is at once gentle and humble in coping with all circumstances.
The master [Yaoshan] asked Yunyan 雲
嵓 , “What do you do about the problem
of life and death right here before your
very eyes?” Yunyan answered, “Right here
before my very eyes there is no problem
of life and death.” The master said, “You
studied under Baizhang 百丈 for over
twenty years, but you haven’t rid yourself
of vulgar ways.”
Then Yunyan said, “I’ve told you my
view. Let me hear yours.” The master said,

208 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
夫如㽄嗄 [上音西下所嫁切] 之器、不堪貯醍醐。如大器者、直
要不受人惑。隨處作主、立處皆眞。但有來者、皆不得受。爾
一念疑、即魔入心。如菩薩疑時、生死魔得便。但能息念、更
莫外求。物來則照。爾但信現今用底、一箇事也無。爾一念心
生三界、隨緣被境、分爲六塵。爾如今應用處、欠少什麼。一
剎那間、便入淨入穢、入彌勒樓閣、入三眼國土、處處遊履、
唯見空名。

Just as a cracked jug is unﬁt to hold ghee, so he who would be a great vessel
must not be taken in by the deluded views of others. Make yourself master
everywhere, and wherever you stand is the true [place].
“Whatever comes along, don’t accept it. One thought of doubt, and
instantly the demon [māra] enters your mind. Even a bodhisattva, when in
doubt, is taken advantage of by the demon of birth-and-death. Just desist
from thinking, and never seek outside. If something should come, illumine
it. Have faith in your activity revealed now—there isn’t a thing to do.
“One thought of your mind produces the three realms and, in accordance with causal conditions and inﬂuenced by circumstances, the division
into the six dusts takes place. What is lacking in your present responsive
activity! In an instant you enter the pure, enter the dirty, enter the Tower of
Maitreya, enter the Land of the Three Eyes, and everywhere you travel all
you see are empty names.”
“I live always trembling and shaking, so
meekly and timidly, fussing over all kinds
of worthless matters. This is the way I
spend my time.”

Cracked jug. The Southern Nirvana
Sutra (the Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra as
translated by Huiyan 慧嚴 [363–443]), uses
the metaphors of an earthenware jar and a
diamond jar 金剛寶甁 to compare ordinary
people with the Tathāgata:
An earthenware jar cracks with a breaking sound. A diamond jar is not like this,
nor is an emancipated one. The diamond
jar is a metaphor for emancipation…. The
truly enlightened one is none other than
the Tathāgata. Therefore the Tathāgata’s
body is indestructible. (t 12: 633a)

Ghee 醍醐 is a clariﬁed butter used in
India largely for sacrificial purposes. In

Buddhism it has a metaphorical meaning,
such as described. Consider also the following passage from the Nirvana Sutra:
For example, son of a good family, from
a cow comes fresh milk, from the milk
comes cream, from cream comes curdled
milk, from curdled milk comes butter,
and from butter comes ghee. Ghee is the
finest of all. Son of a good family, buddha is like this. From buddha issued forth
the twelve divisions of the teachings,
from the twelve divisions of the teachings
issued the sutras, from the sutras issued
the vaipulya scriptures, from the vaipulya
scriptures issued the Prajñāpāramitā,
from the Prajñāpāramitā issued the
Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra. It is just like ghee.
What I mean is that ghee is a metaphor
for the buddha-nature. And the buddhanature is none other than the Tathāgata.
(t 12: 690c–691a)

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 209

xvii
問、如何是三眼國土。師云、我共爾入淨妙國土中、著淸淨衣、
說法身佛。又入無差別國土中、著無差別衣、說報身佛。又入
解脫國土中、著光明衣、說化身佛。此三眼國土、皆是依變。

Someone asked, “What about the ‘Land of the Three Eyes’?”
The master said, “When you and I together enter the Land of Pure
Mystery we put on the robe of purity and preach as the dharmakāya buddha; when we enter the Land of Nondiﬀerentiation we put on the robe of
nondiﬀerentiation and preach as the saṃbhogakāya buddha; when we enter
the Land of Emancipation we put on the robe of brightness and preach as
the nirmāṇakāya buddha. These Lands of the Three Eyes are all dependent
transformations.
Great vessel translates 大器, used here as
similar in meaning to the more usual 法器,
“vessel of the dharma,” a person capable
of following the buddha-way. The origin
of the term is usually traced to the “Tipodaduo pin” 提婆達多品 (Chapter on Devadatta) of the Lotus Sutra, where the Dragon
King’s daughter appears before the Buddha
and the assembly, and requests the Buddha to aﬃrm her enlightenment. Śāriputra
then says to her, “A woman’s body is foul
and not a ﬁt vessel of dharma” (t 9: 35c).
Fortunately the young lady, by the exercise
of her magical powers, is able to instantly
transform her woman’s body into that of a
man and, before the astounded assembly,
to manifest as a bodhisattva preach ing
the dharma and receiving the homage of
innumerable beings.
The term 大器 itself is purely Chinese
and undoubtedly had its origin in section
41 of the Daode jing 道德經, where we ﬁnd
the term 大器晚成 , “a great vessel takes
long to complete.” Linji has here given this
Taoist term a Buddhist connotation.
Six dusts 六塵 (Skr., śaḍ viśayā) are the
six objects of cognition: form 色 (rūpa),
sound 聲 (śabda), odor 香 (gandha), taste
味 (rasa), tangibles 觸 (spraṣṭavya), and
objects of mind 法 (dharma). They are

called “dusts” because they obscure the
original purity of the mind. The term 六塵
is synonymous with 六境.
The Land of the Three Eyes 三眼國土
is the Land of Sudarśana bhikku (Shanxian biqiu 善現比丘), the twelfth teacher
visited by Sudhana (Shancai tongzi 善財童
子), as recounted in the Avataṃsaka Sutra
(t 9: 703c).
In the Xin Huayan jing lun, the term
“three eyes” 三眼 refers to the dharma eye
法眼, the eye of knowledge 智眼, and the
eye of prajñā 慧眼 (t 36: 787c). There are
various other definitions, however; here
Linji identifies the Three Eyes with the
three buddha bodies.

xvii
The Land of Pure Mystery 淨妙國土 is
another name for the pure land described
in the sutra Guan wuliang shou jing 觀無量
壽經 (Sutra on the contemplation of eternal life), one of the three central sutras of
the Pure Land Buddhist tradition.
Dependent transformations 依 變 ,
like the “threefold dependency” 三種依
explained in the comment on page 162,
expresses the standpoint that the buddha
is no more than a relative concept with no
intrinsic or inherent nature.

210 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

約經論家、取法身爲根本、報化二身爲用。山僧見處、法身即
不解說法。所以古人云、身依義立、土據體論。法性身、法性
土、明知是建立之法、依通國土。空拳黃葉、用誑小兒。蒺藜
菱刺、枯骨上覓什麼汁。心外無法、內亦不可得、求什麼物。
爾諸方言道、有修有證。莫錯。設有修得者、皆是生死業。

“According to the masters of the sutras and śāstras, the dharmakāya
is regarded as basic substance and the saṃbhogakāya and nirmāṇakāya
as function. From my point of view the dharmakāya cannot expound the
dharma. Therefore a man of old said, ‘The [buddha-]bodies are posited
depending upon meaning; the [buddha-]lands are postulated in keeping with substance.’ So we clearly know that the dharma-nature body and
dharma-nature land are fabricated things, based on dependent understanding. Empty ﬁsts and yellow leaves used to fool a child! Spiked-gorse seeds!
Horned water chestnuts! What kind of juice are you looking for in such
dried-up bones!
“Outside mind there’s no dharma, nor is there anything to be gained
within it. What are you seeking? Everywhere you say, ‘There’s something to
practice, something to obtain.’ Make no mistake! Even if there were something to be gained by practice, it would be nothing but birth-and-death
karma.
According to the masters…. Compare
this passage to the words of Linji’s teacher
Huangbo in the cf:
A b u d d h a h a s t h re e b o d i e s . T h e
dharmakāya preaches the dharma of
the universal voidness of self-nature;
the saṃbhogakāya preaches the dharma
of the universal purity of things; the
nirmāṇakāya preaches the dharmas of the
six pāramitās [see page 211, below] and all
other good practices. The dharma of the
dharmakāya cannot be grasped through
words, sounds, forms, or the written word.
There is nothing to be said, nothing to be
demonstrated; there is nothing other than
the universal voidness of self-nature. Thus
it is said, “There is nothing to be preached
as the dharma; this is called preaching
the dharma.” The saṃbhogakāya and the
nirmāṇakāya both appear in response to
particular circumstances, and the dharma
they preach corresponds to outer con-

ditions and to their listeners’ capacities;
in this way they guide sentient beings.
None of this is the true dharma. Therefore it is said, “The saṃbhogakāya and the
nirmāṇakāya are not the true buddha, nor
are they the ones who preach the dharma.”
(t 48: 382a)

A man of old. The master referred to
here is thought to be Ci’en Dashi Kuiji
慈恩大師窺基 (632–682). With regard to
Kuiji and this quote, see pages 162–163,
above.
Dependent understanding translates
依通 , an unusual term that is not found

outside of Chan writings. Japanese commentators take it to be an abbreviation
of the phrase 依倚通解 , “understanding
that depends upon something else.” In
the section of the gy devoted to Nanquan
Puyuan, an exchange between Nanquan
and a certain monk is recorded:

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 211
The monk asked, “Is a student not permitted to understand the Way?” The master
said, “To understand what Way? Also, how
understand?” “I don’t know,” the monk
said. The master said, “Not knowing is all
right, but if you take my words you will be
called one of dependent understanding.”
(x 68: 70a)

The wl of Huangbo Xiyun has:
But to one who has seen into his own
nature, what place is not his own original
nature? Therefore the six gati (destinies);
the four ways of birth; and the mountains,
rivers, and great earth, all are the pure
and bright substance of our own nature.
Therefore it is said, “Seeing form is no
other than seeing mind, because form and
mind are not diﬀerent.”
One who accepts form and, on this
basis, sees, hears, and perceives, and who
then tries to see into [nature] by rejecting things as such—such a one will fall
into the ranks of those in the two vehicles
[śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas], whose
understanding is dependent 依倚通解. (x
68: 21b)

Empty ﬁsts and yellow leaves used to
fool a child! translates the two expressions 空拳黃葉、用誑小兒, metaphors for
something that is passed off for what it
is not. They are found frequently in the
Nirvana Sutra and other scriptures. The
Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra, for example,
uses the expression “empty ﬁst” 空拳 as a
metaphor for deceiving others with false
views:
It is like deceiving a young lad with an
empty ﬁst. Because he is ignorant he thinks
there is something real in it. (t 7: 1104c)

And the Northern Nirvana Sutra uses
“yellow leaf ” 黃葉 to indicate expedient
teachings:
It is as, when a child cries and wails, its
father and mother will pull a yellow leaf
from a poplar tree and say, “Don’t cry!
Don’t cry! We will give you a piece of
gold.” The child, on seeing the yellow leaf,
imagines it to be pure gold and at once

stops crying, though in truth this poplar
leaf is not gold. (t 12: 485c)

Dried-up bones translates 枯 骨 , an
expression likely deriving from an allegory that is found in texts like the Zhengfa
nianchu jing 正法念處經 (Sutra on contemplating the true dharma) and the Da
baoji jing, in which a dog licking a dried
bone mistakes its own saliva for juice from
the bone.
Outside mind… within it. See the
words of Huangbo Xiyun in the cf:
It is much better immediately and of yourself to recognize the fundamental dharma.
This dharma is none other than mind;
outside mind there is no dharma. This
mind is none other than dharma; outside
dharma there is no mind. (t 48: 380b)

Note also that the jc reports Mazu Daoyi,
three generations before Huangbo, as having said:
Each and every one of you should believe
that his own mind, just this is buddha.
Outside mind there is no other buddha,
outside buddha there is no other mind.
(t 51: 246a)

Everywhere you say translates 爾諸方
言道, a sentence that is traditionally read
by Japanese commentators as nanji shohō
ni iu, dō ni… (“You are all saying that in
the Way there is something to…”). This
reading is difficult to justify grammatically, however, since the term 言道 here
is a compound verb meaning simply “to
say.” The term appears several times in the
present text, and a number of examples
can also be found in the db. After the Song
dynasty it was largely superseded by the
compound 說道.
Six pāramitās, often translated as the
“six perfections,” are the practices by
means of which one crosses over from
the world of birth-and-death to the other
shore, or nirvana. The six are:
1. dāna 布施: charity or almsgiving
2. śīla 持戒: maintaining the precepts

212 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
爾言六度萬行齊修。我見皆是造業。求佛求法、即是造地獄
業。求菩薩、亦是造業。看經看敎、亦是造業。佛與祖師、是
無事人。所以有漏有爲、無漏無爲、爲淸淨業。

You say, ‘The six pāramitās and the ten thousand [virtuous] actions are all to
be practiced.’ As I see it, all this is just making karma. Seeking buddha and
seeking dharma is only making hell-karma. Seeking bodhisattvahood is also
making karma; reading the sutras and studying the teachings are also making
karma. Buddhas and patriarchs are people with nothing to do. Therefore, [for
them] activity and the deﬁling passions and also nonactivity and passionlessness are ‘pure’ karma.
3.
4.
5.
6.

kṣānti 忍辱: patience and forbearance
vīrya 精進: zeal and devotion
dhyāna 禪定: meditation
prājñā 智慧: wisdom

When the number of pāramitās is given
as ten, to the six already mentioned are
added the following four:
7. upāya 方便: skillful means suitable to the
person and/or occasion
8. praniḍhāna 願 : the vow “to seek bodhi
above and save all sentient beings
below”
9. bala 力: strength or purpose
10. jñāna 智: the knowledge that proﬁts oneself and proﬁts others

In Mahayana Buddhism the practice of all
the pāramitās is considered necessary for
the attainment of bodhisattvahood.
Activity and the deﬁling passions and
also nonactivity and passionlessness.
“Activity” translates 有爲 (Skr., saṃskṛta),
meaning the processes resulting from the
laws of karma, something active, creative,
productive, functioning, phenomenal.
It contrasts with 無爲 (Skr., asaṃskṛta),
meaning that which is non active, passive; laissez-faire; spontaneous, natural;
uncaused, not subject to cause, condition,
or dependence; transcendental, not in
time, unchanging, eternal, inactive, and
free from the passions or senses; nonphenomenal, noumenal; also interpreted as
indicating nirvana, dharma-nature, real-

ity, and dharma realm. “Deﬁling passion”
translates 有漏 (āsrava), meaning, literally,
“ﬂow, drip, discharge.” 有漏 is one translation of the Sanskrit word “kleśa,” meaning
“deﬁlement, passion, distress, pain, aﬄiction,” usually rendered in Chinese as 煩惱.
Its opposite is 無漏 (anāsrava), translated
later in this sentence as “passionlessness,”
and meaning, literally, “no drip, leak, or
ﬂow.” 無漏 thus indicates “outside the passion-stream; outside the stream of transmigratory suﬀering; away from the downﬂow into lower forms of rebirth,” etc.
These four concepts—āsrava, anāsrava,
saṃskṛta, and asaṃskṛta—are discussed
in the Vimalakīrti Sutra:
[The Buddha said, “What is meant by
bodhisattvas not abiding in the unconditioned [asaṃskṛta]?”] “They discern
anāsrava [purity] yet do not cut off the
āsravas [impurities]; they discern that
there is nothing to be practiced, yet by
the practice of dharma transform sentient
beings through instructing them; they
discern the unreality of things, yet do not
renounce great compassion; they discern
the [correct] dharma degrees, yet do not
follow the Hinayana; they discern that all
dharmas are false, without substantiality, without self, without a master, and
without form, yet because their original
vow is not fulfilled they do not empty
[themselves] of merit, meditation, and
wisdom. To practice such dharma as this

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 213
is called ‘the bodhisattva does not abide in
the unconditioned.’
“Also, because they are provided with
merit they do not abide in the unconditioned; because they are provided with
wisdom they do not extinguish the conditioned [saṃskṛta]; because they have
great compassion they do not abide in
the unconditioned; because they fulfill
their original vow they do not extinguish
the conditioned; because they accumulate the medicine of dharma they do not
abide in the unconditioned; because they
administer the medicine according to
[need] they do not extinguish the conditioned; because they know the ills of
sentient beings they do not abide in the
unconditioned; because they cure the ills
of sentient beings they do not extinguish
the conditioned.
“All virtuous bodhisattvas, in practicing
this dharma, neither extinguish the conditioned nor abide in the unconditioned.
This is called the doctrine of emancipation
through the extinguishable and the nonextinguishable.” (t 14: 554c)

A related passage from the Vimalakīrti
Sutra is as follows:
Simhaṃati Bodhisattva said, “Āsrava
and anāsrava make two. If one knows
that the nature of all dharmas is equal
[dharmāṇāṃ samat], one does not produce the notions [saṃjñā] of āsrava and
anāsrava; one does not attach oneself
either to forms [nimitta] or to formlessness. This is to enter into the doctrine of
nonduality….
Bodhisattva Śuddhādhimukti said,
“Saṃskṛta and asaṃskṛta make two. If
one abandons all calculations [gaṇan]
the mind [citta] becomes like space, and
thanks to pure wisdom [viśuddhaprajñā]
there are no more hindrances [āvaraṇa]:
this is to enter into the [doctrine] of nonduality. (t 14: 550c–551a; translation follows Lamotte 1962, 306)

Pure karma 清淨業 can be interpreted
to mean karma as it applies to those who
have seen into the underlying emptiness

of all dharmas. The Da bore boluomiduo
jing, for example, comments as follows:
[What is the doctrine of the bodhisattva?]…. The doctrine is that all dharmas,
whether good or not good, are immaterial and pure. This is the doctrine of the
bodhisattva. The doctrine that all dharmas, whether recordable or unrecordable,
whether phenomenal [āsrava) or nonphenomenal [anāsrava), whether conditioned
[saṃskṛta) or unconditioned [asaṃskṛta),
whether mundane or supramundane, are
immaterial and pure; this is the doctrine of
the bodhisattva. Because the self-nature of
all dharmas is void, it is far removed [from
the phenomenal]; because this self-nature
is far removed [from the phenomenal] it is
tranquil; because this self-nature is tranquil it is pure; and because this self-nature
is pure, the profound prajñā pāramitā is of
the utmost purity. This prajñā pāramitā,
you must know, is the doctrine of the
bodhisattva. (t 7: 987b)

Nevertheless, the concept of purity is an
ambivalent one in Mahayana thought, as
shown in the following passage from the
Vimalakīrti Sutra:
He who, by observing the unconditioned
[asaṃskṛta], enters the level of true
enlightenment [niyāma] cannot initiate the resolve to attain the supreme and
perfect enlightenment [anuttarā samyak
saṃbodhi]. Just as lotus flowers do not
grow on high plateaus or on dry land but
on low-lying wet mud, so the buddhadharma is produced, not by those sentient
beings who observe the unconditioned
[asaṃskṛta] dharmas and enter the level
of true enlightenment, but by those in
the midst of the deﬁling passions [kleśa].
Also, just as seeds will never grow if sown
in the void but will flourish if sown in
richly manured earth, so he who observes
the unconditioned [asaṃskṛta] dharmas
and enters the level of true enlightenment
cannot produce the buddhadharma, while
even he who gives rise to a consciousness of self as high as Mount Sumeru can
initiate the resolve to attain supreme and

214 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
有一般瞎禿子、飽喫飯了、便坐禪觀行、把捉念漏、不令放
起、厭喧求靜、是外道法。祖師云、爾若住心看靜、擧心外
照、攝心內澄、凝心入定、如是之流、皆是造作。

“There are a bunch of blind shavepates who, having stuﬀed themselves
with food, sit down to meditate and practice contemplation. Arresting the
ﬂow of thought they don’t let it rise; they hate noise and seek stillness. This
is the method of the heretics. A patriarch said, ‘If you stop the mind to look
at stillness, arouse the mind to illumine outside, control the mind to clarify
inside, concentrate the mind to enter samādhi—all such [practices] as these
are artiﬁcial striving.’
perfect enlightenment and produce the
buddhadharma.
Therefore you must know that all the
defiling passions [kleśa] are seeds for
tathāgatahood. Just as he who does not
dive deep into the ocean cannot gain the
priceless pearl, so too he who does not
enter the great sea of the deﬁling passions
cannot gain the treasure of all wisdom. (t
14: 549b)

There is also the following passage from
the Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment, in the
chapter “The Bodhisattva of Pure Wisdom” 清淨慧菩薩:
Again, if there is a man who, having cut
oﬀ the aﬄictions forever, attains the purity
of the dharma realm, his realization of
purity constitutes a hindrance in itself,
and therefore he does not attain the freedom of perfect awakening. This is called
“the ordinary person’s [way of] according
with the nature of awakening.”
Good young man, all the bodhisattvas, upon observing that emancipation
itself constitutes a hindrance, cut oﬀ this
hindrance of emancipation. Yet they still
remain aware of awakening. Thus the
awareness of awakening constitutes a hindrance and they cannot attain the freedom of perfect awakening. This is called
“the bodhisattva-who-has-not-enteredthe-ﬁrst-stage-of-true-bodhisattvahood’s
[way of ] according with the nature of
awakening.”

O good young man, having illumination and having awakening are both hindrances. Hence the [true] bodhisattva is
always awakened yet does not abide [in
awakening]; illumination and he who is
illumined are together extinguished. (t
17: 917a)

Arresting the flow of thought… seek
stillness. See the opening lines of “Jingluan
bu’er” 淨亂不二 (Quietude and confusion
are not two), the ﬁfth in a series of poems
entitled Shisike song 十四科頌 (Verses on
fourteen themes), attributed to Baozhi 寶
誌 (418–514):
The śrāvaka’s hating noise and seeking
quietude / Is like rejecting ﬂour and
looking for bread.
Bread originally is none other than ﬂour /
Prepared by people in a hundred diﬀerent ways. (t 51: 451a)

This is the method of the heretics. See
the section on Jueduo Sanzang 崛多三藏
(n.d.) in zj 3:
The master (Jueduo Sanzang), an heir of
the Sixth Patriarch, was a native of India.
He once traveled to the village of Li 曆 in
the district of Dingxiang 定襄 in Dayuan
大原 , where he came upon a disciple of
Great Teacher Shen 神大師 (Shenxiu 神
秀; 606?–706, founder of the Northern, or
Gradual, school of Chan), who had built
a grass hut and was sitting alone contemplating the mind.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 215
The master asked, “What are you
doing?” The disciple replied, “I am observing stillness.” “Who is he who is observing,
and what is stillness?” asked the master.
The monk rose from his place, bowed
deeply, and said, “What do you mean? I
beg you to instruct me.” The master then
said, “Why don’t you observe yourself?
Why don’t you still yourself?”
The monk had no reply to this, and the
master, seeing that he was of a hesitant
and indecisive nature, asked, “Who is your
teacher?”
“Ven. Shenxiu,” replied the monk. “And
is this the only method your teacher has
taught you, or does he have some other
ideas as well?” asked the master. “No,”
replied the monk, “he taught me only
observing stillness.” “This,” said the master,
“is the sort of method practiced in India
by the most worthless of heretics. In this
country it is considered to be the way of
the Chan school, but it greatly misleads
people.”

If you stop the mind… artiﬁcial striving. This quotation is from Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會 (684–758), the heir of the
Sixth Patriarch through whose efforts
the teachings of Huineng emphasizing
sudden enlightenment 頓悟 came to be
known as the Southern school of Chan, to
distinguish them from Shenxiu’s gradualenlightenment 漸教 teachings, known as
the Northern school. Note that, whereas
Linji usually introduces quotations from
earlier Buddhist masters with the words
“a man of old” 古人 , he here shows special respect for Shenhui by using the term
“patriarch” 祖師.
A number of works and fragments
discovered at Dunhuang and ascribed to
Shenhui have been collected and edited
by Hu Shi 胡適 (1930 and 1958). In the ﬁrst
of these collections three instances occur
in which Shenhui describes the practices
of the Northern school in words paralleling those of Linji: 125.6–7, 133.11–134.2,
and 175.7–176.2. In the second collection

two such instances are found: 832.17–18
and 846.15. (Note that, throughout, Hu
Shi has mistakenly given the character 證,
“to prove,” for 澄, “to clarify,” the character
used in the Linji text.)
The following excerpt taken from Hu
1930 gives not only the Northern school
views just as Linji describes them, but also
Shenhui’s criticism and a clear statement
of his own position:
Master [Chong]yuan asked, “The two
great virtuous ones, Chan Master Songyue
Puji and Chan Master Dongyue Xiangmo
[disciples of Shenxiu], both taught men to
freeze the mind in order to enter samādhi,
to stop the mind in order to observe
purity, to arouse the mind in order to illumine the outside, and to concentrate the
mind in order to clarify the inside. They
pronounced this to be the principle of the
teaching. For what reason do you today,
in speaking about Chan, not teach men to
freeze the mind in order to enter samādhi,
to stop the mind in order to observe purity,
to arouse the mind in order to illumine
the outside, and to concentrate the mind
in order to clarify the inside? What do you
call [true] sitting meditation 坐禪?”
The venerable priest [Shenhui] replied,
“If you teach men to freeze the mind in
order to enter samādhi, to stop the mind
in order to observe purity, to arouse the
mind in order to illumine the outside,
and to concentrate the mind in order to
clarify the inside, this is a hindrance to
[the attainment of] bodhi. What I now call
‘sitting’ 坐 is [the state when] thought is
not aroused. What I now call ‘meditation’
禪 is seeing into one’s own original nature.
Therefore I do not teach men to seat the
body or to stop the mind in order to enter
samādhi.” (175.7–176.2)

Take them to be the true Way translates 爲是眞道 , where the compound 爲
是 means “to regard” or “to consider.” Taking into consideration the quadrisyllabic
(i.e., the double disyllabic) rhythm of this
phrase, the fourth character 道 necessarily
forms a compound with the preceding

216 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
是爾如今與麼聽法底人、作麼生擬修他證他莊嚴他。渠且不是
修底物、不是莊嚴得底物。若敎他莊嚴、一切物即莊嚴得。爾
且莫錯。道流、爾取這一般老師口裏語、爲是眞道、是善知識
不思議、我是凡夫心、不敢測度他老宿。瞎屡生、爾一生祇作
這箇見解、辜負這一雙眼。冷噤噤地、如凍凌上驢駒相似。我
不敢毀善知識、怕生口業。道流、夫大善知識、始敢毀佛毀
祖、是非天下、排斥三藏敎、罵辱諸小兒、向逆順中覓人。

“This very you, the man who right now is thus listening to my discourse,
how is he to be cultivated, to be enlightened, to be adorned? He is not one to
be cultivated, he is not one to be adorned. But if you let him do the adorning,
then everything would be adorned. Don’t be mistaken!
“Followers of the Way, you seize upon words from the mouths of those
old masters and take them to be the true Way. You think, ‘These good teachers are wonderful, and I, simple-minded fellow that I am, don’t dare measure
such old worthies.’ Blind idiots! You go through your entire life holding such
views, betraying your own two eyes. Trembling with fright, like donkeys on
an icy path, [you say to yourselves,] ‘I don’t dare disparage these good teachers for fear of making karma with my mouth!’
“Followers of the Way, it is only a great teacher who dares to disparage
the buddhas, dares to disparage the patriarchs, to determine the right and
the wrong of the world, to reject the teachings of the Tripiṭaka, to revile all
infantile fellows, and to look for a Person amidst fortunate and unfortunate
circumstances.
character 眞 to form 眞道, “true Way,” so
that the entire phrase reads, as above, “take
them to be the true Way.” This contrasts
with the traditional Japanese reading of
道 as iu, “to say,” which would give, kore
shin nari to nashite iu, “taking them to be
true, say….”
I don’t dare… my mouth 我不敢毀善知
識怕生口業. Japanese commentators have
traditionally taken these words to express
Linji’s own attitude, yielding the Japanese
reading, ware aete zenchishiki o soshirite,

kugō o shōzen o osoruru ni arazu, “I do
not fear to make karma with my mouth
by abusing these learned men.” Here 不敢,
“not to dare,” is taken to control both the
verb 毀 “to disparage,” in the ﬁrst clause
and also 怕, “to fear,” in the second clause.
The expression 不敢, however, cannot control such a negative word as 怕 , since 不
敢 is invariably followed by words with
strongly positive meanings. We have preferred to take these words as Linji’s mocking criticism of his listeners, and to read 不
敢 with the ﬁrst verb 毀 only, as above.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 217

所以我於十二年中、求一箇業性、知芥子許不可得。若似新婦
子禪師、便即怕趁出院、不與飯喫、不安不樂。自古先輩、到
處人不信、被遞出、始知是貴。若到處人盡肯、堪作什麼。
所以師子一吼、野干腦裂。道流、諸方說、有道可修、有法可
證。爾說證何法、修何道。爾今用處、欠少什麼物、修補何處。

“Therefore, when I look back over the past twelve years for a single thing
having the nature of karma, I can’t ﬁnd anything even the size of a mustard
seed. The Chan master who is like a new bride will fear lest he be thrown out
of his temple, be given no food to eat, and have no contentment and ease.
From olden days our predecessors never had people anywhere who believed in
them. Only after they had been driven out was their worth recognized. If they
had been fully accepted by people everywhere, what would they have been
good for? Therefore it is said, ‘The lion’s single roar splits the jackals’ skulls.’
“Followers of the Way, people everywhere say that there is a Way to be
practiced, a dharma to be conﬁrmed. Tell me, what dharma will you conﬁrm, what Way will you practice? What is lacking in your present activity?
What still needs to be patched up?
The past twelve years. From ancient
times the Chinese have measured time
in twelve-year periods, the approximate
time that it takes Jupiter to complete one
cycle through the heavens. There are also
twelve animals, one for each year, in the
Chinese zodiac. “Twelve years” is thus a
loose designation for “a number of years.”
For instance, there is in the Vimalakīrti
Sutra the following conversation between
Śāriputra and the goddess:
Śāriputra said to the goddess, “Why do
you not change your woman’s body?” The
goddess replied, “For the past twelve years
I have sought for a woman’s form, but have
never been able to attain one. Into what
form shall I then change?” (t 14: 548b)

The lion’s single roar splits the jackals’
skulls. Linji may here be paraphrasing
a verse from Yongjia’s Song of Enlightenment: “The lion’s roar, preaching of fearlessness—hearing this, the timid animals’
brains are torn in pieces” (t 48: 396a).
Among the other possible sources of

this term is a fable found in the Wufen lü
五分律 (The ﬁve-part vinaya) that tells of a
fox that lived close to the mountain cave
of a hermit. This hermit was accustomed
to reciting the books of the Kṣatriyas
aloud, and thus the fox, listening to him,
gradually attained some understanding.
One day the fox thought to himself, “I
now know enough book language to make
myself king of the beasts.” He set forth
on his travels, and through various tricks
succeeded in getting all the foxes to follow
him. With his pack of foxes he subdued
all the elephants; with the elephants he
subdued all the tigers; and with the tigers
he subdued all the lions. He then declared
himself king of the beasts.
Having become king, he thought, “I am
now king of the beasts. It is not fitting
that I take a beast for a wife.” So, mounted
upon a white elephant and leading all
the beasts, he surrounded the citadel of
Kapilavastu. When the king of Kapilavastu
sent a messenger to inquire what this was

218 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
後生小阿師不會、便即信這般野狐精魅、許他說事、繋縛人、
言道理行相應、護惜三業、始得成佛。如此說者、如春細雨。
古人云、路逢達道人、第一莫向道。

“The immature young monk, not understanding this, believes in these
fox-spirits and lets them speak the kind of nonsense that binds other people,
such as, ‘Only by harmonizing the principle and practice and by guarding
[against] the three karmas can buddhahood be attained.’ People who talk
like this are as common as spring showers. A man of old said,
If on the road you meet a man who has mastered the Way,
Above all do not speak of the Way.

all about, the fox replied, “As I am king of
all the beasts, it is ﬁtting that I receive your
daughter for my wife. If you give her to
me, then good; if you do not, I will destroy
your country.”
The king hastily called a council of
his ministers. All but one urged him to
assent to the fox’s demand. The sole dissenter, who was farseeing and clever in
the ways of the world, said, “O King, you
have only to dispatch an envoy to set a
time for the battle, but on this condition,
that the fox order the lions to ﬁght ﬁrst,
then to roar. The fox will think that we
are afraid and certainly will order the
lions to roar first, then fight. But when
the day of battle arrives you must be sure
to order everyone within the citadel to
cover their ears.”
Everything turned out just as the minister had planned. As soon as the vanguard of the army went forth from the
citadel to do battle, sure enough, the lions
let out a great roar. When the fox heard
this awesome sound, his heart burst into
seven pieces and he fell to the ground.
Thereupon the hordes of beasts all ﬂed in
confusion. (t 22: 18b–c)
For 野干, translated here as “jackal,” see
Zuting shiyuan 祖庭事苑 7 (x 64: 423b).
Three karmas 三業 refers to several different groups of so-called “karmas” (activ-

ities), most commonly being: 1) activities
of the body 身, i.e., deeds; 2) activities of
the mouth 口, i.e., speech; and 3) activities
of the mind 意, i.e., thoughts.
If on the road… do not speak of the
Way. Editor’s note: The second line, “Above
all do not speak of the Way” 第一莫向道,
has been retranslated from Sasaki’s original “Above all do not try to approach the
Way,” on the basis of Yanagida 1977, 127.
This couplet is Linji’s adaption of the
last two lines of a verse by Sikongshan
Benjing 司空山本淨 (667–761), an heir of
the Sixth Patriarch. The master had been
asked about the Way, and concluded his
reply with the following verse:
Regarding the substance of the Way, fundamentally there’s nothing to practice
Without practice, one naturally accords
with the Way.
He who conceives the idea of practicing
the Way
Has never understood the Way.
He has abandoned his one true nature
And entered the noisy, bustling world.
If you meet one who practices the Way
Don’t ever speak of the Way. (x 80: 59c)

This couplet seems to have been popular
at the time, for it is found, with variations,
in several of the early “recorded sayings.”
In this sentence 第一 is an intensive
adverb lacking its usual meaning of “ﬁrst.”

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 219

所以言、若人修道道不行、萬般邪境競頭生。智劍出來無一
物、明頭未顯暗頭明。所以古人云、平常心是道。

Therefore it is said,
When a man tries to practice the Way, the Way does not function,
And ten thousand evil circumstances vie in raising their heads.
But when the sword of wisdom ﬂashes forth, nothing remains;
Before brightness is manifest, darkness is bright.
For that reason a man of old said, ‘Ordinary mind is the Way.’

It is usually, though not always, employed
in a negative imperative sentence; used
with 莫, it indicates a strong interdiction.
The expression is found, for example, in
the Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch
25: “Don’t ever be attached to emptiness”
第一莫著空 (Suzuki and Kda 1934, 34).
Other examples are found in the jc (t 51:
335c), gy (x 68: 46a), zh (x 79: 192a), etc.
A rare occasion when this expression is
used as a positive imperative is found in
the Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch
40: “Come back quickly and don’t let me
have to reprimand you” 汝第一早來, 勿令
恠 (Suzuki and Kda 1934, 41.7).
At times, as above, the character 勿 is
used to replace 莫. For example. the Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch, section
13: “Don’t ever make the mistake of saying
that samādhi and prajñā are diﬀerent from
one another 第一勿言定惠別 (Suzuki and
Kda 1934, 11.6). Another common variation is 第一不得, “above all you shouldn’t…”
(e.g., jc [t 51: 440c], gy [x 68: 14c], zh [x
79: 148c], wh [x 80: 425c]).
This colloquial expression seems to
have disappeared after the Song, but a vestige can still be found in the Qing novel
Guanchang xianxing ji 宮場現形記 (Panorama of oﬃcialdom), by Li Baojia 李寶嘉
(1867–1906), written at the very end of the
dynasty. In chapter 5 is the sentence 爾第
一別答應他的錢, “Don’t ever comply with
his claim for payment.”

When a man… darkness is bright. The
source of this quote is unknown. However,
the expression “sword of wisdom” 智劍
may derive from a line in the Vimalakīrti
Sutra where the Buddha, in the course of
enumerating the activities of the bodhisattva, says, “With the sword of wisdom he
fells the thieves of the deluding passions”
(t 14: 554b).
In connection with the terms “brightness” 明 and “darkness” 暗, see the following lines from the poem Cantong qi 參同
契 (Harmony of diﬀerence and equality)
by Shitou Xiqian 石頭希遷 (700–790), as
quoted in the jc:
Within brightness there is darkness / So
don’t treat brightness as mere brightness.
Within darkness there is brightness / So
don’t view darkness as mere darkness.
Brightness and darkness are relative to
one another / As steps ahead are relative
to steps behind. (t 51: 459b)

Ordinary mind is the Way 平常心是道.
The “man of old” who made this famous
statement was Mazu Daoyi. In a sermon
recorded in the jc the master sets forth his
concept of what this expression means:
Chan Master Daji Daoyi of Jiangxi
addressed the assembly thus: “The Way
does not need to be cultivated. Just don’t
stain it. What is ‘staining it’? Just having
a samsara mind [as regards it] and artiﬁcially striving toward it—this is ‘staining
it.’ If you want to understand this Way

220 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
大德、覓什麼物。現今目前聽法無依道人、歷歷地分明、未曾
欠少。爾若欲得與祖佛不別、但如是見、不用疑誤。爾心心不
異、名之活祖。心若有異、則性相別。心不異故、即性相不別。

“Virtuous monks, what are you looking for? [You] nondependent people
of the Way who listen to my discourse right now before my eyes, [you are]
bright and clear and have never lacked anything. If you want to be no different from the patriarch-buddha, just see things this way. There’s no need
to waver.
“Your minds and Mind do not diﬀer—this is called [your] living patriarch. If mind diﬀers, its essence will diﬀer from its manifestations. Since
mind does not diﬀer, its essence and its manifestations do not diﬀer.”
completely, the ordinary mind is the Way.
What is called the ‘ordinary mind’ is without artificially created activity, without
right or wrong, without grasping or relinquishing, without annihilation or permanence, without secular or sacred. The sutra
says, ‘That which is neither the secular
man’s practice nor the sage’s practice is the
“bodhisattva practice”.’ Your present walking, staying, sitting, lying, responding to
the occasion, accepting existing things—
all these are the Way. The Way is the very
Dharma realm, and everything, including
marvelous activities as numerous as the
sands of the Ganges, is within the dharma
realm.” (t 51: 440a)

This passage shows that the usual attribution of the statement “ordinary mind is
the Way” to Mazu’s disciple Nanquan is
mistaken. This is made explicit in the following passage (also in the jc):
At this time there was a monk who asked,
“From the earliest patriarch to Great
Teacher Jiangxi [Mazu], all have said, ‘This
mind is buddha, the ordinary mind is the
Way.’ Now you, Reverend Priest [Nanquan], say, ‘Mind is not buddha, wisdom
is not the Way.’ Thus all the students have
doubts. I beg of you, out of your compassion, to explain to us.” (t 51: 445b)

The association of Nanquan’s name with
the expression may owe to the fact that

when his disciple Zhaozhou Congshen
asked him, “What is the Way?” Nanquan
replied with the words of his master
Mazu:
The master [Zhaozhou] asked Nanquan,
“What is the Way?” Nanquan said, “Ordinary mind is the Way.” The master said,
“Can one strive for it?” “To strive is to
diverge from it,” Nanquan replied. “But if
one doesn’t strive, how is the Way to be
known?” the master asked. Nanquan said,
“The Way is not related to knowing or notknowing. Knowing is false understanding;
not-knowing is indiﬀerence. If you truly
penetrate the Way that is not to be striven
for, it is like the vast void extending without limit. How can one talk of aﬃrmation
and negation?” At these words the master
was awakened to the abstruse principle.
(t 51: 276c)

Your minds and Mind translates 心
心, traditionally taken to mean “from one
instant of mind to the next,” so that 心
心不異 would mean, “the mind that does
not differ from one instant to the next.”
Another interpretation, albeit less frequent, reads the phrase as “the mind that
does not differ from every other mind.”
We based our translation, “your minds
and Mind do not diﬀer,” upon the words
of Linji’s teacher Huangbo Xiyun, as found
in the jc:

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 221

xviii
問、如何是心心不異處。師云、爾擬問、早異了也、性相各
分。道流、莫錯。世出世諸法、皆無自性、亦無生性。但有空
名、名字亦空。

Someone asked, “What about the state where ‘mind and Mind do not
diﬀer’?”
The master said, “The instant you ask the question they are already separate, and essence diﬀers from its manifestations.
“Followers of the Way, make no mistake! All the dharmas of this world
and of the worlds beyond are without self-nature. Also, they are without produced nature. They are just empty names, and these names are also empty.
From the time the Tathāgata transmitted his dharma to Mahākāśyapa up to
the present, mind has been sealed by
Mind, and mind and Mind do not differ. When the seal is impressed upon the
void it does not make a mark; when the
seal is impressed upon things, it does not
make dharma. Therefore mind is sealed by
Mind, and mind and Mind do not diﬀer.
(t 51: 272c)

Also, in the wl we ﬁnd the following:
When [Bodhidharma] came from the
west he transmitted only mind-buddha.
He pointed directly to the truth that the
minds of you all are fundamentally none
other than buddha and that mind and
Mind do not diﬀer. This is what is meant
by “patriarch.” (t 48: 384b)

If mind differs… manifestations do
not diﬀer. Editor’s note: Sasaki’s original
translation for this passage was, “If mind
diﬀers, the essential nature and forms will
be different. Since mind does not differ,
therefore the essential nature and forms
are not different.” Yanagida, however,
came to interpret 性 and 相, rendered by
Sasaki as “essential nature” and “forms,”
as, respectively, 心性, “mind essence,” and
心識 , “the mind in its various manifestations” (1977, 128). I have followed this
interpretation.

xviii
Also, they are without produced nature
亦 無 生 性 . See the Northern Nirvana
Sutra:
The impure dharmas, even before they
come into being, already have birth-nature
生性 ; hence it is through birth that they
can come into being. The pure dharmas are
originally without birth-nature 無生性; for
this reason their coming into being cannot
be through birth. Like ﬁre, which has an
original [burning-]nature and which, on
chancing to meet a cause, bursts into ﬂame;
like the eye, which has a seeing nature and
because of color, light, and mind, therefore
sees; so too are sentient beings. Because
they originally possess [birth-]nature, on
chancing to meet the causal conditions
and come in contact with karma, they are
conceived when their fathers and mothers
are in harmonious union. (t 12: 490c)

For these terms as used in the Weishi 唯
識 (Consciousness-Only) school, see the
entry 三無性 in Mochizuki Bukkyō daijiten
2:1686c–1687a.
They are just empty names, and these
names are also empty. See Vimalakīrti’s
reply to Mañjuśrī’s questions regarding
his illness:
When [the Bodhisattva] attains to this
sameness, there is no other illness; there

222 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
爾祇麼認他閑名爲實。大錯了也。設有、皆是依變之境。有箇
菩提依、涅槃依、解脫依、三身依、境智依、菩薩依、佛依。
爾向依變國土中、覓什麼物。乃至三乘十二分敎、皆是拭不淨
故紙。佛是幻化身、祖是老比丘。

All you are doing is taking these worthless names to be real. That’s all
wrong! Even if they do exist, they are nothing but states of dependent
transformation, such as the dependent transformations of bodhi, nirvana,
emancipation, the threefold body, the [objective] surroundings and the
[subjective] mind, bodhisattvahood, and buddhahood. What are you looking for in these lands of dependent transformations! All of these, up to and
including the Three Vehicles’ twelve divisions of teachings, are just so much
waste paper to wipe oﬀ privy ﬁlth. The buddha is just a phantom body, the
patriarchs just old monks.
is only the illness of emptiness, and the
illness of emptiness is also empty.” (t 14:
545a)

The interpretation of these lines is based
upon the Zhu Weimojie jing 注 維 摩 詰
經 , the commentary on the Vimalakīrti
Sutra said to have been compiled by Sengzhao from notes on Kumārajīva’s lectures
given during the translation of the sutra,
plus the comments of Sengzhao and several other disciples (t 38: 377a). Just as
Linji in the previous section characterized the dharmakāya, saṃbhogakāya, and
nirmāṇakāya as “dependent transformations” (see pages 162 and 209, above), so
here he uses the same term to characterize the states of nirvana, bodhi, etc.—all
generally considered to be absolute or
transcendental—as relative or dependent
states.
The objective surroundings and the
subjective mind translates 境智 , a term
explained at length by the Tiantai master Zhiyi in his Si nianchu 四念處 (Four
foundations of mindfulness) (t 46: 575a).
It was apparently familiar to the compilers of the Dunhuang Platform Sutra of
the Sixth Patriarch, where, in section 17,
we ﬁnd:

No-thought 無念 means not to be deﬁled
by external objects. It is to free thought
from external objects and not to arouse
thoughts about dharmas. But do not stop
thinking about things, nor eliminate all
thoughts. [If you do so] as soon as a single
thought stops you will be reborn in other
realms. Take heed of this! Do not cease
objective things nor subjective mind (境
智). (See Yampolsky 1967, 51.)

The term may have been introduced into
the Chan school by Yongjia Xuanjue, who
was a student of Tiantai before studying
under the Sixth Patriarch, since we find
the following in the Chanzong Yongjia ji
禪宗永嘉集 (Anthology of Yongjia of the
Chan School):
He who aspires to seek the great Way
must ﬁrst of all make pure the three acts
[of body, word, and thought] through
pure practice. Then, in the four forms of
demeanor—sitting, standing, walking, and
lying—he will enter the Way by degrees.
When he has reached the state where the
objects of the six roots have been thoroughly penetrated while conforming with
conditions, and the objective world and
the subjective mind 境智 both have been
stilled, he will mysteriously meet with the
marvelous principle. (t 48: 388b)

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 223

爾還是娘生已否。爾若求佛、即被佛魔攝。爾若求祖、即被祖
魔縛。爾若有求皆苦。不如無事。有一般禿比丘、向學人道、
佛是究竟、於三大阿僧祇劫、修行果滿、方始成道。道流、爾
若道佛是究竟、緣什麼八十年後、向拘尸羅城、雙林樹間、側
臥而死去。佛今何在。明知與我生死不別。

“But you, weren’t you born of a mother? If you seek buddha, you’ll be
held in the grip of Buddha-Māra. If you seek the patriarchs, you’ll be bound
by the ropes of Patriarch-Māra. If you engage in any seeking, it will all be
pain. Much better to do nothing.
“There are a bunch of shavepate monks who say to students, ‘The Buddha is the Ultimate; he attained buddhahood only after he came to the fruition of practices carried on through three great asaṃkhyeya kalpas.’ Followers of the Way, if you say that the Buddha is the ultimate, how is it that after
eighty years of life the Buddha lay down on his side between the twin śāla
trees at Kuśinagara and died? Where is the Buddha now? We clearly know
that his birth and death were not diﬀerent from ours.
Another example of its usage in Chan is
in zj 18. Guishan Lingyou asks his disciple
Yangshan Huiji if he can judge the teachers and disciples who come to see him.
“There are students coming from everywhere. When they ask you about Caoxi’s
(the Sixth Patriarch’s) cardinal principle,
how do you answer them?” [Yangshan]
said, “[I ask,] ‘Virtuous one, where have
you come from recently?’ The student
may answer, ‘Recently I have come from
visiting old worthies everywhere.’ I shall
thereupon bring forward an objective
circumstance and ask, ‘Do the old worthies everywhere speak about this or not?’
Another time I bring out an objective circumstance and say, ‘Putting aside this for
the time being, tell me what is the cardinal
principle of the old worthies everywhere?’
The above two are cases of objective circumstance and subjective mind 境智.”

Waste paper to wipe off privy filth.
A similarly iconoclastic statement by
Linji’s contemporary Deshan Xuanjian is
recorded in zh 20: “The twelve divisions
of the teachings are the census-records

of demons and spirits, paper [ﬁt only] for
cleaning running sores” (x 79: 173a). For a
translation of the entire passage, see page
169, above.
But you, weren’t you born of a mother?
This rather cryptic remark undoubtedly
refers to the “original nature” or “original
face” with which everyone is born. See
the following lines in Nanyue Mingzan’s
poem Ledao ge 樂道歌 (Song of enjoying
the Way):
Don’t blindly seek the true buddha / The
true buddha cannot be seen.
The wondrous nature and the marvelous
mind / How could they ever have been
tempered and reﬁned!
My mind is the nothing-to-do mind / My
face, the face born of my mother.
Though the kalpa-stone may be worn
away / This is changeless forever.
(t 51: 461b)

How is it translates 緣什麼, corresponding to 爲什麼 in present-day Chinese. In
the colloquial language of the Tang it had

224 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
爾言、三十二相八十種好是佛。轉輪聖王應是如來。明知是幻
化。古人云、如來擧身相、爲順世間情。恐人生斷見、權且立
虛名。假言三十二、八十也空聲。有身非覺體、無相乃眞形。

“You say, ‘The thirty-two [primary] features and the eighty [secondary]
features indicate a buddha.’ Then must the cakravartin also be considered a
tathāgata? We clearly know that these features are illusory transformations.
A man of old said,
The Tathāgata’s various bodily features were assumed to conform
with worldly sensibilities.
Lest men conceive annihilist views, he provisionally provided
unreal names.
Temporarily we speak of the ‘thirty-two,’ the ‘eighty,’ also, are but
empty sounds.
The mortal body is not the awakened body, featurelessness is the
true ﬁgure.
the following synonyms: 緣甚; 緣沒; 緣阿
沒; 著甚; 因甚; 爲甚; and 爲什 (or 甚) 沒.
The thirty-two… a tathāgata? In these
lines Linji no doubt had in mind the following passage in the Jin’gang bore boluomi
jing 金剛般若波羅蜜經, Kumārajīva’s Chinese translation of the Diamond Sutra:
[The Buddha questioned Subhūti], saying, “Subhūti, what do you think? Can
the Tathāgata be discerned by the thirtytwo auspicious bodily marks?” Subhūti
replied, “Even so, even so. The Tathāgata
is discerned by the thirty-two auspicious
bodily marks.” The Buddha said, “Subhūti,
if the Tathāgata is discerned by the thirtytwo auspicious bodily marks, then a cakravartin is a tathāgata.” Subhūti addressed
the Buddha, saying, “World-Honored
One, as I understand the meaning of what
you have said, the Tathāgata must not be
discerned by the thirty-two auspicious
bodily marks.” Then the World-Honored
One spoke this gatha:
He who sees me in visible forms / Or
seeks me through audible sounds,
Is walking the heretical path / And cannot see the Tathāgata. (t 8: 752a)

There are various lists of the thirty-two
primary physical characteristics 三十二
相 of a buddha (tathāgata), characteristics
also possessed by a cakravartin (“wheelking” or universal monarch). One of the
most detailed descriptions is in Hurvitz
1962, appendices K and L, listing the characteristics according to Mahāvyutpatti
xvii and Mahāvyutpatti xviii.
A man of old refers to Fu Dashi 傅大士,
a famous layman of the Liang dynasty (for
a biography of Fu, see page 142, above).
The verse that follows is found in the Dunhuang ms entitled Liangchao Fu Dashi song
jingang jing 梁朝傅大士頌金剛經 (Verses
on the Diamond Sutra, by Fu Dashi of
the Liang dynasty), a work composed of
Kumārajīva’s translation of the Diamond
Sutra interspersed with verse comments
attributed to Fu Dashi. Fu’s verse is preceded in the original work by the following
passage from the Diamond Sutra:
[The Buddha questioned Subhūti], saying, “Subhūti, what do you think? Can
the Tathāgata be perceived by his bodily
form?” “No, World-Honored One! The
Tathāgata cannot be perceived by his

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 225

爾道、佛有六通、是不可思議。一切諸天、神仙、阿修羅、大
力鬼、亦有神通。應是佛否。道流、莫錯。

“You say, ‘A buddha has six supernatural powers. This is miraculous!’
All the gods, immortals, asuras, and mighty pretas also have supernatural
powers—must they be considered buddhas? Followers of the Way, make no
mistake!
bodily form. Why? Because what has been
referred to by the Tathāgata as ‘bodily
form’, just this is not bodily form.” The
Buddha said, “Subhūti, every form is
unreal and false. When you perceive all
forms to be no-form, then this is perceiving the Tathāgata.” (t 85: 2b; for the Diamond Sutra passage, see t 8: 749a)

Since Fu Dashi was considered an incarnation of Maitreya, each verse in the text
is preceded by the line 彌勒頌曰 , “Maitreya’s verse says.”
Six supernatural powers translates the
term 六通 (also written as 六神通), which in
turn translates the Sanskrit “ṣaḍabhijñāḥ,”
the six supernatural powers traditionally
said to be possessed by sages, bodhisattvas, and buddhas.
The first five, known collectively as
the 五神通 (pañçābhijñāh), may also be
possessed by various beings other than
enlightened sages, such as immortals,
gods, certain humans (including nonBuddhists), and even some animals. Normally these powers are gained through the
practice of meditation, or are possessed as
intrinsic to the state in which the being is
born as a reward for past merits; they may
also be gained in part through the use of
prayers, incantations, drugs, and amulets
(hence the inclusion of non-Buddhists
among their possessors). The sixth power
is limited to holy sages who have already
gained the ﬁrst ﬁve powers.
The six supernatural powers were
known to pre-Mahayana Buddhists, and

are mentioned in the early scripture
Dīrgha Āgama (see the Chang ahan jing
長阿含經 , t 1: 58a). The names given to
these powers and the sequence in which
they are listed vary with different texts,
and even within the same text. The respective powers are discussed at length in the
Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā śāstra (Dazhidu
lun 大 智 度 論 ) of Nāgārjuna (see t 25:
97c–98b and t 25: 264a–265b) and the
Abhidharmakōśa śāstra (Jushe lun 俱舍
論) of Vasubandhu (see t 29: 142c–143b).
In the following list the individual powers
are given under their names and in the
order found in dl 5:
1. 如意通 (Skr., ṛddhividhi-jñāna): the ability to transform or manifest the body
at will, and to move or ﬂy to any place
whatsoever;
2. 天眼通 (divyacakṣus): the ability to see
anything anywhere, whether large or
small, near or far, as well as to see the
future births and destinies of all beings;
3. 天耳通 (divyaśrotra): the ability to hear
any sound anywhere and to understand
all speech in the form worlds;
4. 他心通 (paracitta-jñāna): the ability to
know the thoughts of all other beings;
5. 宿 命 通 (pūrvanivāsānusmṛti-jñāna):
knowledge of all the previous existences
of oneself and other beings;
6. 漏盡通 (āśravaksaya-jñāna): the supernatural knowledge of the subsiding of
the outﬂowing of the kleśas, or deﬁling
passions. This is the power attained only
by sages, bodhisattvas, and buddhas.

226 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
祇如阿修羅、與天帝釋戰、戰敗領八萬四千眷屬、入藕絲孔中
藏。莫是聖否。

For instance, when Asura fought against Indra and was routed in battle he
led his entire throng, to the number of eighty-four thousand, into the tube
in a ﬁber of a lotus root to hide. Wasn’t he then a sage?
When Asura fought against Indra…
lotus root to hide. Linji’s statement refers
to the battles waged between the asuras
(titans) and Indra (the supreme deity of
the Vedic literature), which are frequently
described in the Buddhist literature. An
example of these stories, possibly the
one Linji is here referring to, is found in
the Guanfo sanmeihai jing 觀佛三昧海經
(Sutra on the samādhi-ocean of contemplating buddha):
When the world again began to take form
after one of the great cyclic cataclysms,
an egg was spontaneously produced, and
from this egg a monstrous woman was
born. This woman gave birth to a son more
monstrous than herself and four times as
large. He had nine hundred heads; in each
head were a thousand eyes, and from his
mouths he emitted ﬁre. He had nine hundred and ninety-nine hands and stood on
eight legs. He ate only mud and the roots
of lotuses, and his voice was produced
from the depths of the sea. His name was
Vimalacitra, and he was the king of the
asuras.
When he was grown his mother
arranged for him a marriage with a
daughter of Gandharva, and after a period
of time the young wife gave birth to
a girl. The girl was of ravishing beauty,
having 84,000 charming points in her
face, 84,000 on her left side, 84,000 on
her right side, 84,000 on the front of her
body, and 84,000 on the back of her body.
Lord Indra, on hearing of the girl’s beauty,
besought Asura to give her to him as his
wife. For a time she lived happily with
Indra in a wonderful palace, in the garden
of which was a lotus plant that produced

84,000 jeweled ladies-in-waiting. But soon
Indra began to bestow his favors upon the
ladies-in-waiting. His bride, becoming
jealous, informed her father, and Asura,
exceedingly angry, mobilized four great
armies and attacked Indra.
Asura caused the water in all the seas
to rise and engulf even Mount Sumeru;
with his nine hundred and ninety-nine
hands he shook Indra’s castle and even
Mount Sumeru itself. Indra, greatly frightened, was at a loss what to do. Then a deva
residing in his palace reminded him that
in the past Buddha had preached the
Prajñāpāramitā. “You must recite it now,”
the deva said, “and Asura’s soldiers will be
destroyed of themselves.” So Indra seated
himself in the Hall of the Good Dharma,
and, burning incense, made a great vow,
saying, “Prajñāpāramitā is the great bright
mantra. It is the incomparable mantra; it
is the unrivaled mantra. It is completely
true and is never false. I will hold to this
dharma and achieve the buddha Way. Let
Asura be defeated of himself.”
As soon as Indra had uttered these
words, by virtue of his meritorious vow, a
great wheel having four swords came out
of the sky and fell upon Asura, causing all
his ears, noses, arms, and legs to fall oﬀ at
once, and the seas to become as scarlet as
red juice. Asura was terriﬁed. Finding no
place of escape, he went into the tube of
the ﬁber of a lotus root. (t 15: 646c–647b)

Wasn’t he translates 莫是…否, in which
莫是 serve to introduce a negative question. Occasionally an interrogative particle such as 否 , 不 , or 麼 completes the
sentence, as in the present example. From
the Yuan dynasty, the construction 莫

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 227

如山僧所擧、皆是業通依通。夫如佛六通者、不然。入色界不
被色惑、入聲界不被聲惑、入香界不被香惑、入味界不被味
惑、入觸界不被觸惑、入法界不被法惑。所以達六種色聲香味
觸法皆是空相、不能繋縛此無依道人。

Such supernatural powers as these I have just mentioned are all reward
powers or dependent powers.
“Those are not the six supernatural powers of a buddha, which are entering the world of color yet not being deluded by color; entering the world of
sound yet not being deluded by sound; entering the world of odor yet not
being deluded by odor; entering the world of taste yet not being deluded by
taste; entering the world of touch yet not being deluded by touch; entering
the world of dharmas yet not being deluded by dharmas. Therefore, when
it is realized that these six—color, sound, odor, taste, touch, and dharmas—
are all empty forms, they cannot bind the man of the Way, dependent upon
nothing.
是 was for the most part superseded by
expressions such as 莫不是 or 莫非是 . In
such usages the character 莫 lost its literal meaning of “nothing” or “none” and
became merely a sign of interrogation.

Reward powers or dependent powers
translates 業通依通, in which the conjunction 業通 refers to supernatural powers
obtained from past karma, while 依通
seemingly corresponds to terms 報通 and
依通 described in the following passage
from the Baozang lun (as the original is
couched in very obscure language, the
following translation must be regarded as
highly tentative):
Within the spirit 神 there is wisdom 智 ,
and in wisdom there is power 通. Power is
of ﬁve kinds. What are these ﬁve powers?
The ﬁrst is called “Way power” 道通 ; the
second is called “spirit power” 神通 ; the
third is called “dependent power” 依通; the
fourth is called “reward power” 報通; and
the ﬁfth is called “magic power” 妖通.
What is meant by “magic power”? When
the transformed spirits of aged foxes and
badgers or the spirits of trees and rocks

take possession of a human body, endowing it with extraordinary cleverness—this
is called “magic power.”
What is meant by “reward power”? The
foreknowledge of ghosts, [the ability] of
all gods and humans in the intermediate state to transform themselves, of holy
dragons to transform themselves—this is
called “reward power.”
What is meant by “dependent power”?
Knowledge [gained] through occult arts,
making use of the body in special ways,
going and coming at will through the use
of charms, accomplishing transformations by the use of special potions—this is
called “dependent power.”
What is meant by “spirit power”? By
stilling the mind to illumine all things,
to control one’s own destiny, to discriminate in various ways—this is called “spirit
power.”
What is meant by “Way power”? In nomind, to respond to things and to convert
all beings, just like the moon in the water
and the ﬂowers in the sky, shadow-forms
without a master—this is “Way power.” (t
45: 147a–b)

228 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
雖是五蘊漏質、便是地行神通。道流、眞佛無形、眞法無相。
爾祇麼幻化上頭、作模作樣。設求得者、皆是野狐精魅、並
不是眞佛、是外道見解。夫如眞學道人、並不取佛、不取菩薩
羅漢、不取三界殊勝。迥無獨脫、不與物拘。乾坤倒覆、我更
不疑。十方諸佛現前、爲一念心喜、三塗地獄頓現、無一念心
怖。緣何如此。我見諸法空相、變即有、不變即無。三界唯
心、萬法唯識。

Constituted though he is of the seepage of the ﬁve skandhas, he has the
supernatural power of walking upon the earth.
“Followers of the Way, true buddha has no ﬁgure, true dharma has no
form. All you’re doing is devising models and patterns out of phantoms.
Anything you may ﬁnd through seeking will be nothing more than a wild
fox-spirit; it certainly won’t be the true buddha. It will be the understanding
of a heretic.
“The true student of the Way has nothing to do with buddhas and nothing to do with bodhisattvas or arhats. Nor has he anything to do with the
good things of the triple world. Having transcended these, solitary and free,
he is not bound by things. Heaven and earth could turn upside down and
he wouldn’t have a doubt; the buddhas of the ten directions could appear
before him and he wouldn’t feel an instant of joy; the three hells could suddenly yawn at his feet and he wouldn’t feel an instant of fear. Why is this
so? Because, as I see it, all dharmas are empty forms—when transformation
takes place they are existent, when transformation does not take place they
are nonexistent. The three realms are mind-only, the ten thousand dharmas
are consciousness-only.
The supernatural power of walking
upon the earth brings to mind the famous
lines of a poem by Layman Pang:
Supernatural power and marvelous activity—these are drawing water and carrying
ﬁrewood. (x 69: 131a)

It certainly won’t be translates 並不是,
where the compound 並不 is a form of
negation, as in present-day Chinese. Usually the character 並 is an intensive article
affixed to a negative word and serves to
emphasize the negation, but occasionally,
as here, it forms a disyllabic compound
with 不 merely for the purpose of pho-

netic harmony. This is also true of such
compounds as 都不, 更不, 總不, 曾不, etc.
The true student of the Way… is not
bound by things. Baizhang Huaihai, several generations before Linji, gives a similar description of the emancipated person
in the bg:
His mind is completely empty of impurity
and purity; he does not dwell in bondage
nor does he dwell in emancipation. He is
without any understanding of the conditioned or the unconditioned. His mind’s
measure being universal sameness, while
abiding in samsara he is free. He does not
make any relation whatsoever with false

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 229
illusions, the worldly passions, the realm
of the skandhas, birth and death, or any of
the sense-entrances. Having transcended
these, there is nothing he depends upon;
he is bound to nothing at all. He leaves
or stays without hindrance; he goes and
comes in birth and death as through an
open door. (Ui 1939–1943, 2: 421)

Heaven and earth could turn upside
down. This phrase probably originated in
the following passage from the “Wubuqian lun” 物不遷論 (Treatise on the immutability of things) of the Zhao lun 肇論:
Were heaven and earth to turn upside
down, this does not mean that they are
not still; were the foaming billows to dash
to heaven, this does not mean that they
move. (t 45: 151c)

The buddhas of the ten directions…
an instant of fear. Linji here speaks of the
emancipated person using words in part
derived from a passage in the cf:
When about to die, one has only to
observe that all ﬁve skandhas are empty
and that the four elements have no ego,
that true mind is formless and neither
comes nor goes, that [essential] nature
does not come into being with birth nor
go away with death, and thus that in deep
serenity and utter stillness the mind and
surroundings become one suchness. One
who can directly and immediately understand in this way will not be bound by
the three realms; he will be one who has
transcended the world. Never should one
have the slightest partiality. Though one
were to see the lovely forms of all the buddhas coming in welcome and manifesting themselves in various ways, have no
thought of following them; though one
were to see evil forms of various kinds
appearing, be without a thought of fear.
If one just naturally forgets one’s mind
and merges with the dharma realm, then
one will gain freedom. This, indeed, is the
pivotal point. (t 48: 381c)

The three realms… consciousnessonly. In the Cheng weishi lun 成唯識論

(Discourse on the establishment of consciousness-only), Xuanzang’s translation
of the Vijñaptimātratā siddhi, the following passage appears:
As the sutra says, “The three realms
are mind-only.” It also says, “Whatever
is caused [objects of perception] is the
manifestation of consciousness-only.”
Furthermore it says, “All dharmas are not
separate from mind.” Also, “According to
[their] minds, sentient beings are deﬁled
or pure.” Also, “The bodhisattva who has
completed the four wisdoms therewith
enters the consciousness-only in which
there is no objective existence.” (t 31: 39a)

Though only the first statement is the
same as Linji’s, the meaning of the following statement accords with that of Linji’s
second statement.
zj 3 records an interesting discussion
between National Teacher Huizhong 慧
忠國師 (?–775), an heir of the Sixth Patriarch, and a “man from the south,” in which
Linji’s statements in exactly the same form
are attributed to “a sutra”:
A Chan adherent from the south asked,
“What about the mind of the old [buddhas]?” The master said, “Walls and tiles,
things without sentiency—all these are
the mind of the old buddhas.” The southerner said, “This diﬀers greatly from the
words of the Nirvana Sutra, which says,
‘[Because it] has nothing to do with walls
and tiles, things without sentiency, therefore we call it “buddha-nature”.’ Now you
say that everything without sentiency
is buddha-mind. I wonder if ‘mind’ and
‘nature’ are diﬀerent or not.” The master
said, “To the deluded they are different;
to the enlightened they are not diﬀerent.”
“This again contradicts the sutra,” said
the southerner, “for it says, ‘Mind is not
buddha-nature because buddha-nature
is permanent and mind is without permanence.’ Now you say they are not different. What is the meaning of this?” The
master said, “[The Nirvana Sutra states,]
‘You depend upon the words, not upon
the meaning.’ For example, in the winter

230 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
所以夢幻空花、何勞把捉。唯有道流、目前現今聽法底人、入
火不燒、入水不溺、入三塗地獄、如遊園觀、入餓鬼畜生、而
不受報。緣何如此。無嫌底法。

Hence,
Illusory dreams, ﬂowers in the sky,
Why trouble to grasp at them!
“Only you, the follower of the Way right now before my eyes listening to
my discourse, [only you] enter ﬁre and are not burned, enter water and are
not drowned, enter the three hells as though strolling in a pleasure garden,
enter the realms of the hungry ghosts and the beasts without suﬀering their
fate. How can this be? There are no dharmas to be disliked.
freezing water becomes ice; in the spring
melting ice becomes water. When sentient beings are deluded their nature is
frost-bound and becomes mind; when
sentient beings are enlightened, their
mind melts and becomes nature. If you
are correct in insisting that what is without sentiency is without buddha-nature,
then the sutra ought not to say, ‘The three
realms are mind-only, the ten thousand
dharmas are consciousness-only.’ Hence
the Avataṃsaka Sutra says, ‘Every existent
dharma in the three realms is only mindcreated.’ Now on the other hand, let me
ask you, do things without sentiency exist
inside the three realms or outside them?
Are they mind or are they not mind? If
they are not mind, the sutra ought not
to say, ‘The three realms are mind-only.’
If they are mind, the sutra ought not to
say, ‘The nonsentient are without buddhanature.’ You yourself contradict the sutra; I
do not contradict it.”

This passage is from the Avataṃsaka Sutra
“old” translation, fascicle 25; “new” translation, fascicle 37. The words are spoken
by Diamond-Storehouse Bodhisattva 金
剛藏菩薩: “Within the First Truth there is
nothing created and no act of creating….
The three realms are empty, and this in
itself is mind-created” (t 9: 558c); “Every-

thing existent in the three realms is only
One Mind” (t 10: 194a).
Huangbo makes the same two statements as Linji makes here, but indicates
that these are merely expedient teachings.
If at any time you hold the view that [the
personality] is permanent, this is the heretical view of permanency. If, by observing
that all dharmas are empty, you conceive
the empty view, this is the heretical view
of extinction. Hence, [the teaching that]
“the three realms are mind-only and the
ten-thousand dharmas are consciousnessonly”—even this is set forth merely in reply
to heretics and men of wrong views. (x
68: 19c)

Illusory dreams… grasp at them. These
lines are from the Xinxin ming:
Illusory dreams, ﬂowers in the sky / Why
trouble to grasp at them?
Gain and loss, right and wrong / Away
with them once and for all! (t 48: 376c)

Later in this section Linji quotes these
lines with slight variations. The verse
was apparently quite popular during this
period. Zhaozhou Congshen also quotes
them (t 51: 446b).
To enter fire… not be drowned is a
stock expression found in many Taoist
works from the Zhuangzi on, as well as in
Buddhist scriptures and Chan writings. In

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 231

爾若愛聖憎凡、生死海裏沈浮。煩惱由心故有、無心煩惱何
拘。不勞分別取相、自然得道須臾。爾擬傍家波波地學得、於
三祇劫中、終歸生死。不如無事、向叢林中、床角頭交腳坐。

If you love the sacred and hate the secular,
You’ll ﬂoat and sink in the birth-and-death sea.
The passions exist dependent on mind;
Have no-mind, and how can they bind you?
Without troubling to discriminate or cling to forms,
You’ll attain the Way naturally in a moment of time.
“But if you try to get understanding by hurrying down this byway and
that, you’ll still be in the round of samsara after three asaṃkhyeya kalpas.
Better take your ease sitting cross-legged on a meditation platform in the
monastery.
the Lotus Sutra these marvelous abilities
are said to be the reward for devotion to
the sutra and its teachings:
Good young man! You have been able
in the dharma of Śākyamuni to keep,
read, reﬂect upon, and expound this sutra
to others. The blessed merit you have
obtained is beyond measure and without
limit. Fire cannot burn you, nor can water
wash you away. (t 9: 54c)

An example from a Chan work predating
the ll is found in the bg:
The early elders entered ﬁre and did not
burn, entered water and did not drown.
When they themselves wanted to burn
they burned, when they wanted to drown
they drowned, when they wanted to live
they lived, when they wanted to die they
died. They had freedom to go or to stay.
Such men as these are qualified to have
complete freedom. (x 68: 10b)

Enter the three hells as though strolling
in a pleasure garden. There is a similar line
in a verse recapitulation in Kumārajīva’s
translation of the Lotus Sutra, but used
in a totally different context. There the
phrase is included in a description of the
terrible fate in store for those who revile
the sutra:

Evil men such as these…. / Dwell perpetually in the hells,
Considering them their pleasure garden /
Or stay in the other evil paths / As their
own abiding places. (t 9: 15c–16a)

A usage closer in meaning to that of Linji
is found in the “New” Avataṃsaka Sutra,
in the explanation of the ten distinctive
characteristics of the bodhisattva 十種不共
法. The fourth characteristic, the bodhisattva’s ability to use various expedients to
convert people, is described as follows:
“He goes and comes in samsara as though
in a pleasure garden, and never has even
a passing thought of weariness or fatigue”
(t 10: 296c). The Vimalakīrti Sutra, in
describing the activities of the bodhisattva, echoes the Avataṃsaka Sutra: “To
regard being in the midst of the dhyānas
as being in the hells, and to regard being in
the midst of samsara as being in a pleasure
garden” (t 14: 554b).
If you love the sacred… a moment of
time. The quotation is taken from the second of ten poems, entitled Dasheng zan
大乘讚 (In praise of the Mahayana). See
pages 172 and 189, above.
Monastery translates 叢林, lit., “thicket”
or “grove.” Since in the early days Bud-

232 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
道流、如諸方有學人來、主客相見了、便有一句子語、辨前頭
善知識。被學人拈出箇機權語路、向善知識口角頭攛過、看爾
識不識。爾若識得是境、把得便抛向坑子裏。學人便即尋常、
然後便索善知識語。依前奪之。學人云、上智哉、是大善知
識。即云、爾大不識好惡。如善知識、把出箇境塊子、向學人
面前弄。前人辨得、下下作主、不受境惑。善知識便即現半
身、學人便喝。善知識又入一切差別語路中擺撲。學人云、不
識好惡老禿奴。善知識歎曰、眞正道流。

“Followers of the Way, students come from every quarter, and after
host and guest have met the student will test the teacher with a phrase.
Some tricky words are chosen by the student and ﬂung at the corner of the
teacher’s mouth. ‘Let’s see if you can understand this!’ he says. If you teachers recognize it as a device, you seize it and throw it into a pit. Whereupon
the student quiets down and asks the teacher to say something. As before,
the teacher robs him of his attitude. The student says, ‘What superlative wisdom! A great teacher, indeed!’ To which you teachers instantly retort, ‘You
can’t even tell good from bad.’
“Or a teacher may take out a bunch of stuﬀ and play with it in front of a
student. The latter, seeing through this, makes himself master in every case
and doesn’t fall for the humbug. Now the teacher reveals half of his body,
whereupon the student gives a shout. Again the teacher tries to rattle the
student by using all sorts of expressions having to do with diﬀerentiation.
‘You can’t tell good from bad, you old shavepate!’ exclaims the student. And
the teacher, with a sigh of admiration, says, ‘Ah, a true follower of the Way!’
dhist monks gathered in the cool shade of
groves and woods, this term came to mean
a gathering place for monks—hence, a
monastery.
Host and guest 主客 is a colloquial term
referring, in this case, to teacher and student (for the similar expression “guest and
host” 賓主, used earlier by Linji, see page
134, above). There now follows a description of four types of encounter between
teachers and students: the first and second, between a good teacher and a good
student; the third and fourth, between a
poor teacher and a poor student. Later
in this same lecture we find four other
examples of similar encounters. The clas-

sification of teacher-student encounters
into types was later elaborated in great
detail by Fenyang Shanzhao, in the sixth
generation of the Linji line. Fenyang’s classification, known as Fenyang’s Eighteen
Questions 汾陽十八問, is found in the ry
(t 48: 307c–308a).
Some tricky words… understand this
被學人 …攛過、看爾識不識 . In the tradi-

tional Japanese reading, the final clause
is taken to be indirect narration: gakunin
ni… zanka shite, nanji shiru ya shirazu
ya to miraru, “having been thrown by
the student, it will be seen whether you
can understand or not.” However, the last
clause is obviously direct narration, even

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 233
though it is not accompanied by a reporting verb such as 云 , 說 , or 道 , “to say.” It
should be noted that this passage as a
whole is very colloquial, and that in the
colloquial language reporting verbs are
often omitted with expressions of direct
narration. This is why the verb “say” is
supplied in the English text.
A bunch of stuff translates 境塊子 , a
colloquialism of uncertain meaning. It is
used by Linji on this occasion only, and
has not been found elsewhere. The word
塊子in this case seems to have the feeling
of 土塊 (“clod of earth,” “lump of clay”) or
石塊 (“chunk of stone”), both of which are
often used to indicate something trivial
or worthless. Here it appears to indicate
a series of actions such as raising a whisk,
holding up a stick or shouting, or gestures
such as snapping the ﬁngers or winking
the eye, which in this case are used by the
teacher as mere tricks to test the student’s
ability to distinguish the sham from the
real.
In every case translates 下下 , a colloquial expression that became obsolete
after the Tang. The Ming editions of the ll
substitute the words 了不 in an apparent
attempt to make better sense of the passage, interpreting it as “[the student] never
tries to make himself master.” Japanese
commentators, in their eﬀorts to be faithful to the older editions of the work, all
of which read 下下, have oﬀered various
interpretations of the passage. In light of
our present knowledge, these may now be
dismissed.
The Beijing edition (1957) of the db
contains a version of the Dunhuang manuscript “Kongzi Xiang Tuo xiangwen shu”
孔子項託相問書 (Chronicle of the interview between Confucius and Xiang Tuo)
with the following passage: “When Confucius replied to Xiang Tuo, in every case
he failed to get the better of Xiang Tuo” 夫
子共項託對答下下不如項託 (db 1:233.12).
The editor’s note on the term 下下 reads,

“The meaning of 下下 is similar to that
of 一一 (‘in every case’). 下下 is still in
the spoken language of north China.” See
Soymié 1954, where all the various versions of this text are described, discussed,
and in part translated; the passage under
consideration is to be found on page 340.
The only other known example of this
expression in Zen literature appears in
the following passage from the Record of
Zhaozhou, contained in the gy:
The king of Zhenzhou asked [Zhaozhou],
“Master, you are well along in years. May I
ask how many teeth you have left?” “I have
only one tooth,” said the master. “But how
can you eat anything?” asked the king. To
which the master replied, “Though I have
but one tooth, I never fail 下下 to chew
everything up.” (x 68: 85c)

Half of his body translates 現半身 , a
very old expression in Buddhism. The
ability to “reveal half of his body” is
listed as one of the powers of the Buddha’s disciple Maudgalyāyana (Mulian
目連 ), who was famous for his ability in
supernatural manifestations. In the Misha
saibu hexi wufen lü 彌沙塞部和醯五分律
(Mahīśāsaka-vinaya) it says:
At this Maudgalyāyana made manifest his
supernatural transformations. He divided
his body into a hundred thousand [bodies], then united them into one. He passed
through all stone walls. He walked on the
water as he walked on the earth; he sat and
lay down in the midst of the empty sky;
he ﬂew like a bird. His body entered the
Brahma Heaven, and his hands stroked
the sun and moon. Above his body fire
burst forth, below his body water gushed
forth; above his body water gushed forth,
below his body ﬁre burst forth. Sometimes
he manifested half his body, sometimes he
manifested his entire body. He leapt up in
the east and disappeared in the west, he
leapt up in the west and disappeared in
the east. (t 22: 22a)

In the Southern Nirvana Sutra, in the
section in which the Buddha describes

234 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
如諸方善知識、不辨邪正。學人來問、菩提涅槃、三身境智、
瞎老師便與他解說。被他學人罵著、便把棒打他、言無禮度。
自是爾善知識無眼、不得嗔他。有一般不識好惡禿奴、即指東
劃西、好晴好雨、好燈籠露柱。爾看、眉毛有幾莖。

“There are teachers all around who can’t distinguish the false from the
true. When students come asking about bodhi, nirvana, the trikāya, or the
[objective] surroundings and the [subjective] mind, the blind old teachers
immediately start explaining to them. When they’re railed at by the students
they grab their sticks and hit them, [shouting,] ‘What insolent talk!’ Obviously you teachers yourselves are without an eye so you’ve no right to get
angry with them.
“And then there’re a bunch of shavepates who, not knowing good from
bad, point to the east and point to the west, delight in fair weather, delight in
rain, and delight in lanterns and pillars. Look at them! How many hairs are
left in their eyebrows!
the esoteric meaning of the letters of the
alphabet, we ﬁnd the character 咤 used to
transliterate the Sanskrit t or ṭ, described
as follows: “咤 : to reveal the half of the
body in the land of the Jambudvīpa and
preach the dharma, just like the halfmoon” (t 12: 654c).
In Chan the expression was used with
a somewhat diﬀerent though not entirely
unrelated meaning. A master is said to
“reveal the half of his body” when, through
cryptic words or gestures, he partially discloses a profound truth in such a way as to
obscure it from any but one with the truly
perceiving eye, and elicits an equally cryptic response. The interview between Mayu
and Linji in Critical Examinations 19 is
considered an example of this by Japanese
commentators.
The [objective] surroundings and the
[subjective] mind. For further explanation, see pages 222–223, above.
They grab their sticks… ‘What insolent talk’ translates 便把棒打他言無禮度 ,
traditionally read in Japanese as kore o
utte iwaku,“reido nashi” to, “grabbing his

stick and hitting him, he says, ‘You have no
manners’,” thus making 言 the main verb
of the sentence. This reading misses the
stylistic structure of the sentence, which
basically consists of two four-character
clauses (便 is to be disregarded). 言 naturally belongs to the second clause, which
in its entirety is a kind of objective complement of 打.
Lanterns and pillars. Editor’s note:
Iriya (1989, 94) suggests that in this case
the 露柱, meaning, literally, “outdoor pillar,” indicates actual pillars that stood in
the gardens in front of the dharma hall
and meditation hall. jc 23, in the section
on Qianming Huiche 乾 明 慧 徹 , mentions “the hanging of lanterns 燈籠 on the
outdoor pillar,” suggesting that the pillars were set up for purposes of nighttime
illumination (t 51: 396a). For 露柱 used in
another sense, see page 298, below.
How many hairs are left in their eyebrows. It was popularly believed at the
time that the retribution for false preaching of the dharma was to have one’s eyebrows fall out. A famous example con-

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 235

這箇具機緣。學人不會、便即心狂。如是之流、總是野狐精魅
魍魎。被他好學人嗌嗌微笑、言瞎老禿奴惑亂他天下人。道
流、出家兒且要學道。祇如山僧、往日曾向毘尼中留心、亦曾
於經論尋討。後方知是濟世藥、表顯之說、遂乃一時抛卻、即
訪道參禪。後遇大善知識、方乃道眼分明、始識得天下老和
尚、知其邪正。不是娘生下便會、還是體究練磨、一朝自省。

There is a good reason for this [loss of eyebrows]. Lacking understanding,
students become infatuated with them. Such [shavepates] as these are all
wild fox-spirits and nature-goblins. Good students snicker and say, ‘Blind
old shavepates, deluding and bewitching everyone under heaven!’
“Followers of the Way, he who is a renouncer of home must needs study
the Way. Take me, for example—in bygone days I devoted myself to the
vinaya and also delved into the sutras and śāstras. Later, when I realized that
they were only remedies to help the world and displays of opinion, I threw
them all away, and, searching for the Way, I practiced meditation. Still later
I met a great teacher. Then, indeed, my dharma-eye became clear and for
the ﬁrst time I was able to understand all the old teachers of the world and
to tell the true from the false. It is not that I understood from the moment I
was born of my mother, but that, after exhaustive investigation and grinding
practice, in one instant I knew for myself.
cerns the master Danxia Tianran 丹霞天
然 (738–823):
When Danxia was at the temple Huilin si
慧林寺 it was so cold that he took a wooden
buddha image from the hall, set it on ﬁre,
and warmed himself by the blaze. The
temple master saw this and scolded him,
saying, “How can you burn our wooden
buddha?” Danxia stirred the ashes with
his staﬀ and said, “I burned it to retrieve
the holy relics (śārira).”The temple master
responded, “How could there be relics in
a wooden buddha?” “If there are no relics,
please give me the two attendant images
to burn,” Danxia retorted. The temple
master’s eyebrows fell out. (x 67: 15c)

The śārira of which Danxia speaks are
the relics—sometimes described as indestructible, pebble-like substances—that
supposedly remain after the cremation of
a buddha or holy sage. The implication of

the story is that if there are no śārira, then
the image is no more and no less than an
ordinary piece of wood. For a biography
of Danxia, see pages 255–256, below.
There is a good reason for this [loss
of eyebrows]. This sentence is clearly the
remark of someone other than Linji which
was later inserted into the text.
I devoted myself to the vinaya. In
China at the time it was customary for
Buddhist clerics to begin their training
with a lengthy period of basic study leading to ordination in accordance with the
precepts (vinaya) of Theravada Buddhism.
The word for vinaya that appears in the
text is 毘尼 , a shortened form of 毘奈耶 ,
the Chinese transliteration of the original
Sanskrit “vinaya.”
[I…] delved into the sutras and śāstras.
According to Chan tradition, Linji, in his

236 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
道流、爾欲得如法見解、但莫受人惑。向裏向外、逢著便殺。
逢佛殺佛、逢祖殺祖、逢羅漢殺羅漢、逢父母殺父母、逢親眷
殺親眷、始得解脫、不與物拘、透脫自在。

“Followers of the Way, if you want insight into dharma as it is, just don’t
be taken in by the deluded views of others. Whatever you encounter, either
within or without, slay it at once. On meeting a buddha slay the buddha, on
meeting a patriarch slay the patriarch, on meeting an arhat slay the arhat,
on meeting your parents slay your parents, on meeting your kinsman slay
your kinsman, and you attain emancipation. By not cleaving to things, you
freely pass through.
youth, devoted himself particularly to
the study of the Avataṃsaka Sutra and
the treatises of the fourth Huayan patriarch, Qing liang Chengguan 清 凉 澄 觀
(737–838).
After exhaustive investigation and
grinding discipline, in an instant I knew
for myself translates 體究練磨一朝自省 ,
where 體究 (exhaustive investigation) is
the equivalent of 體會 or 體得. The compound 一朝 means “immediately” or “at
once”; 自省 means “to realize, to have witness within.”
Whatever you encounter… you freely
pass through. Radical though they may
sound, Linji’s statements have their precedents in the traditional teachings of
the Mahayana sutras. For example, the
Dafangdeng daji jing 大方等大集經 (Great
collection sutra) contains the following
passage:
[Bodhisattva Aruṇa asked,] “WorldHonored One! How is relinquishment to
be practiced?” [The Buddha answered,]
“Good young man, if there is a bodhisattva who does not practice compassion
as well as a rejoicing mind, but practices
relinquishment and ponders on relinquishment, beginning with his father and
mother and continuing up to the śrāvakas,
pratyekabuddhas, bodhisattvas, and all
buddhas, when he practices this relinquishment he will be far removed from

all kinds of desire and anger, and from
attachment to dharmas. (t 13: 170c)

Renunciation was a concept that was also
central to the teaching of Linji’s teacher,
Huangbo:
The bodhisattva’s mind is like the empty
sky. He has completely relinquished
everything, and is not attached even to
the merit that he has acquired. There are
three kinds of renunciation. If the inside
and the outside, the body and the mind,
have been completely relinquished and,
just as in the empty sky, there is nothing to be grasped or attached to; if all
action is carried out in accordance with
the place and the circumstances; and if
both the doer and the what-is-done are
forgotten, then this is great renunciation.
If the Way is followed and virtuous acts
performed, and at the same time they are
relinquished without hope of reward, then
this is medium renunciation. If all kinds
of good acts are widely practiced with
the hope of reward, but no attachment is
left upon hearing about the dharma and
understanding its emptiness, then this is
small renunciation.
Great renunciation is like having a
lighted candle in front of you: there is
no longer either delusion or enlightenment. Medium renunciation is like having
a lighted candle to your side: sometimes
there is brightness, sometimes there is
darkness. Small renunciation is like hav-

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 237

如諸方學道流、未有不依物出來底。山僧向此間、從頭打。手
上出來手上打。口裏出來口裏打。眼裏出來眼裏打。未有一箇
獨脫出來底。皆是上他古人閑機境。山僧無一法與人、祇是治
病解縛。爾諸方道流、試不依物出來、我要共爾商量。十年五
歳、並無一人。皆是依草附葉、竹木精靈、野狐精魅、向一切
糞塊上亂咬。

“Among all the students from every quarter who are followers of the
Way, none has yet come before me without being dependent on something.
Here I hit them right from the start. If they come forth using their hands, I
hit them on the hands; if they come forth using their mouths, I hit them on
the mouth; if they come forth using their eyes, I hit them on the eyes. Not
one has yet come before me in solitary freedom. All are clambering after the
worthless contrivances of the men of old. As for myself, I haven’t a single
dharma to give to people. All I can do is to cure illnesses and untie bonds.
You followers of the Way from every quarter, try coming before me without
being dependent upon things. I would confer with you.
“Five years, nay ten years, have passed, but as yet not one person [has
appeared]. All have been [ghosts] dependent upon grasses or attached to
leaves, souls of bamboos and trees, wild fox-spirits. They recklessly gnaw on
all kinds of dung clods.
ing a lighted candle behind you: you cannot see the pitfalls.
Hence the bodhisattva’s mind is like the
empty sky, for he has completely relinquished everything. His past mind being
unobtainable, there is renunciation of the
past; his present mind being unobtainable,
there is relinquishment of the present; his
future mind being unobtainable, there is
renunciation of the future. This is what
is known as the renunciation of the three
periods. (t 48: 382a)

I haven’t a single dharma to give to
people. Linji’s comment is similar to those
0f several other masters:
Xuefeng asked, “As for the style of our
school that has been handed down from
the past, how do you show it to people?”
[Deshan] said, “My teaching has no words
or phrases. Truly there is not a single
dharma to give to people.” (t 51: 318a)

The master [National Teacher Dada Wuye
大逹無業國師 (760–821)] said, “All the buddhas have never appeared in the world.
Nor have they given a single dharma to
people. They have simply written prescriptions suitable for the disease. They
are like sweet fruits exchanged for bitter
gourds.” (t 51: 444b)

I would confer with you. An example
of the use of a similar phrase by Nanquan
Puyuan is found in the jc:
My brothers, nowadays there are a lot
of [so-called] Chan masters, but when
I look for a dullard I can’t ﬁ nd one. I’m
not saying there are none—perhaps there
are a few among us. If there are, come
forth. I would discuss things with you.
(t 51: 445a)

All have been [ghosts] dependent upon
grasses or attached to leaves. Linji’s image
of disembodied spirits clinging to plants

238 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
瞎漢、枉消他十方信施、道我是出家兒、作如是見解。向爾
道、無佛無法、無修無證。祇與麼傍家擬求什麼物。瞎漢、頭
上安頭。是爾欠少什麼。道流、是爾目前用底、與祖佛不別。
祇麼不信、便向外求。莫錯。向外無法、內亦不可得。爾取山
僧口裏語、不如休歇無事去。

Blind fools! Wastefully squandering the alms given them by believers everywhere and saying, ‘I am a renouncer of home,’ all the while holding such
views as these!
“I say to you there is no buddha, no dharma, nothing to practice, nothing to enlighten to. Just what are you seeking in the highways and byways?
Blind men! You’re putting a head on top of the one you already have. What
do you yourselves lack? Followers of the Way, your own present activities do
not diﬀer from those of the patriarch-buddhas. You just don’t believe this
and keep on seeking outside. Make no mistake! Outside there is no dharma;
inside, there is nothing to be obtained. Better than grasp at the words from
my mouth, take it easy and do nothing.
is also used by several other masters in
the Chan literature. The zh, for example,
records Linji’s contemporary Deshan
Xuanjian as saying:
Don’t love the sacred—“sacred” is an
empty name. In the three realms and the
ten directions of the world, if there is a
single grain of dust or a single dharma
to be obtained, so that, grasping it, you
make explanations about it and consider
it to have value, then you will completely
fall into the heretical way of Deva Māra.
Even those of great learning are all spirits
dependent upon grasses and clinging to
trees 依草附木, or they are wild fox spirits.
(x 79: 173a)

However, the best-known use of this
phrase is undoubtedly that in wg 1, in
Wumen’s commentary on the koan “Zhaozhou’s ‘Wu’”:
Those who study Chan must pass through
the barriers of the patriarchs. For the
marvelous awakening, it is necessary

for the paths of mind to be exhausted
and completely obliterated. Those who
do not pass through the barriers of the
patriarchs and do not obliterate the paths
of mind are all spirits dependent upon
grasses and clinging to trees 依草附木精
靈. (t 48: 292c)

Dung clods is a reference to the worthless contrivances of the ancients, mentioned on page 166, above.
Wastefully squandering the alms…
holding such views as these. Statements
condemning false practice as a waste of
the alms donated by the faithful are found
throughout the Buddhist literature. The
following is a typical example by Deshan
Xuanjian, found in the zh:
Betraying our forebears, compromising
our school, they brazenly claim to be
world-renouncers. Such as these squander
the alms given them by believers everywhere, though entitled to not a drop of
water. (x 79: 173b)

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 239

已起者莫續、未起者不要放起、便勝爾十年行腳。約山僧見
處、無如許多般、祇是平常。著衣喫飯、無事過時。爾諸方來
者、皆是有心求佛求法、求解脫、求出離三界。癡人、爾要出
三界、什麼處去。佛祖是賞繋底名句。爾欲識三界麼。不離爾
今聽法底心地。爾一念心貪是欲界。爾一念心瞋是色界。爾一
念心癡是無色界。

Don’t continue [thoughts] that have already arisen and don’t let those that
haven’t yet arisen be aroused. Just this will be worth far more to you than a
ten years’ pilgrimage.
“As I see it, there isn’t so much to do. Just be ordinary—put on your
clothes, eat your food, and pass the time doing nothing. You who come here
from here and there all have a mind to seek buddha, to seek dharma, to seek
emancipation, to seek escape from the three realms. Foolish fellows! When
you’ve left the three realms where would you go?
“‘Buddha’ and ‘patriarch’ are only names of praise-bondage. Do you want
to know the three realms? They are not separate from the mind-ground
of you who right now are listening to my discourse. Your single covetous
thought is the realm of desire; your single angry thought is the realm of
form; your single deluded thought is the realm of formlessness.
Don’t continue… be aroused. Similar advice is oﬀered in zj 6 by Dongshan
Liangjie:
Someone asked, “What is the illness?” The
master answered, “Subtle arisings of the
mind are the illness.” The questioner asked
further, “What is the medicine?” The master answered, “Not continuing on, this is
the medicine.”

See also zl 38 (t 48: 638a).
You who come here… where would
you go? Ideas similar to those in this passage are found from the earliest times in
Chan. See, for example, the following passage in the jc, in the section on Niutou
Farong 牛頭法融 (594–657), founder of the
Oxhead (Niutou 牛頭) school of Chan:
All the deluding passions and the hindrances of past karma are immaterial
from the very start. All causes and eﬀects
are like dreams and illusions. There are no

three realms to leave, there is no enlightenment to seek. (t 51: 227a)

Names of praise-bondage translates 賞
繫底名句, the meaning of which is unclear.
Traditionally it is interpreted to mean
“to bind through praise,” but this reading
is not grammatically possible. No other
examples of this usage exist.
Do you want to know the three
realms?… the realm of formlessness. An
interpretation of the three realms almost
identical to Linji’s is found in the Wuxing
lun 悟性論:
Covetousness is the realm of desire; anger
is the realm of form; folly is the realm
of nonform. When an instant of thought
arises, you enter the three realms; when an
instant of thought is annihilated, you leave
the three realms. Thus know that the creation or annihilation of the three realms,
the existence or nonexistence of the ten

240 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
是爾屋裏家具子。三界不自道、我是三界。還是道流、目前靈
靈地照燭萬般、酌度世界底人、與三界安名。大德、四大色身
是無常。乃至脾胃肝膽、髪毛爪齒、唯見諸法空相。爾一念心
歇得處、喚作菩提樹。爾一念心不能歇得處、喚作無明樹。無
明無住處、無明無始終。

These are the furnishings within your own house. The three realms do not
of themselves proclaim: ‘We are the three realms!’ But you, followers of the
Way, right now vividly illumining all things and taking the measure of the
world, you give the names to the three realms.
“Virtuous monks, the physical body [composed] of the four great elements is impermanent; [every part of it,] including the spleen, stomach,
liver, and gallbladder, the hair, nails, and teeth as well, only proves that all
dharmas are empty appearances. The place where your one thought comes
to rest is called the bodhi tree; the place where your one thought cannot
come to rest is called the avidyā tree. Avidyā has no dwelling place; avidyā
has no beginning and no end.
thousand dharmas, all depend upon One
Mind. (t 48: 371a)

elements], and thus in reality it is but an
illusory transformation. (t 17: 914b)

The physical body… are empty appearances. The four great elements 四大 are
earth, water, ﬁre, and wind or air (see page
164). This sentence summarizes a teaching in the Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment
instructing seekers to first observe the
precepts and practice tranquility of mind.
Then, sitting in quiet meditation, they are
to reﬂect thus:

The bodhi tree 菩提樹 is, of course,
the name given to the tree under which
Śākyamuni attained his great awakening, but it is also used as a metaphor for
the state of enlightenment itself. Its bestknown usage in Chan is in the famous
verses said to have been composed by
Shenxiu and Huineng at the time the
Fifth Patriarch was seeking a successor.
The Dunhuang text of the Platform Sutra
of the Sixth Patriarch contains Shenxiu’s
verse and two versions of Huineng’s; the
Yuan text contains Shenxiu’s and one by
Huineng. The Dunhuang verses are quoted
below; the textual variants are minor, and
are not noted. Shenxiu’s verse:

This body of mine is composed of the four
elements. The hair of my head, my nails
and teeth, my skin and ﬂesh, sinews and
bones, marrow and brain, filthy matter,
all return to earth. My spittle, mucus, pus,
blood, saliva, drool, phlegm, tears, semen,
excrement, and urine all return to water.
My vital warmth returns to ﬁre, and the
motion of my body returns to wind. When
the four great elements are separated one
from the other, where is this illusory body?
Hence we know that this body, in the last
analysis, is without substance, and its form
is nothing but the combining [of the four

The body is the bodhi tree
The mind is like a clear mirror.
At all times strive to polish it
And let no dust collect. (t 48: 337c)

Huineng’s verse (a):
Fundamentally bodhi is without a tree
Also is the bright mirror without a stand.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 241

爾若念念心歇不得、便上他無明樹、便入六道四生、披毛戴
角。爾若歇得、便是淸淨身界。

If your successive thoughts cannot come to rest, you go up the avidyā tree;
you enter the six paths of existence and the four modes of birth, wear fur on
your body and horns on your head. If your successive thoughts can come to
rest, then this [very body] is the pure body.
Buddha-nature is always clear and pure
So how can dust collect upon it?
(t 48: 338c)

Huineng’s verse (b):
The mind is the bodhi tree
The body is the stand of a bright mirror.
The bright mirror is fundamentally clear
and pure
So where can it be deﬁled with dust?
(t 48: 338c)

The expression “bodhi tree” is encountered in another Dunhuang text, the
Dasheng wusheng fangbian men 大乘無
生方便門 (Expedient means for attaining
birthlessness in the Mahayana). A long
statement regarding the consecutive steps
toward enlightenment concludes with,
“When both mind and objective matters
are discarded, there is not a single thing
to exist—this is the great bodhi tree” (t
85: 1273c).
Avidyā tree 無明樹 is a metaphor for
darkness or ignorance, as opposed to
“bodhi tree,” a metaphor for enlightenment. In translating 無明 we chose the
word “avidyā,” since Linji appears to be
referring to primal ignorance, a connotation that the English word “ignorance”
does not necessarily convey.
The six paths of existence 六道 or 六趣;
see pages 143–144, above.
The four modes of birth 四生 (Skr.,
caturyoni) are the four ways in which sentient beings are reborn in the six paths.
For traditional expositions of this classiﬁcation, see the Zengyi ahan jing 增一阿含
經 (Further discourses of the Buddha) (t

2: 632a) and the Jushe lun 俱舍論 (Treasury
of the Abhidharma) (t 29: 43c–44a). In
brief, the four modes are:
1. 腹生 (Skr., jārāyu-ja): birth from the
womb, as with mammals;
2. 卵生 (aṇḍa-ja): birth from an egg outside
the body, as with birds;
3. 濕生 (saṁsveda-ja): birth from water or
moisture, as with ﬁsh and worms;
4. 化生 (upapādu-ja): birth by metamorphosis, as with insects from a chrysalis,
gods in the heavenly realms, and helldwellers.

Regarding the relation between the six
paths (the realm of relativity) and the buddha (the realm of the absolute), Huangbo
comments:
[Someone] asked, “Since from the beginning we have been buddha, how can there
then be the four modes of birth and the six
paths of existence and all kinds of forms
that are not alike?” The master said, “The
substance of all the buddhas is a perfect
whole; moreover it knows neither increase
nor decrease. It ﬂows into the six ways and
each and every thing everywhere is perfect.
Among the myriad diﬀerent varieties [of
phenomena] each one is buddha. It is like a
lump of quicksilver that has been scattered
everywhere; each and every droplet is perfect. When it is not broken up it is just one
lump, but this one is none other than the all
and the all is none other than the one.” (t
48: 386a; x 68: 18a–b)

Wear fur on your body…. An earlier
usage of this vivid expression is found in
a sermon by Yaoshan Weiyan 藥山惟儼
(745–828):

242 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
爾一念不生、便是上菩提樹、三界神通變化、意生化身、法喜
禪悅、身光自照。思衣羅綺千重、思食百味具足、更無橫病。
菩提無住處、是故無得者。

“When not a single thought arises in your mind, then you go up the
bodhi tree: you supernaturally transform yourself in the three realms and
change your bodily form at will. You rejoice in the dharma and delight
in samādhi, and the radiance of your body shines forth of itself. At the
thought of garments a thousand lengths of brocade are at hand; at the
thought of food a hundred delicacies are before you; furthermore, you
never suﬀer unusual illness. ‘Bodhi has no dwelling place, therefore it is
not attainable.’
Do you want to know the [realm of the]
beasts? [It is the realm of those who] right
now do not understand benevolence and
righteousness, who do not discriminate
between kinsman and stranger. Why must
they wear fur on their bodies and horns
on their heads, be slaughtered and hung
by their heels [for you to recognise them]?
(t 51: 440)

This [very body] is the pure body.
Though as a technical term the word
translated as “body,” 身界 (Skr., kāyadhatū:
“body-realm” or “body-field”) is one of
the eighteen dhātu, or realms (fields) of
sensory experience, it seems Linji has not
used it here in that sense.
In the following lines Yongjia, the author
of the Song of Enlightenment, though not
using Linji’s exact expression, clearly has
the same idea in mind:
The real nature of avidyā is none other
than the buddha-nature;
This illusory and unreal body is none
other than the dharma-body.
(t 48: 396c)

In the same vein, the poet Su Dongpo 蘇東
坂 (1036–1101) wrote:
The sound of the valley stream
Just this is the teaching of the buddha.
The form of the mountains
Can this be other than the pure body?

Change your bodily form at will translates the phrase 意生化身, which refers to
the ability attributed to bodhisattvas of a
certain level to transform their bodies as
they wish so that they may enter into any
of the six paths of existence and bring salvation to the beings there. The term 意生
身 (Skr., manomāyakāya), which indicates
this “body created through thought or
will,” is found in the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra.
The following passage is taken from Guṇabhadra’s Chinese translation, the Lengqie
abaduoluobao jing 楞伽阿跋多羅寶經:
[Mahāmati] said, “What is meant by, ‘The
bodhisattva-mahāsattva has attained the
virtuous joy of self-awakening to noble
wisdom’?” [The Buddha said], “It means
that he has achieved equanimity as
regards the law of no-birth and abides in
the eighth stage of bodhisattvahood, that
he has succeeded in separating [himself]
from citta 心意 , manovijñāna 意識 , the
five dharmas, the [three] kinds of selfnature 自性, and the characteristics of the
two kinds of egolessness, and that he has
gained the thought-created body 意生身.”
“By what causal relation is the thoughtcreated body gained?” The Buddha said
to Mahāmati, “As for the thought-created
body, it is called ‘thought-created’ because
it is like thought that goes swiftly and without obstruction. Just as thought goes without obstruction through stone walls and

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 243
in different directions for immeasurable
distances as memories relating to things
in the past are recalled, so the self-mind
ﬂows on uninterruptedly and creates bodies without hindrance. Thus, Mahāmati, a
thought-created body is gained at once and
in completion. Because the bodhisattvamahāsattva’s illusory-like samādhi power
of creating bodies through thought is free
and supernatural, various kinds of noble
bodies adorned with marvelous characteristics are produced at once and in completion. Just as a thought-creation is without
obstructions, so he recollects his original
vow and in accordance with it brings sentient beings to maturity and thus gains the
virtuous joy of self-awakening to noble
wisdom.” (t 16: 489c)

Rejoice in the dharma 法喜 and delight
in samādhi 禪悅 are qualities mentioned
in the Lotus Sutra as two types of “food”
partaken of by the enlightened. The Buddha describes the buddha-land that Pūrṇa
(Fulouna 富樓那), the most accomplished
of his disciples in preaching the dharma,
will realize in future ages, saying,
Humans and gods will associate and converse together. There will be no evil gati
[realms of existence; see pages 143–144,
above], also no female bodies; all beings
will be born by transformation and without carnal desires. They will attain great
supernatural powers, their bodies will
emit radiance, they will ﬂy through the air
at will…. The beings of this land will be
continuously provided with two kinds of
food: the food of rejoicing-in-the-dharma
and the food of delighting-in-samādhi.
(t 9: 27c)

The antecedents of these concepts are
found in the earliest sutras. In the Zengyi
ahan jing 增一阿含經 (Further discourses
of the Buddha), Śākyamuni Buddha
speaks of the four kinds of food for people
in the world versus the ﬁve kinds of food
for renunciants:
There are nine kinds of food. Four kinds
are food for people who are living in the

world, and ﬁve kinds are for people who
have renounced the world.
What are the four kinds of food for
people living in the world? The first is
food eaten with the hand 揣食; the second
is the food of joy 樂食; the third is the food
of reﬂection 念食; the fourth is the food of
thought 識食. These are the four kinds of
food for people in the world.
Now what are the ﬁve kinds of food for
those called ‘people who have renounced
the world’? The ﬁrst is the food of meditation 禪食; the second is the food of resolve
願食; the third is the food of recollection
念食 ; the fourth is the food of the eight
ways of emancipation 八解脫食; the ﬁfth
is the food of rejoicing 喜食 . These are
the five kinds of food. Thus, bhikkus, in
renouncing the world you must ﬁx your
attention upon forsaking the four kinds
of food and seek the means to prepare the
ﬁve kinds of food. (t 2: 772b)

The food of rejoicing and the food of
meditation undoubtedly relate to the two
mentioned in the Lotus Sutra and later
by Linji.
The radiance of your body shines forth
of itself. Light emanating from the body is
one of the thirty-two marks of a buddha,
comprising no. 15, 常光一丈相, in the list
found in the Sanzang fashu 三藏法數 (but
having no equivalent in the Mahāvyutpatti
list; see page 224, above). In the dl the following passage appears:
The four sides of a buddha’s body are each
adorned with lights shining brightly for
ten feet. Bodhisattvas are also born with
this light, which is one of the thirty-two
marks and is known as the mark of the
ten-foot light 丈光相. (t 25: 114c)

The Huayan jing tanxuanji 華嚴經探玄
記 (Investigation of the mysteries of the
Avataṃsaka Sutra) has the following:
There are two kinds of light. One is the
light of knowledge 智光 and the other is
the light of the body 身光 . The light of
knowledge is divided into two types, one
that illuminates the dharma—one that, in

244 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
道流、大丈夫漢、更疑箇什麼。目前用處、更是阿誰。把得便
用、莫著名字、號爲玄旨。與麼見得、勿嫌底法。古人云、心
隨萬境轉、轉處實能幽。隨流認得性、無喜亦無憂。

“Followers of the Way, what more is there for the resolute fellow to
doubt? The activity going on right now—whose is it? Grasp and use, but
never name—this is called the ‘mysterious principle.’ Come to such understanding as this, and there is nothing to be disliked. A man of old said:
[My] mind turns in accordance with the myriad circumstances,
And this turning, in truth, is most mysterious.
Recognizing [my] nature while according with the ﬂow,
[I] have no more joy nor any sorrow.
other words, illuminates the true and the
mundane—and another that illuminates
activity in accordance with all types of
beings. The light of the body is also divided
into two types, one that is perfectly bright
and unobstructed and is known as Eternal
Light 常光 , and the other of which jolts
one into understanding with its radiance
and is known as Radiant Light 放光 . (t
35: 146c)

At the thought of garments a thousand lengths… unusual illness. Linji’s
expressions here are reminiscent of the
descriptions of Amitābha’s Land of Bliss
in the Wuliangshou jing 無量壽經 (Sutra
on immeasurable life), of Maitreya’s
buddha-land in the Mile dachengfo jing
彌勒大成佛經 (Sutra on Maitreya’s great
attainment of buddhahood), and of other
similar lands. The following passage from
the Wuliangshou jing is illustrative of the
general character of these descriptions:
Ānanda, all those who are born in this
buddha-land are provided with pure
bodies, all kinds of marvelous sounds,
supernatural meritorious virtues, palaces
in which to dwell, robes, food, all kinds of
marvelous ﬂower fragrances, and articles
of adornment. It is just like in the Sixth
Heaven, where these things are provided
spontaneously. When they desire to eat,
there appear before them utensils of the

seven precious things—gold, silver, lapislazuli, cornelian, coral, amber, and pearls
bright as the moon. All the bowls appear
like this in accordance with their will,
and food and drink of the hundred flavors spontaneously ﬁll them to repletion.
Although this food exists, truly there is no
one who eats it, for they merely look at its
color and smell its fragrance, and, in their
minds considering it to be food, they are
naturally satisﬁed. (t 12: 271b–c)

Bodhi has no dwelling place, therefore
it is not attainable. The source of Linji’s
quotation appears to be an almost identical passage from the Vimalakīrti Sutra:
Śāriputra asked a deva, “Will you some
day obtain Supreme Enlightenment [Skr.,
anuttarā-samyak-sambodhi]?” The deva
said, “Śāriputra, if you again become an
ordinary man, I shall obtain Supreme
Enlightenment.” Śāriputra said, “There is
no possibility of my again becoming an
ordinary man.” The deva said, “There is also
no possibility of my obtaining Supreme
Enlightenment. Why is this so? Enlightenment [bodhi] has no dwelling place, therefore it is unobtainable.” (t 14: 548c)

A man of old refers to Manorhita
(Mona luo 摩 拏 羅 ), the twenty-second
Indian patriarch of Zen. What follows is
his so-called transmission verse. The earliest appearance of this verse is in bz 5;

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 245

道流、如禪宗見解、死活循然。參學之人、大須子細。如主客
相見、便有言論往來。或應物現形、或全體作用、或把機權喜
怒、或現半身、或乘師子、或乘象王。

“Followers of the Way, the view of the Chan school is that the sequence
of death and life is orderly. The student of Chan must examine [this] most
carefully.
“When host and guest meet they vie with each other in discussion. At
times, in response to something, they may manifest a form; at times they may
act with their whole body; or they may use tricks or devices to appear joyful
or angry; or they may reveal half of the body; or again they may ride upon a
lion or mount a lordly elephant.
it is also found in numerous other texts,
including zj 2, zl 97 (t 48: 939a), jc 2 (t
51: 214a), gy 11 (x 68: 67b), tg 4 (x 78:
436c), zh 2 (x 79: 20c), and in Dunhuang
ms Stein 2165, where it is entitled simply
“Verse of a Patriarch.”
The sequence of death and life is
orderly translates the expression 死活循
然, the meaning of which is not clear. Traditional commentaries usually interpret
it to mean that in the Great Death there
is the “bright and vigorous” life 活撥撥地
earlier described by Linji (see page 198),
and in the “bright and vigorous” life there
is the Great Death.
They may act with their whole body
全體作用 . This expression describes an

action through which one actualizes the
functioning of essence. Although the term
全體作用 was used frequently by Chan
masters after Linji, it is not found in this
exact form prior to the ll, and thus may
have originated with this master.
However, we ﬁnd Linji’s contemporary,
Deshan Xuanjian, also using the term in
the following passage in zh 20, yet another
example of the puzzling similarities of
expression in the sermons of Linji and
Deshan (see, for example, the comments
on pages 168, 175, 176, 177, 198, 202, 223, 251,
270, and 285).

All of you… forever carrying your own
dead bodies on your backs and wearing
cangues on your necks and chains on your
ankles—from ﬁve hundred or a thousand
li away you come and, standing here before
me with your feet planted far apart, say,
“Heshang, you must explain to us, you
must instruct us!” Whereupon this old fellow acts with his entire being 全體作用 .
My great staﬀ mows you down, you landslaves. I curse you robbers with faces like
your own asses. You don’t know bad from
good. (x 79: 174b)

Two works by the Chan and Huayan master Guifeng Zongmi have a largely synonymous term, 佛性全體之用. The ﬁrst work is
the preface to the Yuanjue jing dashu shiyi
chao 圓覺經大疏釋義鈔 (Subcommentary
to the Large commentary on the Sutra of
Perfect Enlightenment), where Zongmi,
in a description of the seven schools of
Chan, characterizes the lineage of Mazu
as follows:
[Mazu] spread this teaching widely. Since
to raise the mind, to stir up thought, to
snap the ﬁngers, to cough, to raise the eyebrows, and all other actions and deeds
are the functioning of the total body of
the buddha-nature 佛性全體之用 , therefore there is no second subjectivity. Many
kinds of food are made from wheat ﬂour,
and the buddha-nature is just like this.
Because its total body is greed, anger, stu-

246 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
如有眞正學人、便喝先拈出一箇膠盆子。善知識不辨是境、便
上他境上、作模作樣。學人便喝。前人不肯放。此是膏肓之
病、不堪醫。喚作客看主。

“A true student gives a shout, and to start with holds out a sticky lacquer
tray. The teacher, not discerning that this is an objective circumstance, goes
after it and performs a lot of antics with it. The student again shouts but still
the teacher is unwilling to let go. This is a disease of the vitals that no doctoring can cure; it is called ‘the guest examines the host.’
pidity, the producing of good and bad, and
the sensing of pain and pleasure, each and
every one of these is the [buddha-]nature.
(x 9: 534b)

Second, Zongmi uses the same words,
slightly abbreviated, when he characterizes the teaching of the Hongzhou 洪州
school (i.e., the school of Mazu, derived
from the name of the province in which
he taught) in the Zhonghua chuan xindi
chanmen shizi chengxi tu 中華傳心地禪門
師資承襲圖 (Chart of the master-disciple
succession of the Chan school that transmits the mind ground in China; x 63: 33a).
This work combines a letter to Zongmi
from his disciple Pei Xiu 裴休 (797–870),
in which the official enquires about the
four schools of Chan (the Beizong 北宗 ,
Niutou 牛頭, Heze 荷澤, and Hongzhou 洪
州), with Zongmi’s long and detailed reply.
It would seem that, since Zongmi does
not attribute the term “functioning of the
total body of the buddha-nature” to any of
the other schools, he considered it to be a
teaching unique to Mazu’s line—the line
to which, of course, Linji belonged.
When host and guest meet…. The passage that follows this phrase, constituting
one of Linji’s famous “grouped statements,”
is traditionally known as the “[four] interviews between guest 主 and host 客.” It is
quoted, with a few minor variations, in bl
case 38 (t 48: 177a) and in the ry (t 48:
303a–b). In both of these texts the present
sequence is reversed to read “guest and

host,” and the last sentence of the previous
paragraph, “The student of Chan must
observe this with great care,” is used as the
introductory statement. For the master’s
earlier remarks on “hosts and guests,” see
above, pages 133 and 232, with accompanying notes.
They may ride upon a lion or mount
a lordly elephant. Linji is symbolically
referring to the qualities represented by
Mañjuśrī (the Bodhisattva of Intrinsic
Wisdom 智), who in Buddhist iconography is most often depicted riding a lion,
and Samantabhadra (the Bodhisattva
of Universal Law 理 ), who is most often
depicted riding a white elephant.
A sticky lacquer tray translates 膠盆子,
a tray in which lacquer for use in painting was prepared. This is a metaphor for
something that, if touched for even an
instant, holds one fast and deprives one
of freedom. Thus the term here means a
kind of verbal bait or trap. In later Chan
it became synonymous with the koan 公案
and the similar term “word head” 話頭.
There is a similar term used in Chan, 膠
盆, which apparently indicates a container
that is more like a pot than a tray, as in,
“He stuck his head into a pot of glue” 頭入
膠盆, in bl case 46 (t 48: 182c).
A disease of the vitals that no doctoring can cure translates 膏盲之病, which literally means a disease occurring between
the lower part of the heart 膏 and the

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 247

或是善知識不拈出物、隨學人問處即奪。學人被奪、抵死不
放。此是主看客。或有學人、應一箇淸淨境、出善知識前。善
知識辨得是境、把得抛向坑裏。學人言、大好善知識。即云、
咄哉、不識好惡。學人便禮拜。此喚作主看主。或有學人、披
枷帶鎖、出善知識前。善知識更與安一重枷鎖。學人歡喜、彼
此不辨。呼爲客看客。大德、山僧如是所擧、皆是辨魔揀異、
知其邪正。道流、寔情大難、佛法幽玄、解得可可地。

“Sometimes a teacher will oﬀer nothing, but, the moment a student asks
a question, grabs it away. The student, his question having been taken from
him, resists to the death and will not let go. This is called ‘the host examines
the guest.’
“Sometimes a student comes forth before a teacher in conformity with a
state of purity. The teacher, discerning that this is an objective circumstance,
seizes it and ﬂings it into a pit. ‘What an excellent teacher!’ exclaims the student, and the teacher replies, ‘Bah! You can’t tell good from bad!’ Thereupon
the student makes a deep bow: this is called ‘the host examines the host.’
“Or again, a student will appear before a teacher wearing a cangue and
bound with chains. The teacher fastens on still more chains and cangues for
him. The student is so delighted that he can’t tell what is what; this is called
‘the guest examines the guest.’
“Virtuous monks, all the examples I have brought before you serve to
distinguish demons and point out heretics, thus making it possible for you
to know what is erroneous and what is correct.
“Followers of the Way, true sincerity is extremely diﬃcult to attain, and
the buddhadharma is deep and mysterious, yet a goodly measure of understanding can be acquired.
upper part of the diaphragm 盲. Diseases
occurring in this area were regarded as
incurable in traditional Chinese medicine.

middle way is called “cangues” 枷 ; delusion concerning the dharmakāya is called
“chains” 鎖. Such things bind the student,
who cannot release himself. (t 34: 928a)

Wearing a cangue and bound with
chains indicates adherence to mistaken
views. The Guanyin yishu 觀音義疏 (Commentary on the meaning of “The universal gate of Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara”)
comments as follows:

A goodly measure of understanding
translates the rather obscure expression
解得可可地. The traditional Japanese reading, followed by Dōchū, interprets 解得 as
a verb in the conditional mood, i.e., getoku
sureba, “Should you get understanding,
then…,” so that the sentence would mean,
“Should you get understanding, then
there’s nothing to it.” This is problematic, since 可可 , meaning “a little,” “some

Delusion concerning the temporal and
the real is called “manacles” 杻; delusion
concerning samādhi and prajñā is called
“fetters” 械 ; delusion concerning the

248 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
山僧竟日與他說破、學者總不在意。千遍萬遍、腳底踏過、黑
沒焌地、無一箇形段、歷歷孤明。學人信不及、便向名句上
生解。年登半百、祇管傍家負死屍行、檐卻檐子天下走。索草
鞋錢有日在。大德、山僧說向外無法、學人不會、便即向裏作
解、便即倚壁坐、舌拄上齶、湛然不動、取此爲是祖門佛法
也。大錯。是爾若取不動淸淨境爲是、爾即認他無明爲郎主。
古人云、湛湛黑暗深坑、寔可怖畏。此之是也。爾若認他動者
是、一切草木皆解動、應可是道也。

I explain it exhaustively all day long, but you students give not the slightest
heed. Though a thousand times, nay ten thousand times, you tread it underfoot, you are still in utter darkness. It is without a vestige of form, yet is clear
in its solitary shining.
“Because your faith [in yourselves] is insuﬃcient, you students turn to
words and phrases and base your understanding upon them. Until you’ve
reached the half-century mark you continue dragging [your] dead bodies up
blind alleys and running about the world bearing your heavy load. The day
will come when you’ll have to pay up for the straw sandals you’ve worn out.
“Virtuous monks, when I state that there are no dharmas outside, the
student does not comprehend and immediately tries to ﬁnd understanding
within. He sits down cross-legged with his back against a wall, his tongue
glued to the roof of his mouth, completely still and motionless. This he takes
to be the buddhadharma of the patriarchal school. That’s all wrong.
“If you take the state of motionlessness and purity to be correct, then
you are recognizing the darkness [of avidyā] as master. This is what a man
of old meant when he said, ‘Fearful indeed is the bottomless black pit!’ If on
the other hand you recognize motion to be correct, since all plants and trees
can move, must they then be the Way?
amount,” etc., is a colloquial adverb modifying 解得 . The term 可可 was used by
many other Chan masters (e.g., Nanquan
Puyuan [jc 28; t 51: 445c]), and is seen in
works like the Wang Fanzhi shiji 王梵志詩
集 (Poems of Wang Fanzhi):
If you try to squeeze even a little gain from
others / You will cause them considerable
可可 pain. (Pelliot Coll., no. 2718)

Another example of this usage is found in
the Hanshan shi 寒山詩 (Poems of Hanshan):

In former times I was fairly 可可 poor /
This morning I hit the extreme of poverty
and cold.

He sits down cross-legged… completely still and motionless. Linji’s
description of meditation repeats traditional instructions, as in the Tiantai Xiuxi
zhiguan zuochan fayao 修習止觀坐禪法要
(Essentials of seated meditation for practicing calming and contemplation):
Next one should shut one’s mouth, bringing the lips and teeth together so that they

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 249
barely touch, and raise one’s tongue to the
roof of the mouth. Then the eyes should
be shut, but only just enough to cut oﬀ the
light from outside. Then, sitting perfectly
upright in the proper position, one should
be like an anchor-stone, making not the
slightest movement, whether of trunk,
head, or four limbs. (t 46: 465c)

If you take the state of motionlessness… as master. Here “the state of
motionlessness and purity” is equated by
Linji with avidyā. Commentaries on this
argument generally rely on the doctrine
of the tathāgatagarbha 如來藏 (tathāgatawomb), as expounded in the dq, Nirvana
Sutra, Shengman jing 勝鬘經 (Lion’s roar
of Queen Śrīmālā sutra), Foxing lun 佛性
論 (Thesis on buddha-nature), and She
dasheng lun shi 攝大乘論釋 (Commentary on the Summary of the Mahayana).
The doctrine holds that the source of all
things is bhūtatathatā 眞如 (suchness).
Bhūtatathatā possesses two aspects:
immovability or immutability in essence,
and changeability or movability in conditions. From the viewpoint of the former
aspect, bhūtatathatā is identiﬁed with the
tathāgatagarbha, which is also called the
womb of the innately pure 自性清淨藏 .
This is enveloped in kleśa or avidyā of a
fundamental nature, known as 根本無明,
and in this respect “the state of motionlessness and purity” can be connected
with avidyā.
However, it is plain that Linji is using
this term as a rhetorical device, intending it in the sense of “ordinary darkness”
rather than “fundamental darkness.” This
conclusion is supported by his coupling of
無明 with the word 郎主, “master” (see the
comment on 無明郎主 later in this note),
a combination appearing in the Nirvana
Sutra, where the 無明 of 無明郎主 clearly
signiﬁes ordinary darkness:
Do not weep and wail like a newborn
babe. Restrain yourselves and do not recklessly disturb your minds. All of you here
are suffering the consequences of your

activity in the great sea of samsara. Zealously practice purifying your minds and
do not neglect the wisdom of recollection. Quickly seek correct knowledge and
hasten to go beyond all existing things.
The three realms take your body and turn
it endlessly on the wheel of suffering.
Ignorance the Master 無明郎主 and Aﬀection the Demon-King use your bodies
and minds as their servants and, lashing
them with whips, make them their slaves.
Everywhere associating yourselves with
your surroundings, you create the karma
of samsara. (t 12: 900b)

Another, nearly equivalent, passage
appears soon after (t 12: 901b). 無明郎主 is
also used in this sense by Shenhui 神會 in
his preface to the Dasheng dunjiao song 大
乘頓教頌 (Poem on the sudden enlightenment of the Mahayana):
There is Ignorance the Master and Aﬀection the Demon-King. They avail themselves of the empty void in order to bring
about causation and gather together the
passions in order to bring about karma.
(Suzuki 1934, 64)

In the Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑑 (Comprehensive mirror to aid government), Hu
Sanxing 胡三省 (1230–1287), commenting
on the chronicle of Emperor Wu 武帝 of
Jin 晉, says of the usage of 郎主: “At present
ordinary people often speak of the ‘master’
as 郎主 ; furthermore, they speak of the
master’s son as 郎君.” The Zheng suwen 證
俗文 4 (Explaining vernacular writings)
by Hao Yixing 郝懿行 (1755–1825) gives
another interpretation: “Usually a slave in
speaking of his master uses 郎, sometimes
he uses 郎主.” The biography of Liu Jishu
劉季述 in the Xin Tang shu 新唐書 (Newer
chronicles of the Tang) records his famous
words, “It often happens that a slave of
a hundred years serves a master 郎主 of
three years.”
A man of old: unknown.
Fearful indeed is the bottomless black
pit. A similar statement is found in the bg,
introduced by 教云, “a sutra says”:

250 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
所以動者是風大、不動者是地大。動與不動、倶無自性。爾若
向動處捉他、他向不動處立。爾若向不動處捉他、他向動處
立。譬如濳泉魚、鼓波而自躍。大德、動與不動、是二種境。
還是無依道人、用動用不動。

“Thus ‘motion is the wind element; motionlessness is the earth element.’
Motion and motionlessness both are without self-nature. If you try to seize
it within motion, it takes a position within motionlessness. If you try to seize
it within motionlessness, it takes a position within motion.
Like a ﬁsh hidden in a pool,
Smacking the waves as it leaps [from the water].
Virtuous monks, motion and motionlessness are merely two kinds of states;
it is the nondependent Man of the Way who utilizes motion and utilizes
motionlessness.
Therefore the śrāvaka, on hearing the
buddha dharma, cannot arouse the
supreme mind of the Way. Hence it is said
that one who cuts oﬀ good roots is without buddha-nature. A sutra says, “This
is called ‘the deep pit of emancipation, a
place to be feared’.” At a single thought he
falls into hell with the speed of an arrow
shot from a bow. (gy 1; x 68: 6b–c)

The sutra is probably the Dafangdeng daji
jing, which has the following passage:
Supposing that there is a person that has
fallen into a deep pit—he is able to beneﬁt
neither himself nor others. Śrāvakas and
pratyekabuddhas are also like this. They
have fallen into the pit of emancipation
and are able to beneﬁt neither themselves
nor others. (t 13: 88a)

Thus ‘motion is the wind element;
motionlessness is the earth element’
translates the sentence 所以動者是風大、
不動者是地大 . Linji’s statement appears
to be a quotation, judging from his use
of 所以, though so far no source has been
identified. The phrase 動是風大 is, however, found in the Da banniepan jing shu
大般涅槃經疏 (Commentary on the Nirvana Sutra), the Dasheng yizhang 大乘義章
(Essay on the meaning of the Mahayana;

in this text the earth element is identiﬁed
with “hardness” 堅 ), and the Chanmen
zhang 禪門章 (Essay on the meditation
gate) by Zhiyi 智顗 (538–597), founder of
the Tiantai school. In the Chanmen zhang
the phrase appears in a passage describing
the “eight sensations” 八觸 that hinder the
beginning meditation student: restlessness
動, itching 痒, buoyancy 輕, heaviness 重,
cold 冷, heat 暖, roughness 澁, smoothness
滑. Zhiyi comments:
Buoyancy and restlessness are the wind
element; itchiness and heat are the ﬁre element; cold and smoothness are the water
element; heaviness and roughness are the
earth element.” (x 55: 658c)

Like a ﬁsh hidden… as it leaps [from
the water]. The quote is a modiﬁed version of the last two lines of a verse in
the Da sheng chengye lun 大 乘 成 業 論 ,
Xuanzang’s translation of Vasubandhu’s
Karmasiddhi-prakaraṇa.
Through the [activities of] body and
speech displayed without / Are made
manifest the thoughts of the mind
within.
Just as a ﬁsh hidden in a deep pool / By
stirring up ripples reveals itself.
(t 31: 781b)

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 251

如諸方學人來、山僧此間、作三種根器斷。如中下根器來、我
便奪其境、而不除其法。或中上根器來、我便境法倶奪。如
上上根器來、我便境法人倶不奪。如有出格見解人來、山僧此
間、便全體作用、不歷根器。大德、到這裏、學人著力處不通
風、石火電光即過了也。學人若眼定動、即沒交涉。

“As for the students who come from every quarter, I myself divide them
into three categories according to their inherent capacities. If one of less
than average capacity comes, I snatch away his state but do not take away his
dharma. If one of better than average capacity comes, I snatch away both his
state and dharma. If one of superior capacity comes, I snatch away neither his
state, his dharma, nor himself. But should a man of extraordinary understanding come, I would act with my whole body and not place him in any category.
Virtuous monks, when a student has reached this point, his manifest power
is impenetrable to any wind and swifter than a spark from ﬂint or a ﬂash of
lightning.
“The moment a student blinks his eyes he’s already way oﬀ.
The original verse is concerned with the
fact that the activities of the mind, which
are subjective, reveal themselves in objective acts and words, but Linji seems to
be using the ﬁsh simile simply to express
complete freedom. For the master’s quotation of the ﬁrst two lines of the verse, see
page 260, below, and the accompanying
comment. For a French translation of the
Karmasiddhi -prakaraṇa, see Lamotte
1936; the verse under discussion is found
on page 209.
This point translates 這裏, a term that in
ordinary usage means “here” or “this place”
and as such is the same as expressions like
此間, 此中, and 箇中. In Chan usage, however, the term is often used with the connotation of “the ultimate state.”
Blink an eye translates 眼定動; the compound 定動 literally means “to fix and
move,” but the concept is diﬃcult to render accurately into English. Dōchū suggests that only the second of the two verbs,
“move,” has any force; his suggestion has
been followed in the present translation.

Since there are no known usages that
predate the present one in the ll, it is possible that the term originated with Linji.
However, in the present case as well there
is in a sermon by Linji’s contemporary
Deshan Xuanjian a passage in which
appear not only this compound but the
entire sentence in which it appears (except
that 眼目定動 takes the place of 眼定動):
Many of you have knowledge and understanding. But do you know his countenance? [Though everyone], from the
renouncer of home to the bodhisattva
who has attained the completed mind of
the tenth stage, looks for his traces they
cannot ﬁnd them. Therefore all the gods
rejoice, the deity of the soil lifts his feet
reverently in his hands, all the buddhas of
the ten directions praise him, and the king
of the demons weeps copious tears. Why?
Because of this emptiness he is brisk and
lively, without any roots and without any
dwelling place. If, right here, your eyes
move 若到這裏眼目定動 , you will have
already lost contact with him. (zh 20; x
79: 173c)

252 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
擬心即差、動念即乖。有人解者、不離目前。大德、爾檐鉢嚢
屎檐子、傍家走求佛求法。即今與麼馳求底、爾還識渠麼。活
撥撥地、祇是勿根株。擁不聚、撥不散。求著即轉遠、不求還
在目前、靈音屬耳。若人不信、徒勞百年。

The moment he applies his mind, he’s already diﬀered. The moment he
arouses a thought, he’s already deviated. But for the man who understands,
it’s always right here before his eyes.
“Virtuous monks, you carry your bowl-bag and lug your dung-sack,
rushing up blind alleys in search of buddha and in search of dharma. Do
you know who it is who right now is running around searching this way?
He is brisk and lively, with no roots at all. Though you [try to] embrace him,
you cannot gather him in; though you [try to] drive him away, you cannot
shake him oﬀ. If you seek him he retreats farther and farther away; if you
don’t seek him, then he’s right there before your eyes, his wondrous voice
resounding in your ears. If you have no faith [in this], you’ll waste your
entire life.
Two later examples of the phrase 定動
眼目are found, one by Yunmen Wenyan in

cerned with something or with nothing,
pick and you fail. (t 48: 140b)

yk 2 and the other in the commentary by
Yuanwu Keqin to the koan in the ﬁrst case
of the bl. To interpret the term as Dōchū
does seems consistent with the context in
both of these examples.
The quote from Yunmen reads as follows:

The moment he applies his mind, he’s
already diﬀered 擬心即差 and the moment
he arouses a thought, he’s already deviated 動念即乖 are presented here as Linji’s
own words, but in fact the first is quite
similar to a statement that appears in the
Zhao lun 肇論 by the early Chinese Buddhist monk Sengzhao 僧肇 (374/78–414),
who states:

[Yunmen] announced, “Panshan said,
‘What is it when illumination and the
state [of illumination] are both forgotten?’ I say that within the eastern sea I
hide my body and upon Mount Sumeru
I ride a horse.” Then he hit the seat a blow
with his staﬀ. Whereupon the eyes of the
whole assembly moved. He then picked
up his staﬀ and drove them out, saying, “I
thought you were intelligent fellows, you
lacquer buckets!” (t 47: 554.c–555a)

The passage from Yuanwu Keqin’s commentary in the bl is as follows:
At this Emperor Wu’s eyes moved; he was
utterly in the dark. He did not understand
what [Bodhidharma] had said. When you
reach this point, whether you are con-

The principle 理 is darkly concealed; apply
the mind and already you are oﬀ the mark
擬心已差, and all the more so if you speak
of it. (t 45: 157a)

Furthermore, the ﬁrst statement is identical and the second almost identical with
statements found in works by Linji’s great
contemporary, Guifeng Zongmi. Zongmi,
in his Chanyuan zhuquanji duxu 禪源諸詮
集都序 (Preface to the “Anthology of essential writings on the origins of Chan), attributes the ﬁrst statement to Heze Shenhui
荷澤神會 (670–762), the great exponent of
the Southern school of Chan:

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 253
Therefore the sutra says, “Grasp your own
mind with your own mind; it has nothing
to do with illusory creations or illusory
dharmas.” The śāstra says, “Mind does not
see mind.” Heze Dashi said, “To apply the
mind is already to have diﬀered” 擬心即
差. (t 48: 405a)

It should be noted, however, that this statement is not found in any of the Shenhui
records from Dunhuang.
The second statement appears with a
slight variation in the Zhu Huayan fajie
guanmen 註華嚴法界觀門, Zongmi’s commentary on a work by Du Shun 杜 順
(557–640), the ﬁrst patriarch of the Huayan
school. Zongmi’s statement reads:
The instant you arouse mind and produce
thought you have already deviated from
the substance of dharma. (t 45: 687a)

Moreover, both statements appear
together, in reverse order, the second with
the above-noted variation, in the following passage from Zongmi’s Yuanjue jing
dashu shiyi chao 圓覺經大疏釋義鈔 (Subcommentary to the Large commentary on
the Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment). Note
that here too the ﬁrst statement is attributed to Shenhui.
Furthermore, producing mind and arousing thought is already to have deviated
from the dharma-substance. The Seventh
Patriarch [Shenhui] said, “To apply the
mind is already to have diﬀered [from it]
擬心即差.” (x 9: 233c)

We also find Huangbo Xiyun, Linji’s
teacher, using each of these statements
separately, but without attribution, in a
sermon on “mind”:
This mind is bright and pure like the
empty void, and without a single speck of
form. To cause mind to rise and to stir up
thought is already to have deviated from
the dharma-substance 動念即乖法體 and
attached yourself to form. (t 48: 380a)
You cannot seek mind with mind; you
cannot seek buddha with buddha; you
cannot seek dharma with dharma. Therefore the student of the Way is directly

without mind and tallies with It in silence;
that is all. To apply the mind is already to
have diﬀered 擬心即差. Mind is transmitted by mind. That is the correct view. (t
48: 381b)

Whether Linji was acquainted with
these statements through Zongmi’s works
or only through the words of his teacher
Huangbo is impossible to determine.
It seems likely, however, that the lines
became well known in Chan circles after
Zongmi’s works were circulated, since
Luohan Guichen 羅漢桂齔 (867–928) also
uses them, in the same wording as Linji
and also without attribution, in a sermon
on the buddha-mind recorded in the jc:
Therefore I say, to apply the mind is
already to have differed from [the buddhadharma]; to stir up thoughts you have
already deviated from it. (t 51: 448a)

Bowl-bag 鉢嚢 and dung-sack 屎檐子.
The term “bowl-bag” refers to the small
sack in which monks and nuns carry their
begging bowls and other everyday necessities when they are traveling about on
pilgrimage. In this case “bowl-bag” may
be regarded as a metaphor for the monks’
and nuns’ possessions, or, together with
the following “dung-sack,” as an analogy
for the human body. The expression 鉢
嚢 is frequently encountered in the Buddhist literature, while 屎檐子 appears to be
unique to the Linji lu.
He is brisk and lively 活撥撥地. For an
earlier passage using the same expression,
see page 198 above, text and accompanying note, where 活撥撥地 is translated as
“bright and vigorous.”
Though you [try to] embrace him….
Linji is here giving a prose paraphrase
of several lines in the poem Huozhuyin
獲珠吟 (Song on obtaining the pearl), by
Venerable Guannan 關南長老 (n.d.), in
the jc:
The three realms are like illusions
The six paths are like dreams.

254 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
道流、一剎那間、便入華藏世界、入毘盧遮那國土、入解脫國
土、入神通國土、入淸淨國土、入法界、入穢入淨、入凡入
聖、入餓鬼畜生、處處討覓尋、皆不見有生有死、唯有空名。
幻化空花、不勞把捉、得失是非、一時放卻。道流、山僧佛
法、的的相承、從麻谷和尚、丹霞和尚、道一和尚、盧山拽石
頭和尚、一路行遍天下。無人信得、盡皆起謗。

“Followers of the Way, in an instant you enter the Lotus World, the Land
of Vairocana, the Land of Emancipation, the Land of Supernatural Powers,
the Land of Purity, and the dharma realm; you enter the dirty and the pure,
the secular and the sacred, the realm of hungry ghosts and the realm of
beasts. Yet however far and wide you may search, nowhere will you see any
birth or death; there will only be empty names.
Illusory transformations, ﬂowers in the sky—
Don’t trouble to grasp at them.
Gain and loss, right and wrong—
Away with them once and for all!
“Followers of the Way, my buddhadharma is that of the correct transmission, a transmission that has continued in a single line through the
masters Mayu, Danxia, Daoyi, Lushan, and Shigong, and has spread abroad
over all the world. Yet no one has faith in it and everyone heaps slander on it.
The presence of sages in the world [is
brief] as a ﬂash of lightning
Nations are no more than bubbles on the
water.
Impermanency, birth, and dissolution—
Day by day everything changes, everything passes away.
Only Great Intrinsic Wisdom,
Mahāprajñā, is ﬁrm and immutable
Like the diamond, it cannot be drilled.
Soft as cotton wool, it is exactly like emptiness
Tiny as a grain of dust, it cannot be seen.
By embracing it I try to gather it to me,
but I cannot.
By driving it away, I try to shake it oﬀ, but
I cannot.
By inclining my ear to it, I try to hear it,
but I cannot.
By gazing ﬁxedly at it, I try to observe,
but I cannot. (t 51: 463c)

You enter the Lotus World, the Land of
Vairocana…. The list of lands Linji presents in this passage is very similar to the
one that he gives in Discourse 14, and is
undoubtedly based on the same passage in
the Avataṃsaka Sutra, “Chapter on entering the dharma realm,” that the Discourse
14 list is. See pages 195–196, above.
However far and wide you may search
translates 討覓尋, a compound that combines three different characters that all
share the same meaning of “search,” to
give added emphasis to the entire term.
Illusory transformations… once and
for all. Linji is again quoting from the
Xinxin ming; the ﬁrst two lines of the present passage were cited by him earlier in
this same discourse (see page 230 and the
accompanying note). The text here varies
from the earlier one and from the text as

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 255
it appears both in the Xinxin ming itself (t
48: 376c) and in the jc (t 51: 457b), substituting the compound 幻化 “illusory transformations” for 夢玄 “illusory dreams,”
and the character 不 “don’t” for 何 “why.”
A single line through the masters…
Shigong. All of the masters mentioned
are disciples of Mazu, with the sole exception of Danxia. Danxia may have been
included because he appears to have been
the ﬁrst to use the term 一路行, “a single
line.” Danxia uses it in the second stanza
of his long poem Gujiyin 孤寂吟 (Song of
solitude), zj 4.
The stanza reads:
“Don’t waste time, make the utmost
eﬀort!” / I speak these words, but men
don’t understand.
Those who do, join with me in traveling the one road 一路行 / How can we
stumble and fall among the thorn trees
and brambles!

Mayu 麻谷. See Introduction, note 30.
Danxia 丹霞, i.e., Tianran 天然 of Danxia
(738–823), is mentioned in zj 4; jc 14; and
sg 11. Although there is some variation
in these works, all agree that his family
name and place of origin are unknown,
that he studied the Confucian teachings,
and that he was an heir of Shitou Xiqian.
According to the zj, he set out for the capital Chang’an to take the examinations,
accompanied by his friend Pang 龐 (later
the famous Layman Pang). While on their
way they heard the name of Mazu Daoyi,
whereupon they changed their plans and
went to Jiangxi to meet the great master
himself. Mazu immediately accepted Pang
as his student, but, after scrutinizing his
companion, said, “Shitou, who lives on the
Nanyue, is your teacher.” The young man
went to see Shitou and was permitted to
remain in that master’s group.
Several years passed during which
the young layman’s activities were limited largely to manual labor. One night

at the evening gathering the master said,
“Tomorrow let’s cut the weeds in front of
the Buddha Hall.” The following morning,
while all the monks and temple boys were
busy with their sickles, the young layman,
who had remained behind, poured water
into a basin, washed his hair, then knelt
down before the master. Pleased, Shitou
shaved his head. When he was completely
shaved, suddenly the crown of his head
rose up of itself. “Tianran 天然 (spontaneously)!” exclaimed the astonished master.
Smiling, the new disciple said, “I am grateful to you for my monk’s name.” “What
name do you say I gave you?” asked Shitou in surprise. “Didn’t you say tianran
just now?” was the reply. Such is said to
have been the origin of Tianran’s religious
name.
Shitou then began to instruct him in
simple Buddhist principles. “Enough!
Enough!” Tianran cried, clapping his
hands over his ears. “Then,” said the master, “as a test let me see your activity.”
Tianran immediately ran into the Monk’s
Hall, jumped up on the image of Mañjuśrī
enshrined there, and straddled it. “This
young disciple will end by smashing
shrines and images,” said the master, words
foreshadowing Tianran’s later burning of
a wooden buddha at Huilin si (see page
235, above).
After receiving dharma transmission,
Tianran wandered for a number of years,
visiting various masters (including Mazu)
and renewing his friendship with Pang,
who had never renounced his Confucian robe (four interesting conversations
between Tianran and Pang are recorded
in the Record of Layman Pang 1). Later
he built a hut on Mount Danxia 丹霞 in
Dengzhou 登州 , Henan. Gradually students gathered around him and a temple
was built. One day, in his eighty-ﬁfth year,
after bathing, he announced that he was
going out. He put on his straw traveling
hat and his sandals, took up his staﬀ, then

256 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
passed away before his foot had touched
the ground.
Danxia, as he is usually known, was an
excellent poet. Five of his poems are found
in zj 4; variants of two of these poems are
in the jc (t 51: 463b–c). For more on his
poems, see page 258, below.
Lushan 廬山 , i.e., Chan Master Zhichang 智 常 禪 師 (n.d.), was an important heir of the master Mazu. He derives
his name from his residence on Lushan
(Mount Lu 廬), where he was priest of the
temple Guizong si 歸宗寺. His biography
is found in zj 15; the jc (t 51: 255c–256b);
the sg (t 50: 817b–c); and other works.
Nothing is known of his early life. The
biographies mention his friendship with
Nanquan Puyuan (apparently dating from
the days when they were fellow students
under Mazu) and record several of their
conversations. Of Zhichang’s understanding, Huangbo is recorded to have said,
“Under Mazu Dashi there were eightyeight men who sat in the training hall.
Those who [obtained] the Dashi’s true
dharma-eye were few; one of these was
Lushan” (zj 16).
During the Yuanhe 元和 era (806–819)
Zhichang went to Lushan and restored
Guizong si, a temple that had originally
been the home of the famous warrior and
calligrapher Wang Xizhi 王羲之 (321–379),
and was later turned into a temple for the
Kashmirian monk Buddhayaśas (Fotuoyeshe 佛陀耶舍, n.d.), who arrived at Lushan
in 412. In the following centuries Guizong
si was blessed with a succession of eminent Chan masters, and remained into
recent times the most important of the
great temples on Lushan (see Mochizuki
Bukkyō daijiten 1:524a).
Zhichang is said to have been of striking appearance, with eyes that had double
pupils, a mark attributed in Chinese lore
to the ancient sage rulers. Because of this
he seems to have attracted considerable
attention, in order to avoid which he con-

stantly rubbed his eyes with a medicine
that caused them to become red. For this
reason he was often referred to as Chiyan
Guizong 赤眼歸宗 (Red-eyed Guizong).
It was to Zhichang’s dharma-heir Gao’an
Dayu 高安大愚 (n.d.) that Huangbo sent
Linji, and under whom the latter attained
his first satori (Introduction, page 67).
Among the master’s friends was the governor of Jiangxi, Li Bo 李渤 (?–831); a number of their conversations remain. Both
zj 15 and jc 29 contain Zhichang’s poems.
His imperially bestowed posthumous title
was Chan Master Zhizhen 至眞禪師.
Shigong 石鞏 (n.d.), another disciple of
Mazu, lived in Fuzhou 撫州, present Jiangxi.
His religious name was Huizang 慧藏. His
biography is found in zj 14 and the jc (t
51: 248b–c). Shigong, a hunter who hated
the sight of monks, came across Mazu’s
hermitage one day and asked the master
if he had seen a deer Shigong was chasing.
“Who are you?” asked Mazu. “A hunter,”
he replied. Mazu asked, “Do you know
how to shoot?” “Yes,” Shigong answered.
“How many deer do you shoot with a
single arrow?” The hunter replied, “One.”
“Then you don’t know how to shoot,” said
Mazu. “And do you know how to shoot,
Reverend?” asked the hunter. “Yes,” replied
Mazu. “So how many deer do you shoot
with an arrow?” asked the hunter. “I shoot
the entire herd with a single arrow,” was
the reply. The hunter said, “They all have
lives; why need you shoot the whole herd
at once?” “If you are aware of the principle,” responded Mazu, “why don’t you
shoot yourself?” The hunter answered, “If
you made me shoot myself, I could not do
so.” Mazu said, “Suddenly, today, this fellow
has stopped the ignorance and delusions
that have been his for eons.” Mazu’s words
hit him with such force that on the spot he
broke his bow and arrows and threw them
away. Then, cutting oﬀ his long hair with
his own sword, he gave himself over to the
master’s guidance and became a monk.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 257

如道一和尚用處、純一無雜、學人三百五百、盡皆不見他意。
如盧山和尚、自在眞正、順逆用處、學人不測涯際、悉皆忙
然。

“Venerable Daoyi’s activity was pure and simple; not one of his three to
ﬁve hundred students could discern what he meant. Venerable Lushan was
free and true; whether conforming or opposing, his actions were unfathomable to his students—they were all dumbfounded.
Later, when Shigong had himself become
a teacher, he is said to have always carried a
bow and arrow with which to test students.
One day a monk named Sanping Yizhong
三平義忠 (781–872) came for an interview. He had no more than come before
the master when he bared his chest and
shouted, “Is that an arrow to kill people
or to give them life?” Shigong again broke
his bow and arrow. As he gave Yizhong his
recognition he said, “After thirty years of
drawing a bow and searching for someone,
at last I have found half a man.”
This passage listing the names of Mayu,
Danxia, Daoyi, Lushan, and Shigong does
not match the corresponding passage in
certain other versions of the ll. The tg
version, for example, reads, “Lushan, who
tread on a stone” 廬山蹈石 (x 78: 472b),
and omits the name of Shigong 石 鞏 ,
which in our text immediately follows that
of Lushan. Shigong is also omitted in the
zh version of the ll, which reads, “Lushan,
the priest who turned the millstone” 廬
山拽石頭和尚 (x 79: 87b). However, both
texts, when describing the activities of the
various masters a few lines later, follow the
ll text exactly and mention both Lushan
and Shigong.
It may be that the phrases in the tg and
zh are no more than copyist errors, and
that the references to stones 石 are merely
corruptions of the 鞏 in Shigong’s name
(石鞏). The situation is complicated, however, by Lushan’s association in the Chan
literature with millstones, an association

reflected in the tg and the zh versions.
For example, the Fayan Chanshi yulu 法
演禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan
Master Fayan) says, “Guizong [Lushan]
turned the [mill]stone” (t 47: 662a). The
relation of Lushan to millstones is elucidated in bl 44:
Guizong one day was working [with the
assembly] dragging a [mill]stone. “Where
are we going?” he asked the duty-monk.
“We’re going to turn the [mill]stone,”
replied the duty-monk. “It’s fine to turn
the stone, but don’t turn the axle-pole,”
said the master. (t 48: 181b)

Although the type of stone being dragged
is not clearly designated in the bl, the fact
that the term “axle-pole” 中心樹子 is used
indicates that it is a millstone. Furthermore, the same exchange appears in the
section on Nanquan Puyuan in the zh (x
79: 39a-b), but the character 磨 is substituted for 石, clearly indicating that what is
being dragged is a millstone.
Pure and simple. To characterize Daoyi’s
activity Linji has used one of the master’s
own expressions from the Mazu yulu 馬祖
語錄 (Recorded sayings of Mazu):
All dharmas are mind-dharmas; all names
are mind-names. The myriad dharmas all
arise from mind; mind is the root of the
myriad dharmas. The sutra says, “Through
understanding mind one penetrates to
the fundamental source. Therefore one is
called a śramaṇa.” Names are equal, meanings are equal, all dharmas without exception are equal, pure, and simple. (x 69: 3a)

258 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
如丹霞和尚、翫珠隱顯、學人來者、皆悉被罵。如麻谷用處、
苦如黃檗、近皆不得。如石鞏用處、向箭頭上覓人、來者皆
懼。如山僧今日用處、眞正成壞、翫弄神變、入一切境、隨處
無事、境不能換。

Venerable Danxia played with the pearl, concealing and revealing it; every
single student who came was reviled by him. As for Venerable Mayu, his
activity was as bitter as the huangbo tree; no one could approach him. Venerable Shigong’s activity was to search for a man with the point of his arrow;
all who came before him were struck with fear.
“With respect to my own activity today—true creation and destruction—
I play with miraculous transformations, enter into all kinds of circumstances,
yet nowhere have I anything to do. Circumstances cannot change me.
Ven. Lushan was free and true. Lushan
spoke of his freedom in the opening lines
of an untitled verse recorded in the jc:
I am cut oﬀ from phenomenon and noumenon / The sun is exactly at noon.
I am free, free as a lion / Putting no reliance on things. (t 51: 451c)

Ven. Danxia played with the pearl.
An allusion to the ﬁrst of two of Danxia’s
poems, both entitled Wanzhuyin 翫珠吟
(Playing with the pearl) and recorded in
the jc:
O the wonderful pearl of prajñā! / Its
mystery is diﬃcult to fathom;
In the sea of dharma-nature / I myself
have recognized it.
Now disappearing, now appearing / It
plays among the ﬁve skandhas;
Gleaming brightly within and without / It
possesses great spiritual power.
This pearl is not large / Neither is it small;
Brightly it shines by night and by day /
Illuminating all things everywhere.
Seeking it you ﬁnd nothing / Not even a
trace;
Yet standing or sitting it accompanies you
/ Ever clear and distinct. (t 51: 463b)

The same poem, with some variations and
additions, is found under the title Nongzhuyin 弄珠吟 (Playing with the pearl) in
zj 4. See also page 255, above.

His activity was as bitter as the huangbo
tree. The jc records the following example
of Mayu’s “activity”:
A monk asked, “I have no doubts regarding the twelve divisions of the teachings,
but what was the purpose of the Patriarch’s coming from the West?” The master [Mayu] stood up and, leaning on his
staﬀ, turned his body around once, then
raised one foot. “Do you understand?”
he asked. When the monk did not reply,
the master struck him. [Another] monk
asked, “What was the central meaning
of the buddhadharma?” The master was
silent. (t 51: 253c.27–254a.1)

The bark of the huangbo 黃蘗 tree (Phellodendron amurense; Chinese cork tree) is
used to make dye and a bitter medicine.
No one could approach him. The word
order in this line, 近皆不得 , is irregular.
The quite ordinary colloquial construction, verb + 不得, “cannot…; it is impossible to…,” is here interrupted by the
interpolation of the noun or adverb 皆 .
Undoubtedly the sentence should be corrected to read 皆近不得. The Ming edition
of the Linji text, apparently in an attempt
to make better sense of the passage, reads
皆傍不得 , “none could approach him” (t
47: 501b, note). For other instances of

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 259

但有來求者、我即便出看渠。渠不識我、我便著數般衣、學人
生解、一向入我言句。苦哉、瞎禿子無眼人、把我著底衣、認
青黃赤白。我脫卻入淸淨境中、學人一見、便生忻欲。我又
脫卻、學人失心、忙然狂走、言我無衣。我即向渠道、爾識我
著衣底人否。忽爾回頭、認我了也。大德、爾莫認衣。衣不能
動、人能著衣。有箇淸淨衣、有箇無生衣、菩提衣、涅槃衣、
有祖衣、有佛衣。大德、但有聲名文句、皆悉是衣變。從臍輪
氣海中鼓激、牙齒敲磕、成其句義。明知是幻化。

“Whenever someone comes here seeking I immediately go out and look
at him. He doesn’t recognize me. Thereupon I don various kinds of robes.
The student, assigning some meaning to this, straightway falls into words
and phrases. What a pity that the blind shavepate, a man without the eye [to
see], grasps at the robe I’m wearing and declares it to be blue or yellow, red
or white! When I remove the robe and enter the state of purity, the student
takes one look and is immediately ﬁlled with delight and longing. Then,
when I cast oﬀ everything, the student is stunned and, running about in
wild confusion, cries, ‘You have no robe!’ If I say, ‘Do you know me, the man
who wears these robes?’ he’ll abruptly turn his head around and recognize
me through and through.
“Virtuous monks, don’t acknowledge robes. Robes cannot move of themselves, but people can put them on. There is the robe of purity, the robe of
birthlessness, the robe of bodhi, the robe of nirvana, the patriarch-robe, and
the buddha-robe. Virtuous monks, these spoken words and written phrases
are all nothing but changes of robes.
“Churning up the sea of breath in your belly and clacking your teeth
together, you devise wordy interpretations. So it’s clear that these are only
illusory transformations.
a similar irregularity, see the incidents
on page 128, above, and pages 306–307,
below.
Ven. Shigong’s activity… point of his
arrow. For a description of Shigong’s
activity with “the point of his arrow,” see
page 257, above.
Straightway falls into words and
phrases. The original phrase, 一向入我言
句 , literally means “falls into my words
and phrases.” The “my” 我 is superﬂuous,
however. In this context the “words and

phrases” the student falls into are those of
the student, and not Linji.
Churning up… clacking your teeth
together. Linji may be ridiculing the elaborate descriptions given in various scriptural writings of the way in which speech
is produced. For example, the dl states:
During speech, the breath in the mouth is
called “udāna.” This enters, goes as far as
the navel, contacts the navel, then issues
forth as sound. The sound issuing forth

260 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
大德、外發聲語業、內表心所法。以思有念、皆悉是衣。爾祇
麼認他著底衣爲寔解。縱經塵劫、祇是衣通。三界循還、輪回
生死。不如無事。相逢不相識、共語不知名。今時學人不得、
蓋爲認名字爲解。大策子上、抄死老漢語、三重五重複子裹、
不敎人見、道是玄旨、以爲保重。大錯。瞎屡生、爾向枯骨
上、覓什麼汁。

Virtuous monks:
Acts of speech are displayed without,
Mental activities are manifested within.
Because of mental activities thoughts arise, but these are all just robes.
“If all you do is acknowledge as real the robes that are merely put on,
even after the passage of kalpas numerous as dust you’ll still have nothing
but an understanding of robes, and will continue going round and round in
the three realms, transmigrating through birth-and-death. Much better to
do nothing.
I meet [him] yet do not recognize [him],
I speak with [him] yet do not know his name.
“Students of today get nowhere because they base their understanding
upon the acknowledgment of names. They inscribe the words of some dead
old guy in a great big notebook, wrap it up in four or ﬁve squares of cloth,
and won’t let anyone look at it. ‘This is the Mysterious Principle,’ they aver,
and safeguard it with care. That’s all wrong. Blind idiots! What kind of juice
are you looking for in such dried-up bones!
contacts the seven places and returns. This
is speech. As the verse says:
The breath is called udāna
When it contacts the navel it ascends.
When the breath contacts the seven
places
The neck, gums, teeth, and lips,
The tongue, throat, and the chest
Within them speech is produced.
(t 25: 103a)

See also a similar passage in the Da
piluzhe’na chengfo jing shu 大毘盧遮那成佛
經疏 (Commentary on the Mahāvairocana
Sutra) (t 39: 608a).
Acts of speech… manifested within.
These two lines are apparently Linji’s

rephrasing of the ﬁrst couplet of the verse
in the Dasheng chengye lun 大乘成業論 ,
from which he had earlier quoted the second couplet, also with slight variations
(see page 250, above).
I meet [him]… know his name. The
same verse is found in a sermon by Nanquan Puyuan, recorded in the Chizhou
Nanquan Puyuan Chanshi yuyao 池州南
泉普願禪師語要 (Essential words of Chan
Master Nanquan Puyuan of Chizhou),
where it is preceded by the words, “The
Great Way is a dark road; it cannot be fathomed by means of the intellect. Therefore
it is said…” (x 68: 73a). The original source
of the verse is unknown, however. After

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 261

有一般不識好惡、向敎中取意度商量、成於句義。如把屎塊
子、向口裏含了、吐過與別人。猶如俗人打傳口令相似、一
生虛過。也道我出家、被他問著佛法、便即杜口無詞、眼似漆
突、口如楄檐。

“Then there’re a bunch of guys who, not knowing good from bad, guess
around and speculate about the scriptures and make wordy interpretations
of them. They’re like men who, having held dung clods in their mouths, spit
them out for the other people. They’re like peasants engaged in playing a
passing-the-word game. They spend their entire lifetime in vain, yet declare
‘We are renouncers of home!’ Questioned about buddhadharma, they just
shut their mouths, bereft of words. Their eyes are as vacant as black chimney
holes and their mouths sag like [loaded] carrying-poles.
Linji’s time it was quoted occasionally. See,
for example, the jc entry on Yunjushan
Chang 雲居山昌 (n.d.) (t 51: 363b).
Great big notebook 大策子上. See also
the advice oﬀered in a sermon by Yaoshan
Weiyan 藥山惟儼 (745–828): “Don’t just
memorize words in books 策子 and make
them your own viewpoint” (jc; t 51: 440c).
The character 策 , also written 冊 , often
appears in this form in manuscripts from
Dunhuang.
A passing-the-word game. This appears
to have been a word game similar to “telephone,” in which a diﬃcult-to-pronounce
phrase was repeated from one person to
the next. Anyone making a mistake was
“ﬁned” by having to drink a cup of wine.
Another example is found in the Dahui
Pujue Chanshi yulu 大 慧 普 覺 禪 師 語 錄
(Record of Chan Master Dahui Pujue):
They ask about one matter, and then
before they have understood they ask
about another, like villagers playing a
pass-the-word. (t 47: 880c)

They spend their entire lifetime in
vain. This phrase is taken from the seventh of the ten poems of the Dasheng zan
大乘讚 (In praise of the Mahayana; see

page 189, above). The couplet in which the
phrase appears reads,
Uselessly toiling, they spend a lifetime
in vain
Through endless kalpas sinking in [the
sea of] birth and old age. (t 51: 449c)

Yet declare “We are renouncers of
home!” translates 也道我是出家, in which
the particle 也 is a colloquial conjunction
having the same meaning as 雖, “though.”
Another example of this usage is seen in
a poem from the Five Dynasties: 也知寺
裏講筵開, 卻走尋春翫花柳 “He knows that
in the temple the sermon has begun, yet
he hurries about, seeking the spring and
enjoying the flowers and willows” (Ren
1955, 140). In written Chinese, 亦 can serve
the same function: 時大師…亦不贊賞, 心
自詮勝 “And though he [the Fifth Patriarch] did not commend him [Huineng],
yet in his heart he greatly appreciated
him” (zj 2).
As vacant as black chimney holes translates 漆突 , a term of uncertain meaning
found nowhere else in the ll, nor in any
other text. The traditional interpretation,
followed in the translation, takes 漆 as
“black” (or “black lacquer,” a metaphor for
tar) and 突 as “chimney.”

262 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
如此之類、逢彌勒出世、移置他方世界、寄地獄受苦。大德、
爾波波地往諸方、覓什麼物、踏爾腳板闊。無佛可求、無道可
成、無法可得。外求有相佛、與汝不相似。欲識汝本心、非合
亦非離。

Such men as these, even though they were to be present when Maitreya
appears in this world, would be banished to another region and there,
lodged in hell, suﬀer its torments.
“Virtuous monks, what are you seeking as you go around hither and yon,
walking until the soles of your feet are ﬂat? There is no buddha to seek, no
Way to complete, no dharma to attain.
If you seek outside for a buddha having form,
You won’t ﬁnd him to resemble you;
If you would know your own original mind,
It’s neither united with nor apart from [him].
When Maitreya appears in this world.
This is a reference to the popular Buddhist belief that in the far distant future
Maitreya, the next buddha, will appear in
the world and save all living beings. Linji
denies that even Maitreya can do anything to help such people as he has been
describing. See also the words of Nanquan
Puyuan recorded in the jc:
If you accept the words of this old monk,
you are called dependent men of the
world. Even though you were [to live] to
see Maitreya’s coming, yet all your hair
would be scorched oﬀ from head to tail.
(t 51: 445b–c)

Banished to another region and there,
lodged in hell, suﬀer its torments. Here
Linji seems to be stating what was a popular belief at the time. The following relevant passage appears in both the Dafangguang fo huayan jing suishu yanyi chao 大
方廣佛華嚴經隨疏演義鈔 (An exegesis of
the commentary on the Comprehensive
sutra on the adornments of buddha) and
zl 93:
In the Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra
the crime of slandering this dharma is
expounded upon at length. It says that

[those who do so] fall into the Avīci Hell
of this region. When this land experiences
the kalpa of destruction their crime is still
not expiated, so they are removed to the
Avīci Hell of another region. In this other
region they again pass through the kalpa
of destruction, and, their crime still not
being expiated, they once more are transferred to another region. In this way they
move through all of the ten directions.
When they have passed through the kalpa
of destruction in each of the ten directions, they are again born into the Avīci
Hell of this region. Though a thousand
buddhas were to appear in the world, saving them would still be diﬃcult. (t 36: 89a;
t 48: 921a)

There is no buddha to seek, no Way to
complete, no dharma to attain. A similar
description is found in the opening lines
of the poem Liaoyuan ge 了元歌 (Song of
understanding the source), by the monk
Tengteng 騰騰:
You ask about the Way / But there is no
Way to be practiced;
You ask about the dharma / But there is
no dharma to be asked about.
(t 51: 461b)

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 263

道流、眞佛無形、眞道無體、眞法無相。三法混融、和合一
處。辨既不得、喚作忙忙業識衆生。

“Followers of the Way, true buddha has no shape, true Way has no substance, true dharma has no form; these three are fused together harmoniously united into one. Just because you can’t understand this, you’re called
‘sentient beings with unlimited karmic consciousness’.”
If you seek outside for a buddha…
apart from [him]. Linji is here quoting
the second verse of the poem attributed
to Buddhanandi (Fotuonanti 佛陀難提 ),
the eighth patriarch of Indian Zen, the
only change being the substitution of 欲
for the original 若 as the ﬁrst character of
the second couplet. As found in bz 2, the
poem reads:
When your words are intimate with mind
The intimacy is beyond that with your
parents.
When your deeds accord with the Way
All the buddhas are none other than your
mind.
If you seek outside for a buddha having
form
[You will ﬁnd] none resembling yourself;
But if you know your Original Mind
You’ll be neither united with nor apart
from him.

You can’t understand this translates 辨
既不得, another example of irregular word
order, the colloquial expression verb + 不
得 being interrupted by the interposition
of the adverb 既. The reading for the equivalent passage in zh 9 is 既辨不得, which is
probably correct (x 79: 88a). For another
instance of a similar irregular word order,
see the comment on page 258, above.
Unlimited karmic consciousness translates the term 忙忙業識. The compound 業
識 is explained at length in the dq; the
following is from the text of Paramārtha
(Zhendi 眞諦, 500–569):
Next, as regards causation [in the realm]
of birth-and-death: What we call sentient

beings depend upon mind 心 , then the
mind-faculty 意 and mental cognition 意
識 evolve. What does this mean? Because
of dependence upon the storehouse-consciousness 阿梨耶識, we say that there is
ignorance 無明 ; [mind] unconsciously
arises, with the ability to see 見, to manifest 現, and to grasp 取 the objective world
境 , thus arousing thoughts in a continuous succession. Therefore we speak of
the faculty of thought 意 (Skr., manas).
This faculty of thought has ﬁve diﬀerent
names. What are these names? The ﬁrst is
activity-consciousness 業識, meaning that
through the power of ignorance 無明力
mind is unconsciously excited into activity. (t 32: 577b)

The adjective 忙忙 is often used as a homonym for 茫茫, and it is with this second
meaning that we have translated the
term here. The expression 忙忙業識 (as
in the ll), or its variant form 忙忙業性 ,
often appears in the zj. The following is
an example taken from fascicle 3 of that
text:
Emperor Suzong 肅宗 [r. 756–762] asked
National Teacher Nanyang Huizhong, “‘All
sentient beings have an illimitable karmanature 忙忙業性 . They have no base on
which to rely; every day they use it yet
do not know it.’ What does this mean?”
The National Teacher picked up a plate
decorated with golden ﬂowers and asked,
“What is this called?” The emperor replied,
“A plate decorated with golden flowers.”
The National Teacher said, “Obviously!
All sentient beings use [It] every day but
do not know it.”

264 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xix
問、如何是眞佛眞法眞道、乞垂開示。師云、佛者心淸淨是。
法者心光明是。道者處處無礙淨光是。三即一、皆是空名、而無
寔有。如眞正學道人、念念心不間斷。自達磨大師從西土來、
祇是覓箇不受人惑底人。後遇二祖、一言便了、始知從前虛用
功夫。山僧今日見處、與祖佛不別。若第一句中得、與祖佛爲
師。若第二句中得、與人天爲師。若第三句中得、自救不了。

Someone asked, “What about the true buddha, the true dharma, and the
true Way? We beg of you to disclose this for us.”
The master said, “Buddha is the mind’s purity; dharma is the mind’s radiance; the Way is the pure light pervading everywhere without hindrance. The
three are one, yet all are empty names and have no real existence. With the
true man of the Way, from moment to moment mind is not interrupted.
“From the time the great teacher Bodhidharma came from the Western Land, he just sought a man who would not accept the deluded views
of others. Later, he met the Second Patriarch, who, having understood at
[Bodhidharma’s] one word, for the ﬁrst time realized that hitherto he had
been futilely engaged in striving.
“As for my understanding today, it’s no diﬀerent from that of the patriarch-buddhas. He who attains at the First Statement becomes the teacher
of patriarch-buddhas; he who attains at the Second Statement becomes the
teacher of men and gods; he who attains at the Third Statement cannot save
even himself.”

xix
True man of the Way translates 眞正作
道人, an unusual term of which no other
examples are known. The Ming text of the
ll in gy 4 reads 眞正學道人 (x 68: 25a);
that in zh 9 reads simply 眞正道人 (x 79:
88a); while that in tg 11 reads 志公作道
人 (x 78: 473a), a phrase that makes little
sense. It is obvious, therefore, that the text
of this passage has been uncertain from
early times. The wh version agrees with
that used in the translation.
Second Patriarch. The Second Patriarch
of Chinese Chan is Huike 慧可 (487–593).
After studying Taoism in his youth he
turned to Buddhism, ordaining under

Chan Master Baojing 寶靜禪師 (n.d). Later
he spent eight years in meditation, leading
to a vision at about the age of forty that
guided him to Bodhidharma.
The jc reports that Huike went to Shaolin temple and called upon Bodhidharma
at the cave where he was meditating.
Receiving no acknowledgment from the
master, Huike waited outside for the entire
night. It was winter, and by dawn the snow
had reached his knees. Finally Bodhidharma asked, “You have stood long in the
snow. What do you seek?” Huike replied, “I
request only that the master, in his mercy,
open the Gate of Sweet Dew and liberate all beings.” Bodhidharma said, “The
supreme, marvelous Way of all buddhas

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 265

xx
問、如何是西來意。師云、若有意、自救不了。云、既無意、
云何二祖得法。師云、得者是不得。云、既若不得、云何是不
得底意。

Someone asked, “What was the purpose of the [Patriarch’s] coming from
the West?”
The master said, “If he had had a purpose he couldn’t have saved even
himself.”
Someone asked, “Since he had no purpose, how did the Second Patriarch obtain the dharma?”
The master said, “‘To obtain’ is to not obtain.”
Someone asked, “If it is ‘to not obtain,’ what is the meaning of ‘to not
obtain’?”
can be attained only through ages of eﬀort
practicing what is difficult to practice,
enduring what is diﬃcult to endure. Why
should you, with your shallow heart and
arrogant mind, ask for the true vehicle
and suﬀer such hardships in vain?” Huike
cut oﬀ his left arm and presented it to the
master as a sign of his detachment and
desire to study the Way. With this, Bodhidharma accepted him as a disciple.
One day he said to Bodhidharma, “My
mind is not yet at rest. Master, I implore
you, please put my mind to rest.” The master replied, “Bring your mind here and I
will put it to rest for you.” Huike said, “I
have searched for my mind, but am unable
to ﬁnd it.” “There,” said the master, “I have
put your mind to rest for you.”
After about five years Huike received
dharma transmission from Bodhidharma,
then became a wandering teacher. His successor was Sengcan 僧璨 (d. 606), about
whom little is known. According to the jc,
Huike taught for thirty years among the
common people in the city of Ye, working
with the laborers and visiting the taverns.
When asked why a man of the Way was
behaving thus, he answered, “I am cultivating my mind in my own way—what

business is it of yours?” Huike became so
popular that he aroused the envy of the
popular dharma master Bianhe 辨和, who
denounced him to the local oﬃcial. Huike,
sentenced to execution for spreading false
doctrines, accepted his fate calmly.
First Statement… Second Statement…
Third Statement. For Linji’s Three Statements, see pages 144–148, above.

xx
If it is ‘to not obtain,’ what…. The
grammatical construction here is 既若 ,
where the subordinate conjunction 既, “if ”
or “because, since,” is connected with 若 to
form a compound meaning simply “if ” or
“since.” Some instances of this usage can
be found in the colloquial literature of the
Tang, but few appear after the Song. The
following examples are both taken from
Tang works found at Dunhuang:
問、既若如此、作沒生時得 Question: “If
this is so, when shall I succeed?” (Suzuki
and Kda 1934, 12)
問曰、既若無心、即合無有見聞覺知 Question: “If mind is nonexistent, then does it
follow that seeing, hearing, perceiving, and
knowing are nonexistent?” (t 85: 1269a)

266 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
師云、爲爾向一切處馳求心不能歇。所以祖師言、咄哉丈夫、
將頭覓頭。爾言下便自回光返照、更不別求、知身心與祖佛不
別、當下無事、方名得法。

The master said, “It is because you cannot stop your mind which runs on
seeking everywhere that a patriarch said, ‘Bah, superior men! Searching for
your heads with your heads!’ When at these words you turn your own light
in upon yourselves and never seek elsewhere, then you’ll know that your
body and mind are not diﬀerent from those of the patriarch-buddhas and
on the instant have nothing to do—this is called ‘obtaining the dharma.’
Searching for your heads with your
heads. This is another reference to the
story of Yajñadatta, the man of Śrāvastī
who thought he had lost his head; see
the comment on page 175, above. zl 98
records a sermon by a certain Ven. Ganquan 甘泉和尚 (n.d.) that contains these
same words, which Linji attributes to “a
patriarch.” Ganquan says, in part:
If you can understand your own mind,
then besides mind there is no other buddha and besides buddha there is no other
mind. As for actions and behavior, whose
are they? Except for this mind there is no
other mind. If you say there is something
other, you are a Yajñadatta; just like him,
[you are] searching for your head with
your head. (t 48: 943b)

Who exactly this Ven. Ganquan was is
difficult to ascertain. There were several
Chan figures of this name, all of whom
were in the line of Mazu, but their dates
are unknown. The earliest was Ganquan
Zhixian 甘 泉 志 賢 , a direct disciple of
Mazu. It may be that both Linji and the
Ganquan whose words are here given
were quoting from the same earlier and as
yet unidentiﬁed source.
Turn your own light in upon yourselves translates 回光返照 , a picturesque
phrase that is often encountered in the
Chan literature, although Linji appears to
have been one of the earlier masters to use
it. The phrase may be said to describe the

essence of Buddhist meditation—to take
the mind, ordinarily occupied entirely
with discursive thought and external phenomena, and direct it inward toward the
source of the mind’s activities. A usage
of this phrase that predates Linji may be
found in the Caoan ge 草庵歌 (Song of
the grass hut) by Shitou Xiqian 石頭希遷
(700–790):
Turning my own light in upon myself 迴
光返照, I return
And penetrate into the spiritual source,
neither front nor back. (t 51: 461c)

A variation of the phrase 回 光 返 照 ,
using the character 顧 instead of 照 , is
found in jc 11, where it is recorded that
Linji’s contemporary Yangshan Huiji 仰山
慧寂 (807–883) “addressed the assembly,
saying, ‘All of you should each turn your
own light inward 回光返顧. Don’t hold on
to my words’.” (t 51: 282c)
On the instant translates 當下, a compound that was frequently used until the
end of the Yuan dynasty; numerous examples are found in such works as the Zhu
Zi yulei 朱子語類 (Conversations between
Zhu Xi and his disciples), the Liu Zhiyuan
zhugongdiao 劉知遠諸宮調 (Ballad of Liu
Zhiyuan), and the Yuanren baizhong qu 元
人百種曲 (A hundred Yuan plays). During
the Tang and the Five Dynasties the terms
當, 當時, and 當即 were frequently used as
synonyms for 當下.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 267

大德、山僧今時、事不獲已、話度說出許多不才淨。爾且莫
錯。據我見處、寔無許多般道理。要用便用、不用便休。祇如
諸方說六度萬行、以爲佛法、我道、是莊嚴門佛事門、非是佛
法。

“Virtuous monks, at present I’ve no other choice than to speak so much
trash and rubbish. Don’t be mistaken. As I see it there really aren’t so many
problems. If you want to act, act; if you don’t, don’t.
“There are people in every quarter who assert that the ten thousand
practices and the six pāramitās constitute the buddhadharma. But I say to
you that they are merely means of adornment, expedients for carrying out
the buddha’s work; they are not buddhadharma [itself].
Trash and rubbish translates 不才淨 ,
a curious expression of which the only
other known usage is found in a sermon
by the Chan master Bieweng Zhen 別翁
甄 (n.d.), included in the Kuyai heshang
manlu 枯崖和尚漫錄 (Casual records of
Ven. Kuyai), a work with a preface dated
1272. Zhen, however, is obviously quoting Linji:
I [Zhen] say that before old Śākya had
seen the morning star, he really gave people cause to suspect him. [Even] after he
had seen the morning star, he came out
with such a lot of trash and rubbish that
his heart and liver and all his ﬁve organs
were laid bare to inspection. (x 87: 45c)

Dōchū recognizes 不才淨 as the equivalent
of 不才不淨, citing the following passage
from the Dahui Pujue Chanshi yulu 大慧
普覺禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan
Master Dahui Pujue):
They hoard in their bosoms such trash
and rubbish 不材不淨 as this; they treat
good men with contempt, and thus create
hell-karma for themselves (t 47: 863b).

The Dahui text uses in place of the character 才 its orthographic variant 材 ; the
Taishō mistakes 材 for the character 村 ,
meaning “village.”
Means of adornment is a metaphor
referring to such activities as maintaining

the precepts and practicing asceticism,
which, although valued and respected in
Chan, are regarded as of secondary importance in comparison with the attainment
of awakening.
Expedients for carrying out Buddha’s
work. Regarding “the Buddha’s work,” Baizhang says:
The Bhagavat [Buddha] then takes on the
thirty-two physical marks and appears
before men, speaking their language,
preaching the dharma to them, converting
them by according with their capacities,
changing his form in response to things,
varying his appearance in all the gati, and
cutting oﬀ ego and the place of ego. Still,
this is secondary work, petty activity; it
too is included in the ways of carrying out
Buddha’s work. (x 68: 13c)

Huangbo had earlier made much the
same statement as his disciple Linji. In his
wl we ﬁnd the following passage:
Someone asked, “If mind is already intrinsically buddha, are we to continue to
carry out the six pāramitās and the tenthousand practices?” [The master] said,
“Enlightenment is present in the mind. It
has nothing whatsoever to do with the six
pāramitās and the ten thousand practices.
All these relate to such kinds of work as
converting, helping, and saving sentient
beings.” (t 48: 384b)

268 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
乃至持齋持戒、擎油不澗、道眼不明、盡須抵債、索飯錢有日
在。何故如此。入道不通理、復身還信施。長者八十一、其樹
不生耳。乃至孤峯獨宿、一食卯齋、長坐不臥、六時行道、皆
是造業底人。

Even those who keep the rules regarding food and conduct with the care of
a man carrying a bowl of oil so as not to spill a drop, if their dharma-eye is
not clear they’ll have to pay their debts, and the day will come when the cost
of their food will be exacted from them. Why is this so?
Since he entered the Way but didn’t penetrate the Principle,
He returned in the ﬂesh to repay the alms he’d received.
When the rich man reaches four score and one,
The tree will no longer produce the fungus.
“Even those who live alone on a solitary peak, or who eat their single
meal at dawn, sit for long periods of time without lying down, and worship
buddha at the six appointed hours of the day—all such persons are simply
creating karma.
The care of a man… spill a drop. This
is an allusion to a parable the Buddha
used to instruct his disciples in the four
stages of mindfulness 四念住 (Skr., catvāri
smṛtyupasthānāni). See the Za ahan jing
雜阿含經 (Miscellaneous discourses of the
Buddha; t 2: 174b–c; Saṁyutta Nikāya,
47.20). The parable, which refers particularly to the first of the four stages,
mindfulness of the body 身念處 (kāya
smṛtyupasthāna), tells of a man carrying
a bowl full of oil who is ordered to walk
through a crowd of people watching beautiful women dance, sing, and give theatrical performances. An executioner with a
naked sword follows him; if the man spills
even a single drop of oil his head will be
immediately cut oﬀ. Only by concentrating his mind and ﬁxing his total attention
upon the oil, never venturing to turn his
head to look at the beautiful women, can
he save his life. The Buddha concludes his
sermon by saying,
Bhikkus, as regards the body, contemplation and mindfulness of the body, zeal in

progress, appropriate means, right wisdom
and right mindfulness, [these] control
covetousness in the secular world. This
is also true of contemplation and mindfulness as regards sensation [vedana], as
regards the mind-states [citta], and as
regards things [dharma]. He is called a
bhikku of right demeanor and self-respect
as regards body, who concentrates his
attention, does not turn his head toward
sound and form, firmly restrains his
mind-states, and dwells in the four stages
of mindfulness. (t 2: 174c)

This parable is retold in the Xiuxing daodi
jing 修行道地經 (Sutra on the stages of the
path of cultivation) (t 15: 196a–198b) to
illustrate “zeal in progress” 精進. It is also
retold, with some variations, in the Nirvana Sutra to illustrate “wisdom in mindfulness” 念慧 (t 12: 496b–c; t 12: 740a).
In the dl the parable is merely referred
to in a short phrase as a simile for zeal in
progress (t 25: 173c). Numerous subsequent works use the parable to describe
the concentrated attention with which the

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 269
precepts and the four stages of mindfulness are to be practiced.

arch’s dharma, himself became the sixteenth Indian patriarch.

Since he entered the Way… produce
the fungus. This verse is attributed to
Kanadeva (Jianatipo 迦那提婆 ), the fifteenth Indian patriarch of Zen. The following story, in which this verse appears,
is told in great detail in bz 3, and in abbreviated form in the jc (t 51: 211b).
After receiving transmission, Kanadeva
departed on a journey to spread the
dharma. Coming to the land of Kapila, he
met an elderly man of great wealth and
his family. In their garden was a tree on
which for a number of years a huge fungus
had grown. The rich man and his younger
son Rāhulata were able to pick and eat
the mushroom, which always grew back
again, but when anyone else in the family
tried to pick it, it would disappear. The
rich man asked Kanadeva the reason for
this strange event. Kanadeva, after going
into a trance, reported that when the rich
man was twenty years old he had taken
a bhikku into his house for thirty years.
The others in the household disliked the
bhikku, but the rich man and Rāhulata
admired him and treated him with great
respect.
The bhikku, though unenlightened,
was a virtuous man, and therefore after
his death he had come back in the form
of a mushroom to repay the charity he
had so long received. Kanadeva then
asked the rich man his age, and, when the
elder replied “seventy-nine,” composed
the verse that Linji here quotes, indicating that, when the man reached eightyone the bhikku would have repayed
the thirty years of almsgiving he had
received and the mushroom would no
longer appear.
Thereafter everyone in the rich man’s
family accepted the teachings of the Buddha. The younger son became Kanadeva’s
disciple, and, after succeeding to the patri-

Even those who live alone on a solitary
peak. A reference to the practice of the
Hinayana pratyekabuddha. In his Tiantai si jiao yi 天台四教儀 (The meaning of
the Tiantai four teachings), the Korean
Tiantai master Je-gwan 諦觀 (ﬂ. late tenth
century) writes:
He is called a pratyekabuddha who lives
when there is no buddha in the world and
dwells alone on an isolated peak. Through
observing the mutability of things he
awakens to no-birth. Therefore he is called
“enlightened for and by himself alone” 獨
覺. (t 46: 77a)

Eat their single meal… hours of the
day. The practices Linji here mentions
seem to belong to a kind of stock list.
Chan tradition has Jayata (Sheyeduo 闍
夜多 ), the twentieth Indian patriarch of
Zen, rebuke an ascetic who “worshipped
buddha at the six appointed hours, desired
little, knew ‘complete satisfaction’, sat for
long periods without lying down, and ate
only one meal a day.” Jayata condemned
such practices as being far from the Way.
When asked why, he replied,
I do not seek the Way, neither do I have
any erroneous views; I do not observe the
six hours of worship, neither do I hold
[buddha] in contempt; I do not sit for
long periods, neither am I indolent; I do
not conﬁne myself to a single meal a day,
neither do I eat indiscriminately; I do not
know complete satisfaction, neither am I
covetous. (t 47: 926b; t 51: 213a)

Also, in the Xuemai lun 血脈論 (Treatise on the transmission), attributed to
Bodhidharma, we read:
I have come to this land only to transmit
the Single Mind. I do not speak about precepts or almsgiving, about zeal in progress
or ascetic practices up to and including
entering water and fire or treading on
sword-discs, about eating a single meal at
dawn or sitting for long periods without
lying down. All these [practices] are the

270 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
乃至頭目髓腦、國城妻子、象馬七珍、盡皆捨施、如是等見、
皆是苦身心故、還招苦果。不如無事、純一無雜。乃至十地滿
心菩薩、皆求此道流蹤跡、了不可得。所以諸天歡喜、地神捧
足、十方諸佛、無不稱歎。緣何如此。爲今聽法道人、用處無
蹤跡。

There are others who give away everything as alms—their heads and eyes,
marrow and brains, states and cities, wives and children, elephants, horses,
and the seven precious things—but all such acts only cause suﬀering of
body and mind and end up inviting future sorrow. It is better to have nothing to do, better to be plain and simple.
“Even if bodhisattvas having the completed mind of the tenth stage were
to search for traces of this follower of the Way, they could never ﬁnd them.
Therefore [it is said]: ‘All the gods rejoice, the gods of earth clasp his feet in
adoration, and of all the buddhas of the ten directions, there are none who
do not praise him.’ Why is this so? Because the person of the Way who is
now listening to my discourse leaves no trace of his activity.”
causation-producing teachings of the heretics. (t 48: 376a)

“Worshipping buddha at the six
appointed hours of the day” (sunset, the
beginning of the night, the middle of the
night, the end of the night, dawn, and
noon) usually included, in addition to ceremonies and chanting, circumambulation
of the buddha-image. “Complete satisfaction” 知足 (Skr., saṃtuṣṭi), means satisfaction with one robe to cover the body and
one bowl to obtain food; see Lamotte
1965, 14.
Heads and eyes… seven precious
things. This list of alms derives from the
“Tipodaduo pin” 提婆達多品 (Chapter on
Devadatta) of the Lotus Sutra, in a section missing in the Sanskrit version of
the sutra. There the Buddha tells the great
assembly that for countless ages past he
had been seeking the Lotus Sutra:
When I had been a king continuously for
many kalpas, I vowed to seek the highest
enlightenment and not let my mind turn
back [from pursuing its purpose]. For the

sake of fulfilling my desire to carry out
to the full the six pāramitās, I strove to
practice almsgiving without any thought
of holding back, [giving away] elephants
and horses, the seven precious things, my
country and my cities, my wives and my
children, my maidservants and my male
attendants, my head and eyes, marrow
and brains, the ﬂesh of my body, my hands
and feet, even my life, without any regret.
(t 9: 34b)

Varying lists of the “seven precious things”
( 七珍 or 七寶 ) exist. In the dl they are
given as gold, silver, lapis lazuli, crystal,
agate, cornelian, and red pearls (or rubies)
(t 25: 134a).
Even if bodhisattvas… none who do
not praise him. This entire passage is also
found almost verbatim in a sermon of
Deshan Xuanjian in the zh (x 79: 173c).
The line “All the gods… there are none
who do not praise him” appears to be a
quotation, though the source is unknown.
Deshan concludes this quotation with a
line not found in the Linji text: “While
King Māra weeps and wails!” 魔王啼哭.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 271

xxi
問、大通智勝佛、十劫坐道場、佛法不現前、不得成佛道。未
審此意如何。乞師指示。師云、大通者、是自己於處處、達其
萬法無性無相、名爲大通。

Someone asked, “[The sutra says,]
The Buddha of Supreme Penetration and Surpassing Wisdom
Sat for ten kalpas in a place of practice,
But the buddhadharma did not manifest [itself to him],
And he did not attain the buddha-way.
I don’t understand the meaning of this. Would the master kindly explain?”
The master said, “‘Supreme Penetration’ means that one personally
penetrates everywhere into the naturelessness and formlessness of the ten
thousand dharmas.

xxi
The Buddha of Supreme Penetration…
the buddha-way. This passage comprises
the ﬁrst two couplets of a long recapitulatory verse in the “Huacheng pin” 化城品
(Chapter on the phantom city) of the Lotus
Sutra (t 9: 26a). In this chapter Śākyamuni
tells the great assembly how, eons in the
past, Tathāgata Mahābhijñājñānabhibhū
(Datong Zhisheng Fo 大通智勝佛) sat for
ten minor kalpas on the terrace of enlightenment 道場 (Skr., bodhimaṇḍa) without
attaining enlightenment.
Chan masters other than Linji have
been content to let the story rest at this
point, making use of these two couplets
to further their own teachings. Baizhang
is questioned about these same lines (x
68: 9c), as is Xingyang Rang 興陽讓 (n.d.)
(wg, case 9; t 48: 294a). Though the interpretations of both Baizhang and Rang differ from that oﬀered in the next paragraph
of this text by Linji, in each case the passage is used to illustrate the Chan doctrine
that, since all beings are already buddhas,
there is no need for further striving.
It is interesting to note, however, that
the Lotus Sutra does not conclude the

story here. At the end of the period of
time mentioned above, the Buddha took
his seat upon a magnificent throne prepared for him by the gods of the Brahma
Heaven, and after ten more minor kalpas
he attained Supreme Perfect Enlightenment. Thereafter, at successive assemblies
he discoursed upon the buddha-truth
step by step, until ﬁnally he revealed the
Lotus Sutra itself. His sixteen sons, who
had been born while he was still a young
prince royal, eventually all became buddhas. Two by two they entered into their
respective realms in each of the eight
directions. The ninth son, one of the two
who dwelt in the west, was Amitāyus Buddha; the sixteenth son, whose realm was
in the northeast, was he who in later ages
became Śākyamuni Buddha.
For an English translation of the Sanskrit version of this chapter, see Kern
1909, 153–187; for English translations of
Kumārajīva’s Chinese version see Murano
1974, 115–139, and Watson 1993, 117–142;
for a resumé of Kumārajīva’s Chinese version, see Soothill 1930, 131–136.
The naturelessness and formlessness of the ten thousand dharmas. For

272 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
智勝者、於一切處不疑、不得一法、名爲智勝。佛者心淸淨、
光明透徹法界、得名爲佛。十劫坐道場者、十波羅蜜是。佛法
不現前者、佛本不生、法本不滅、云何更有現前。不得成佛道
者、佛不應更作佛。古人云、佛常在世間、而不染世間法。道
流、爾欲得作佛、莫隨萬物。

‘Surpassing Wisdom’ means to have no doubts anywhere and to not obtain
a single dharma. ‘Buddha’ means pureness of the mind whose radiance
pervades the entire dharma realm. ‘Sat for ten kalpas in a place of practice’
refers to [the practice of] the ten pāramitās. ‘The buddhadharma did not
manifest’ means that buddha is in essence birthless and dharma (dharmas)
in essence unextinguished. Why should it manifest itself! ‘He did not attain
the buddha-way’: a buddha can’t become a buddha again.
“A man of old said, ‘Buddha is always present in the world, but is not
stained by worldly dharmas.’ Followers of the Way, if you want to become a
buddha, don’t go along with the ten thousand things.
a slightly diﬀerent expression of this, see
Linji’s earlier statement, “All the dharmas
of this world and of the worlds beyond are
without self-nature. Also, they are without
produced nature” (page 221, above).
Buddha is in essence… unextinguished.
See the Vimalakīrti Sutra, where the
bodhisattva Dharmavikurvaṇa, in reply to
Vimalakīrti’s question as to what is meant
by the bodhisattva’s entering the doctrine
of nonduality, says: “Kind sir, birth and
annihilation make a duality. The dharmas
are originally not born and are now not
subject to annihilation” (t 14: 550c).
Huangbo, as recorded in the cf (t 48:
381b), quotes the latter part of the above
passage from the sutra exactly, except
for the substitution of 亦 for the sutra’s
則 . Linji, however, while obviously using
these words as a source, adapts them to his
immediate purposes.
A man of old. The quote is actually
taken from a sutra; see following note.
Buddha is always present… worldly
dharmas. This statement comes from the
Rulai zhuangyan zhihui guangming ru

yiqie fojingjie jing 如來莊嚴智慧光明入一切
佛境界經 (Sutra on the tathāgata-adorning
prajñā-light that enters all buddha-realms;
Skr., Sarvabuddha-viṣayāvatāra-jñānālokālaṃkāra Sutra), translated into Chinese by Dharmaruci (Tanmoliuzhi 曇摩
流支), a monk from southern India who
worked in Luoyang between 501 and
507.
In its original form the statement is a
couplet of ﬁve-character lines (佛常在世
間, 而不染世法) from a long verse section
in which Mañjuśrī praises the Buddha and
restates a portion of the teaching already
received from him (t 12: 248a). Baizhang
Huaihai quotes the verse without attribution, introducing it with 是 (x 68: 6c). In
the ll the verse is rendered into prose
by the addition of 間 between the fourth
and fifth characters of the second line:
佛常在世間 , 而不染世間法 . It is possible
that the lines were commonly quoted in
Linji’s day.
The entire ﬁrst paragraph prior to the
verse brings to mind the opening lines
of the Anxin famen 安心法門, one of the
short works attributed to Bodhidharma:

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 273

心生種種法生、心滅種種法滅。一心不生、萬法無咎。世與出
世、無佛無法、亦不現前、亦不曾失。設有者、皆是名言章
句、接引小兒、施設藥病、表顯名句。且名句不自名句、還是
爾目前昭昭靈靈、鑒覺聞知照燭底、安一切名句。大德、造五
無間業、方得解脫。

When mind arises, all kinds of dharmas arise;
When mind is extinguished, all kinds of dharmas are extinguished.
When mind does not arise,
The ten thousand dharmas have no fault.
Neither in this world nor beyond this world is there any buddha or dharma;
they neither reveal themselves nor are they ever lost. Even if such things
existed, they would only be words and writings for placating little children,
expedient remedies for illnesses, displays of names and phrases. Moreover,
names and phrases are not of themselves names and phrases; it is you,
who right now radiantly and vividly perceive, know, and clearly illumine
[everything]—you it is who aﬃx all names and phrases.
“Virtuous monks, by creating the karma of the ﬁve heinous crimes, you
attain emancipation.”
In the state of delusion men pursue things;
in the state of understanding things pursue men. In the state of understanding
consciousness controls forms; in the state
of delusion forms control consciousness.
(t 48: 370b)

When mind arises… are extinguished.
These two lines come originally from the
long verse section comprising fascicle 9
of the Ru Lengqie jing 入楞伽經, Bodhiruci’s translation of the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra,
where they form the ﬁve-character couplet 心生種種生, 心滅種種滅, “When mind
arises, everything arises; when mind is
extinguished, everything is extinguished”
(t 16: 568c). In the dq the lines are
expanded into a seven-character couplet
without attribution: 心生則種種法生 , 心
滅則種種法滅 , “When mind arises, then
all dharmas arise; when mind is extinguished, then all dharmas are extinguished” (t 32: 577b).

Thereafter the phrase was used in various forms by Chan masters in their sermons and writings. The dq version is seen
in Huangbo’s wl (t 48: 385c), the zl (t 48:
656a), etc.; Dazhu Huihai 大珠慧海 (n.d.),
a disciple of Mazu, has 心生即種種法生, 心
滅即種種法滅 in his Dunwu rudao yaomen
lun 頓悟入道要門論 (Treatise on the essentials for entering the Way through sudden
awakening; x 63: 18a), and attributes it to
the Ru Lengqie jing. Huangbo also uses 心
生種種法生, 心滅種種法滅 (t 48: 386b), the
same rendering as that of Linji. Yunmen,
too, uses this rendition (t 47: 555a).
When mind… have no fault. These two
lines are a quotation from the Xinxin ming,
attributed to Sengcan, the Third Patriarch.
The entire verse is as follows:
When mind does not arise,
The ten thousand dharmas have no fault.
Without blame, without dharmas,
Not arising, not mind.
(t 48: 376c)

274 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
The ﬁve heinous crimes. For an earlier
usage of this term, see page 186. Linji’s
interpretation of the true meaning of
these crimes later in the present passage
seems presaged, not only by the words of
Vimalakīrti quoted in the comment on
page 187, but also by the following passage from the Shisong lü 十誦律 (The tensection vinaya):
Someone asked, “Could there be a case
in which a bhikku kills the mother and
gains great blessing, not retribution?” “Yes,
there is. Desire is called the mother. He
who kills it gains great blessings, not retribution.” “Could there be a case in which
a bhikku kills the father and gains great
blessing, not retribution?” “Yes, there is.
The outﬂow of the passions 漏 is called the
father. He who kills it gains great blessings,
not retribution.” (t 23: 381b)

Two generations earlier than Linji, Baizhang Huaihai, of the same teaching line,
had said,
The bodhisattva commits the ﬁve crimes
that bring on uninterrupted punishment,
but does not enter the Hell of Uninterrupted Punishment. His is the uninterruptedness of complete penetration 圓
通無間 . [This uninterruptedness] is not
the same as the uninterruptedness 無間
[resulting from] the ﬁve grave sins of sentient beings. [All the states,] from that of
māra straight through to that of buddha,
are loathsome to him. He hasn’t the slightest speck [of such things].” (x 68: 11b)

Baizhang is here punning on “uninter-

rupted” 無間 ; 無間 means, literally, “no
gaps.”
Though Linji has here described what
he terms the “ﬁve heinous crimes,” his list
does not entirely conform to the classical
list. He has omitted the third of the five
crimes, the prohibition against the slaying of an arhat, and added, as the fifth
on his list, the ﬁrst of what are known as
the “five most grave sins” 五重罪 . These
are enumerated in the Dasazhe Niqianzi
suoshuo jing 大薩遮尼乾子所說經 (Sutra
expounded by Mahasatya Nirgrantha),
a late Mahayana work translated into
Chinese by the North Indian Buddhist
monk and esoteric master Bodhiruci, who
worked in Luoyang from 508 until somewhere between 534 and 537.
According to a long passage in the
Dasazhe Niqianzi suoshuo jing, the “five
most grave sins” are, brieﬂy:
1) to destroy temples, to burn sutras and
images, to steal a buddha’s or a monk’s
belongings, to induce others to do likewise, and similar such oﬀenses;
2) to slander or abuse the teachings of a
śrāvaka, pratyekabuddha, or bodhisattva;
3) to ill-treat or kill a monk;
4) to commit any one of the “ﬁve heinous crimes”;
5) to deny the karmic consequences of
ill deeds and to act or teach others accordingly, and to live unceasingly in evil (t 9:
336b).
See also the Mochizuki Bukkyō daijiten
entry “Gogyaku” 五逆 (2:1124c–1126b).

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 275

xxii
問、如何是五無間業。師云、殺父害母、出佛身血、破和合
僧、焚燒經像等、此是五無間業。云、如何是父。師云、無明
是父。爾一念心、求起滅處不得、如響應空、隨處無事、名爲
殺父。云、如何是母。師云、貪愛爲母。爾一念心、入欲界
中、求其貪愛、唯見諸法空相、處處無著、名爲害母。

Someone asked, “What is the karma of the ﬁve heinous crimes?”
The master said, “Killing the father, slaying the mother, shedding the
blood of a buddha, destroying the harmony of the sangha, and burning the
scriptures and images—this is the karma of the ﬁve heinous crimes.”
“What is meant by ‘father’?”
The master said, “Avidyā is the father. When the place of arising or extinguishing of a single thought in your mind is not to be found, as with a sound
reverberating throughout space, and there is nothing anywhere for you to
do—this is called ‘killing the father’.”
“What is meant by ‘mother’?”
The master said, “Covetousness is the mother. When a single thought in
your mind enters the world of desire and seeks covetousness, but sees that all
dharmas are only empty forms, and [thus] has no attachment anywhere—this
is called ‘slaying the mother’.”

xxii
When the place… is not to be found
translates 爾一念心心求起滅處不得, which
reﬂects an outlook similar to that in the
following passage from the Nanquan
Puyuan Chanshi yuyao 南泉普願禪師語要
(Essential sayings of Chan Master Nanquan Puyuan), in gy 12:
As regards nonleakage, we are intrinsically
endowed with it; its function is marvelous and permeates everywhere. It operates
covertly and functions secretly, unknown
to people, so that its traces are diﬃcult to
discover. Therefore Māra Deva and all his
cohorts throughout endless kalpas have
never found the place where the bodhisattva’s single thought arises 覓菩薩一念起處
不可得. Māra says in praise, “The buddhadharma is extremely marvelous and diﬃcult indeed for me to fathom.” (x 68: 73b)

Covetousness is the mother… only
empty forms. A similar view of covetousness is seen already in the following passage from the Dunhuang manuscript Erru
sixing lun 二入四行論 (Discourse on the
two entrances and the four practices):
The sutra says, “Not extinguishing the
delusion of covetousness.” This means that
covetousness from the very ﬁrst was never
born and cannot now be extinguished.
Though one seek covetousness inside, outside, or in the middle, it can neither be
found nor obtained. Though it be sought
throughout the ten directions, not the
slightest trace of it can be found. Thus
there is no need to extinguish it in order
to seek emancipation. (Suzuki 1935, 17)

The sutra referred to in the passage is
the Vimalakīrti Sutra (t 14: 540b). The
Northern Nirvana Sutra contains an ear-

276 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
云、如何是出佛身血。師云、爾向淸淨法界中、無一念心生
解、便處處黑暗、是出佛身血。云、如何是破和合僧。師云、
爾一念心、正達煩惱結使、如空無所依、是破和合僧。云、如
何是焚燒經像。師云、見因緣空、心空、法空、一念決定斷、
迥然無事、便是焚燒經像。

“What is meant by ‘shedding the blood of a buddha’?”
The master said, “When in the midst of the pure dharma realm you
haven’t in your mind a single reasoning thought, and [thus] pitch blackness
pervades everywhere—this is called ‘shedding the blood of a buddha’.”
“What is meant by ‘destroying the harmony of the sangha’?”
The master said, “When a single thought in your mind truly realizes that
the bonds and enticements of the passions are like space with nothing upon
which to depend—this is called ‘destroying the harmony of the sangha’.”
“What is meant by ‘burning the scriptures and images’?”
The master said, “When you see that causal relations are empty, that
mind is empty, and that dharmas are empty, and [thus] your single thought
is decisively cut oﬀ and, transcendent, you’ve nothing to do—this is called
‘burning the scriptures and images.’
lier statement of a point of view similar
to that of Linji regarding the “father” and
“mother”:
At that time Mañjuśrī recited this gāthā:
Why, by reverencing the father and the
mother / Obeying and honoring them,
Why, by observing this practice / Does
one fall into the Hell of Uninterrupted
Torment?
The Tathāgata answered with this gāthā:
If, taking coveteousness as the mother/
And avidyā as the father,
You obey and honor them / You will fall
into the Hell of Uninterrupted Torment.
(t 12: 427a–b)

Baizhang Huaihai also speaks of avidyā as
the father and covetousness as the mother
in the following passage from one of his
sermons:
Avidyā is the father, covetousness the
mother. Self is the sword that kills the
self ’s avidyā and covetousness, the father
and the mother. Therefore it is said, “Kill

the father, slay the mother. One word
destroys all dharmas.” (x 68: 12b)

Pitch blackness pervades everywhere
translates 處處黑暗, a term originally used
to describe the bottom of a deep pit or
abyss where no light can reach. Here, however, the expression denotes the state of
suchness in which there is no distinction
between light and dark and no mind to
discriminate between them.
Transcendent, you’ve nothing to do
translates 迥然無事 , a phrase similar to
one used by Baizhang:
His mind is free, and he has not the slightest
connection with the world of delusion, of
the passions, the skandas and dhātus, birth
and death and sensory impressions; gloriously he exists without leaning upon anything, bound by nothing, free to come or
go without hindrance 逈然無寄. (x 69: 8a)

Conceiving an empty ﬁst… the sensefields. These lines are from a stanza in

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 277

大德、若如是達得、免被他凡聖名礙。爾一念心、祇向空拳指
上生寔解、根境法中虛捏怪。自輕而退屈言、我是凡夫、他是
聖人。禿屡生、有甚死急、披他師子皮、卻作野干鳴。

“Virtuous monks, reach such understanding as this, and you’ll be free
from the hindrances of names [like] ‘secular’ and ‘sacred’.
“Yet a single thought in your mind is doing nothing but
Conceiving an empty ﬁst or a [pointing] ﬁnger to be real;
Senselessly conjuring up apparitions from among the dharmas of
the sense-ﬁelds.
You belittle yourselves and modestly withdraw, saying, ‘We are but commoners; he is a sage.’ Bald idiots! What’s the frantic hurry to wrap yourselves in lions’ skins while you’re yapping like jackals!
Yongjia’s Song of Enlightenment. The entire
stanza reads:
Stupid dolts! Childish fools! / Conceiving
the ﬁngers of an empty ﬁst to be real.
By taking the pointing ﬁnger for the
moon, futilely exerting yourselves /
Uselessly evoking apparitions from the
dharmas of the sense-ﬁelds.
(t 48: 396c)

The same idea is expressed in the Shenli
Chanshi yulu 神力禪師語錄 (Recorded
sayings of Chan Master Shenli); Shenli
is another name for Zihu Lizong 子湖
利蹤 (800–880), a disciple of Nan quan
Puyuan:
From the dharmas of the sense-ﬁelds you
create all kinds of supernatural apparitions. Mountain sprites and bogeys attach
themselves to you in the course of your
practice. (gy 12; x 68: 74c)

Modestly withdraw translates 退屈 ,
which may also be rendered as “to hesitate, to hold back.” The term appears in
other texts, such as the Sutra of Perfect
Enlightenment:
Worthy gentlemen, please protect these
junior students, so that they may not be
disturbed in body and spirit by demons
and heretics, and that they may not hesitate. (t 17: 922a)

Baizhang Huaihai says:
Those who study the Way should not hesitate in mind, even when they happen to
meet various hardships, pleasures, and
things agreeable or disagreeable; neither
should they seek fame, wealth, or luxurious living. (x 69: 8a)

Bald idiots! What’s the frantic hurry…
yapping like jackals translates the sentence 禿屢生 , 有甚死急披他師子皮 , 卻野
干鳴, which, according to some Japanese
commentators, is addressed to the members of the audience, with the implication
that, although they pretend to be brave
men, they quickly assume a cringing attitude when confronted by false teachers.
Or, if 披 is interpreted as “wear” rather
than “put on,” the meaning is taken to
be that since the students are intrinsically lions, they are debasing themselves
by their fawning attitude. Dōchū, on the
contrary, suggests that the epithet “bald
idiots” refers to false teachers who, though
disguising themselves in lion skins, can
do no more than howl like the jackals that
they are.
The reference to wrapping oneself in
a lion’s skin while yapping like jackals
probably comes from a story in the Chang
ahan jing :

278 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
大丈夫漢、不作丈夫氣息、自家屋裏物不肯信、祇麼向外覓、
上他古人閑名句、倚陰博陽、不能特達。逢境便緣、逢塵便
執、觸處惑起、自無准定。道流、莫取山僧說處。何故。說無
憑據、一期間圖畫虛空、如彩畫像等喻。

“Resolute fellows [though you are], you do not draw the breath of the resolute. Unwilling to believe in what you have in your own house, you do nothing
but seek outside, go clambering after the worthless sayings of the men of old,
rely upon yin and depend upon yang and are unable to achieve [by yourselves].
On meeting [outer] circumstances, you establish relationship with them; on
meeting [sense-]dusts you cling to them; wherever you are doubts arise, and
you yourselves have no standard of judgment.
“Followers of the Way, don’t accept what I state. Why? Statements have
no proof. They are pictures temporarily drawn in the empty sky, as in the
metaphor of the painted ﬁgures.
Once there was a lion, the king of the
beasts, who lived deep in the forest. Each
morning at dawn when the lion emerged
from its cave it would look all around
and give three roars before setting oﬀ to
hunt…. There was a fox who followed
after the lion and ate the bits of meat that
the lion left. Beginning to feel quite proud
and strong, the fox said to itself, “This lion
in the forest—what sort of beast is it after
all, that it should be any better than me?
From now on I alone will rule….” The fox
then found an isolated spot in the forest,
and, each dawn when it emerged from its
cave, it would … try its best to imitate the
lion’s roars, but all it could produce was a
fox’s yapping. (t 1: 68c–69a)

Rely upon yin and depend upon yang
倚陰博陽 . The meaning is unclear, given
the numerous meanings of yin 陰 and
yang 陽 . The character 博 in the original

phrase is traditionally read in Japanese as
hakaru (to estimate, to judge). This quite
irregular reading may derive from the fact
that 博 is associated with games of chance
and is used at times to mean “gamble.” It
seems, however, that 博 is here a copyist’s
error for 傅, often used as a homophone
for 附 (as in the synonymous 傅會 and 附

會), and meaning “to adhere to,” “to attach
to.” Actually, the construction 倚 …博 …
may be regarded as a divided compound
verb. Using the homophones for these two
characters we have the compound 依草附
葉 (“dependent upon grasses and clinging
to trees”; see pages 237–238, above), 依 here
being the equivalent of 倚 in 倚陰博陽.

Statements have… ﬁgures. A reference
to a metaphor in the Laṅkāvatāra, Nirvana,
and other sutras. The Lengqie abaduoluobao jing 楞伽阿跋多羅寶經, Guṇabhadra’s
translation of the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra, has:
Just as a master-painter / Together with
his disciples,
Spreads various colors and draws many
forms / So my statements are also like
this.
The various colors originally have no
pattern / Nor the brushes, nor the plain
white cloth.
But in order to delight sentient beings /
With beautiful ornamentation I paint
many ﬁgures. (t 16: 484c)

Linji’s reference is particularly apt, since
in this passage the Buddha is telling
Mahāmati Bodhisattva that wordy explanations are not reality.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 279

道流、莫將佛爲究竟。我見猶如厠孔、菩薩羅漢、盡是枷鎖、
縛人底物。所以文殊仗劍、殺於瞿曇、鴦掘持刀、害於釋氏。

“Followers of the Way, don’t take the Buddha to be the ultimate. As I
see it, he is just like a privy hole. Both bodhisattvahood and arhatship are
cangues and chains that bind one. This is why Mañjuśrī tried to kill Gautama with his sword, and why Aṅgulimāla attempted to slay Śākyamuni
with his dagger.
This is why Mañjuśrī… with his dagger. Linji is referring to two attacks on the
Buddha’s life—one by Mañjuśrī and one
by a bandit named Aṅgulimāla—that are
mentioned in the sutras.
Mañjuśrī’s attack on the Buddha is
described in the Da baoji jing 大寶積經
(Sutra of the great treasure collection), a
voluminous collection of Chinese translations of sutras that is primarily the work of
Bodhiruci, although the above-mentioned
text was translated by Dharmagupta, who
worked in Luoyang ca. 590–616.
The text tells us that the ﬁve hundred
bodhisattvas under the Buddha, having
attained knowledge of their previous existences, saw their past evil deeds, including patricide and matricide. Filled with
constant anguish, they were unable to
enter the profound depths of the dharma.
Desiring to rid the bodhisattvas of their
differentiating minds and help them
attain anutpattikadharma-kṣānti 無生法
忍 (“the ﬁrm conviction that the dharmas
are uncreated”), the Buddha used his
supernatural powers to induce Mañjuśrī
to attack him with his sword of wisdom.
Then, stopping Mañjuśrī, he preached to
the assembly that “from the beginning
there has been no ego, no person, no
being. It is merely that the mind within
perceives an ego and a person.” When the
bodhisattvas heard the Buddha’s words,
they thought thus: “All dharmas everywhere are like illusory transformations.
Within these there is no ego, no person,

no sentient being, no individual, no disciple, no entity, no youth, no father, no
mother, no arhat, no buddha, no dharma,
no sangha. Thus there is no murder and
no murderer; how, then, could murder be
committed?” They were thus relieved of
their anguish and, ﬁlled with joy, leapt “the
height of seven tāla trees” (t 11: 590b–c).
Aṅgulimāla was a notorious mass
murderer who encountered Śākyamuni
in a forest and attempted to slay him.
In the Yangjuemoluo jing 央 掘 魔 羅 經
(Aṅgulimāla Sutra) (t 2: no. 120), translated by Guṇabhadra, Aṅgulimāla is
described as a good man whose teacher
had ordered him to kill one thousand people and bring the little ﬁngers of their right
hands. When Aṅgulimāla met the Buddha
he had already killed 999 victims. He ran
after Śākyamuni with dagger drawn, but
was unable to overtake him, even though
Śākyamuni appeared to be walking at his
usual leisurely pace. Astonished, he asked
Śākyamuni about his unusual powers,
and in the end abandoned violence and
became a śramaṇa. The story is the subject of several sutras, primarily the abovementioned Yangjuemoluo jing, the Foshuo
Yangjuemo jing 佛說鴦崛摩經 (Aṅgulimāla
Sutra preached by Buddha; t 2: no. 118),
and the Foshuo Yangjueji jing 佛說鴦崛髻
經 (Aṅgulimāla Sutra preached by Buddha; t 2: no. 119). For English translations
see Chalmers 1926–1927, 2:50–56 and
Bhikkhu 1995, 710–717.
These two attempts on the Buddha’s life

280 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
are mentioned in a number of Chan texts,
including the gy (x 68: 11b) and tg (x 78:
461c). In the following passage from the
wl, Linji’s teacher Huangbo mentions only
Mañjuśrī; the similarity of his words to
those of the above-mentioned Da baoji
jing suggests that Huangbo was quite
familiar with this text:
Someone asked, “Why did Mañjuśrī take
up his sword against Gautama?”
[The master] said, “The five-hundred
Bodhisattvas had gained the knowledge
of their previous lives and perceived the
hindrances caused by their past karma.
These five hundred are just your [body]
composed of the ﬁve skandhas. Because
they had perceived these hindrances from
their previous lives, they sought buddhahood, sought bodhisattvahood, and
sought nirvana. Therefore Mañjuśrī, with
his sword of wisdom, [attempted] to kill
these erroneous views regarding buddha.
Hence [the World-Honored One] said
to him, ‘You are a killer for the good’.” (x
68: 21a)

It is clear that in the Da baoji jing text we
have a canonical sources of the “iconoclastic” teachings often regarded as original with, and conﬁned to, the Chan school.
A careful reading of this sutra further
reveals its close relationship to the entire
ﬁrst part of Linji’s sermon under consideration, beginning with the explanation of
the attainment of emancipation through
commission of the five heinous crimes.
Though Linji, in true Chan style, cuts
through the pedagogical trappings characteristic of classical sutra writings, his
message and that of the sutra are essentially the same.
The Three Vehicles… immediate
enlighten ment. Linji seems here to be
naming several doctrines held as fundamental in most Buddhist schools, but
generally denounced as valueless by Chan
masters. For the Three Vehicles 三乘, see
pages 122–123; for the Tiantai doctrine of

complete and immediate enlightenment
圓頓教迹, see pages 193–194, above.
The doctrine that all beings are born
with one of five natures, and that this
nature determines the degree of their ultimate spiritual attainment, is found in the
Ru Lengqie jing 入楞伽經 (Laṅkāvatāra
Sutra; t 16: 526c). It became such a fundamental tenet of the Faxiang 法相 school
that the school was sometimes called the
Wuxing 五性 (Five-Nature) school. In
the Fodijing lun 佛地經論 (Treatise on the
Buddha-stage Sutra), a work of this school,
the ﬁve natures, under names almost identical with those given in the Ru Lengqie
jing, are explained as follows:
From beginningless time all sentient
beings have been endowed with [one] of
five kinds of nature: the śrāvaka nature,
the pratyekabuddha nature, the tathāgata
nature, the indeterminate nature, and the
nature without merit for entering the religious life. The various sutras and śāstras
set forth in detail the characteristics and
differences of these natures. Those with
the first four kinds of nature will attain
nirvana within a certain set period of time
because of the meritorious skillful means
of the buddhas. The ﬁfth type of nature,
since it lacks the meritorious causes for
entering the spiritual life, does not attain
nirvana within any set period of time. The
only thing the buddhas can do for those
[endowed with this nature] is employ
their skillful means to manifest supernatural powers and preach the dharma of
leaving the evil gati and being reborn in
the good gati. (t 26: 298a)

Since Linji is believed to have studied the
Faxiang teachings before taking up Chan,
he may have been referring speciﬁcally to
this list.
The Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment refers
to a somewhat different group of “five
natures”: ordinary people’s nature; śrāvaka
and pratyekabuddha nature; bodhisattva
nature; indeterminate nature; and heretic
nature (t 17: 916b–c). Since this work was

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 281

道流、無佛可得。乃至三乘五性、圓頓敎迹、皆是一期藥病相
治、並無實法。設有、皆是相似、表顯路布、文字差排、且
如是說。道流、有一般禿子、便向裏許著功、擬求出世之法。
錯了也。若人求佛、是人失佛。若人求道、是人失道。若人求
祖、是人失祖。大德、莫錯。我且不取爾解經論、我亦不取爾
國王大臣、我亦不取爾辯似懸河、我亦不取爾聰明智慧、唯要
爾眞正見解。道流、設解得百本經論、不如一箇無事底阿師。

“Followers of the Way, there is no buddha to be obtained. Even the doctrines [including those] of the Three Vehicles, the ﬁve natures, and complete
and immediate enlightenment—all these are but provisional medicines for
the treatment of symptoms. In no sense do any real dharmas exist. Even if
they were to exist, they would all be nothing but imitations, publicly displayed proclamations, arrangements of letters stated that way just for the
time being.
“Followers of the Way, there’re a bunch of shavepates who try to seek a
transcendental dharma by directing their eﬀorts inward. A great mistake! If
you seek buddha you lose buddha, if you seek the Way you lose the Way, if
you seek the patriarchs you lose the patriarchs.
“Virtuous monks, make no mistake. I don’t care whether you understand
the sutras and śāstras, whether you’re a king or a high minister, whether
you’re as eloquent as a rushing torrent, or whether you’re clever or wise. I
only want you to have true insight.
“Followers of the Way, even if you should master a hundred sutras and
śāstras, you’re not as good as a teacher with nothing to do.
much favored in the Chan school, this
list too was undoubtedly known to Linji.
Another possibility is that he may have
been referring to the doctrine of the ﬁve
natures in general, since various other less
important groupings of these exist.
Followers of the Way… eﬀorts inward
translates 道流、有一般禿子、便向裏許著
功、擬求出世之法 . The word translated
as “inward” is 裏許 , with the 許 serving
as a suffix. Other examples of this construction are 外許 “outside,” 幾許 “how
many,” and 少許 “a few.” Yu Zhengxie 兪正
燮 (1775–1840) says, in the Guisi leigao 癸
巳類稿 (Classiﬁed documents of the Guisi
era) 7, that such suﬃxes as 許 and 馨 of the

Six Dynasties and 向 and 行 of the Song
and Yuan have the same etymology.
Teacher translates the compound 阿
師, a term deriving from the custom that
arose during the Later Han dynasty of
aﬃxing 阿 as a preﬁx of endearment to a
surname, a personal name, a style name,
or an infant’s name. By the time of the
Tang dynasty it was also being aﬃxed to
words indicating various family relationships, as in 阿翁 “grandfather,” 阿婆 “husband’s mother,” 阿舅 “father-in-law,” 阿家
“mother-in-law,” 阿耶 “papa,” 阿孃 “mama,”
阿 兄 “elder brother,” 阿 弟 “younger
brother,” 阿姉 “elder sister,” and so forth.
The usage was further extended to such

282 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
爾解得、即輕蔑他人。勝負修羅、人我無明、長地獄業。如善
星比丘、解十二分敎、生身陷地獄、大地不容。不如無事休歇
去。飢來喫飯、睡來合眼。愚人笑我、智乃知焉。

If you do master them, you’ll regard others with contempt. Asura-like conﬂict and egotistical ignorance increase the karma that leads to hell. Such was
the case of Sunakṣātra bhikku—though he understood the twelve divisions
of the teachings, he fell alive into hell. The great earth had no place for him.
It’s better to do nothing and take it easy.
When hunger comes I eat my rice;
When sleep comes I close my eyes.
Fools laugh at me, but
The wise man understands.
words as 阿師 “teacher” and 阿郎 “master,”
to interrogatives like 阿誰 “who,” 阿沒 and
阿莽 “what,” and 阿那 “which.”
Asura. See comments on pages 144, 180,
and 226. Here the asuras, who are constantly at war against Indra, are used as
a metaphor for the contentious and belligerent nature of humans.
Sunakṣātra bhikku (Shanxing biqiu
善星比丘 ) is the name of a monk who
appears in the “Jiashe pusa pin” 迦葉菩薩
品 (Chapter on Kāśyapa Bodhisattva) in

the Northern Nirvana Sutra (t 12: 560b).
According to the Fahua xuanzan 法華玄
贊 (Praising the profundity of the Lotus
Sutra), “the sutra says” that Gautama had
three sons while still a prince, the eldest
being Sunakṣātra, the second Upamana,
and the third Rāhula (t 34: 671c).
It is said that Sunakṣātra joined the
sangha, memorized the entire twelve divisions of the sutras (see pages 122–124),
freed himself from the passions, and
attained the four dhyānas (the four successive stages of meditation and absorption). But despite his memorization of the
teachings he could not understand the
meaning of even a single word. He began
associating with evil friends, thereby los-

ing everything that he had accomplished
toward the attainment of emancipation.
Subsequently he espoused heretical views,
including that of denying the law of causeand-eﬀect. When he revealed his evil mind
to the Buddha, he fell alive into the Avīci
Hell, the Hell of Uninterrupted Torment.
Because of this he is called an “icchantika bhikku,” a bhikku who has severed
the roots of goodness and destroyed his
chance of attaining buddhahood. He is
sometimes also referred to as the “FourDhyāna Bhikku.”
Sunakṣātra is mentioned in the Śūraṅgama Sutra (t 19: 143a) and also in Yongjia’s
Song of Enlightenment (t 48: 396c), in both
cases as an example of a bhikku whose
wrong views had caused him to fall into
hell.
When hunger comes… wise man
understands. Linji here paraphrases lines
from Nanyue Mingzan’s Ledao ge 樂道
歌 (Song of enjoying the Way), a poem
with which he appears to have been quite
familiar. For his earlier use of these lines,
see text, page 185 and note on the same
page; for other quotations from the Ledao
ge see pages 172, 185, 186, and 223, and
292.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 283

道流、莫向文字中求。心動疲勞、吸冷氣無益。不如一念緣起
無生、超出三乘權學菩薩。大德、莫因循過日。山僧往日、未
有見處時、黑漫漫地。光陰不可空過、腹熱心忙、奔波訪道。
後還得力、始到今日、共道流如是話度。勸諸道流、莫爲衣
食。

“Followers of the Way, don’t seek within words, for when the mind is
stirred you become wearied, and there’s no beneﬁt in gulping icy air. It’s better, by the single thought that causal relations are [fundamentally] birthless,
to surpass the bodhisattvas who depend upon the provisional teaching of
the Three Vehicles.
“Virtuous monks, don’t spend your days drifting along. In the past when
I had as yet no understanding, all about me was utter darkness. But I wasn’t
one to waste time, so with a burning belly and a turbulent mind, I ran around
inquiring about the Way. Later, however, I got some help and ﬁnally today I
can talk to you like this. I advise all you followers of the Way not to live for
food and clothes.
Gulping icy air translates 吸冷 . The
meaning is obscure; one commentator
suggests that it refers to chanting sutras in
a cold room, while others take it to mean
seeking outside for the meaning of words,
in contrast to the preceding phrase, which
they take to mean seeking them within.
It’s better… Three Vehicles. Linji is
apparently basing his statement on the
following passage from the Xin Huayan
jing lun 新華嚴經論 (Treatise on the new
translation of the Avataṃsaka Sutra):
The merit of no-merit is merit that is
never lost. The merit of deliberate merit
all passes away; though one accumulate it
through practice lasting many kalpas, in
the end it is totally destroyed. It is far better to transcend, with the single thought
that causal relations are unborn, such
views as those of the provisional teachings
of the Three Vehicles. (t 36: 724a)

Linji quotes the last line verbatim except
for two substitutions, including 菩 薩
“bodhisattvas” for 等見 “such views” in
the original. Some Japanese commentators, including Dōchū, read 三界 , “three

realms,” for 三乘, “Three Vehicles.” We follow the Taishō text, which is in agreement
with the Xin Huayan jing lun.
I got some help. The ﬁrst known appearance of 得力, “to receive beneﬁts or favors,”
is in the “Huozhi zhuan” 貨殖傳 (Biographies of merchants) in the Shiji 史記 (see
Tongsu bian 通俗編 12). During the Tang
and the Song it was often used as a colloquial expression and many examples
can be found in the poems of Du Fu 杜甫
(712–770) and Bai Juyi 白居易 (772–846),
as well as in the Dunhuang bianwen literature.
I advise all you followers… food and
clothes. Exhortations to monks not to live
merely for the sake of clothing and food
爲衣食 have no doubt existed since the
very founding of the Buddhist sangha.
The phrase is used here in a slightly different sense: to symbolize the strivings of
Hinayana followers, a usage encountered
in the Lotus Sutra, “Wubai dizi shouji pin”
五百弟子受記品 (Chapter on the prophesy
of enlightenment for ﬁve hundred disci-

284 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
看世界易過、善知識難遇。如優曇花時一現耳。爾諸方聞道有
箇臨濟老漢、出來便擬問難、敎語不得。被山僧全體作用、學
人空開得眼、口總動不得。懵然不知以何答我。我向伊道、龍
象蹴踏、非驢所堪。爾諸處祇指胸點肋、道我解禪解道、三箇
兩箇、到這裏不奈何。咄哉、爾將這箇身心、到處簸兩片皮、
誑謼閭閻。喫鐵棒有日在。非出家兒、盡向阿修羅界攝。

Look! The world passes swiftly away, and meeting a good teacher is as rare
as the ﬂowering of the udumbara tree.
“Hearing everywhere of old man Linji, you come here intending to bait
me with diﬃcult questions and make it impossible for me to answer. Faced
with a demonstration of the activity of my whole body, you students just
stare blankly and can’t move your mouths at all; you’re at such a loss you
don’t know how to answer. I tell you, ‘Asses can’t bear being trampled by a
dragon-elephant.’
“You go around everywhere thumping your chests and whacking your
ribs, saying, ‘I understand Chan! I understand the Way!’ But let two or three
of you come here and you can’t do a thing. Bah! Carrying that body and
mind of yours, you go around everywhere ﬂapping your lips like winnowing fans and deceiving villagers. The day will come when you’ll be ﬂogged
with iron rods. You’re not [true] renouncers of home. You’ll all be herded
together in the realm of the asuras.
ples). Upon hearing the Buddha announce
their future destinies, the five hundred
disciples repented of their satisfaction
with their inferior state of knowledge and
compared themselves to a man who
went to the house of a close friend and,
having become drunk on wine, lay down
to sleep. At that time the friend had to go
out on oﬃcial business. He took a priceless jewel, sewed it into the lining of the
man’s robe, and left it with him when he
went out. The man, asleep and drunk,
knew nothing about it. When he got up,
he set out on a journey to other countries. In order to provide himself with
food and clothing he had to search with
all his energy and diligence, encountering very great hardship and making do
with what little he could come by. Later,
the close friend happened to meet him by

chance. The friend said, “How absurd, old
fellow! Why should you have to do all this
for the sake of food and clothing 爲衣食?
In the past I wanted to make certain you
would be able to live in ease and thus on
such-and-such a day and month and year
I took a jewel and sewed it in the lining of
your robe. It must still be there now. But
you did not know about it, and fretted
and wore yourself out trying to provide a
living for yourself. What nonsense! Now
you must take the jewel and exchange it
for goods. Then you can have whatever
you wish at all times and never experience poverty and want.” (t 9: 29a; English
translation from Watson 1993, 150–151)

The udumbara tree: a mythical tree said
to blossom only once every three thousand years, symbolizing the rarity of the
appearance of a buddha in the world.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 285

夫如至理之道、非諍論而求激揚、鏗鏘以摧外道。至於佛祖相
承、更無別意。設有言敎、落在化儀三乘五性、人天因果。如
圓頓之敎、又且不然。童子善財、皆不求過。

“As for the Way of ultimate truth, it is not something that seeks to arouse
enthusiasm through arguments and disputes, nor that uses resounding oratory to refute heretics. As for the transmission of the buddhas and the patriarchs, it has no special purpose. Even though there are verbal teachings,
they all fall into [the category of] such formulas for salvation as the Three
Vehicles, the ﬁve natures, and the cause-and-eﬀect that leads to [rebirth as]
men or gods. But in the case of the teaching of the complete and immediate enlightenment this isn’t so; Sudhana did not go around seeking any of
these.
Asses can’t bear being trampled by a
dragon-elephant. The quotation is from
the chapter “Busiyi pin” 不思議品 (Beyond
comprehension chapter) of the Vimalakīrti
Sutra (t 14: 547a). The dragon-elephant 龍象
(sometimes interpreted to mean “dragons
and elephants”) is a metaphor that is sometimes used for a buddha. At other times,
—as is the case in the present example—
it is used to indicate “bodhisattvas-whoabide-in-inconceivable-emancipation.”
You go around… I understand the
Way! This is another example of similar
passages existing in the records of both
Linji and Deshan Xuanjian. The following
passage is from Deshan, in zh 20:
Make no mistake, virtuous men! You hurry
hither and yon, saying, “I understand
Chan, I understand the Way!” Whacking
your chests and whacking your ribs, you
proclaim, “I am Yang!” “I am Cheng!” (x
79: 172c)

Deceiving villagers. See another passage from the same sermon by Deshan
Xuanjian as that mentioned in the note
above:
Everywhere they seek out people, saying, “I am the direct disciple of the patriarchs!” When they are questioned about
the pivotal matter they shut their mouths

like gate bars. On the other hand, they
explain bodhi, nirvana, bhūtatathatā, and
emancipation to people, quoting widely
from the wordy teachings of the Tripiṭaka.
Saying, “This is Chan, this is the Way,” they
deceive the villagers. What kind of relationship have they when they slander our
forebears! (x 79: 173a)

As for the Way… refute heretics.
Linji is undoubtedly referring here to
the philosophical debates of the Tiantai
and Huayan schools, and to such historical incidents as the so-called Council of
Lhasa and Xuanzang’s refutation of the
heretics during his journey to India. Chan
condemns all such activities. See the lines
from the Dunhuang version of the Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch: “Arguments arise from the idea of victory and
defeat; they are contrary to the Way” (t 48:
342a). Also, in the same text:
This teaching fundamentally is not a
subject for dispute / To dispute is to
miss the meaning of the Way.
When you cling to delusion and dispute
about the doctrine / Your self-nature
will enter into the round of birth-anddeath. (t 48: 361a)

Formulas for salvation translates 化儀,
a technical term usually associated with
the Tiantai arrangement of the various

286 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
大德、莫錯用心。如大海不停死屍。祇麼擔卻、擬天下走。自起
見障、以礙於心。日上無雲、麗天普照。眼中無翳、空裏無花。

“Virtuous monks, don’t use your minds mistakenly. The great sea does
not detain dead bodies, but all you do is rush about the world carrying
them on your shoulders. You yourselves raise the obstructions that impede
your minds. When the sun above has no clouds, the bright heavens shine
everywhere. When there is no cataract on the eye, there are no [imaginary]
ﬂowers in the sky.
categories of the Hinayana and Mahayana
teachings into four “graded methods for
salvation” 化儀 , and four “formulas of
the teaching” 化法 . However, here Linji
appears to be using the term loosely to
cover the various kinds of spoken teachings, since the doctrines of the Three
Vehicles, the ﬁve natures, etc., are not contained in either of these Tiantai formulas.
Sudhana did not go around seeking
any of these. Sudhana (C., Shancai tongzi
善財童子 ) is the protagonist of the “Ru
fajie pin” 入法界品 (Chapter on entering
the dharma realm) and “Puxian pusa xing
pin” 普賢菩薩行品 (Chapter on the activities of Samantabhadra) of the Avataṃsaka
Sutra. In his search for enlightenment,
Sudhana made a pilgrimage to ﬁfty-three
teachers under the guidance of Mañjuśrī.
His quest ﬁnally ended when he met the
future buddha Maitreya, who deemed
him prepared to enter the great tower of
Vairocana Buddha. Thereafter, through
the instruction given by Samantabhadra
Bodhisattva, he came to the full realization of bodhisattvahood.
Linji is saying that the “complete and
sudden teachings” (the teachings of the
Huayan school) are not such mere spoken
teachings as are criticized above, and also
that Sudhana, who by inference represents
the Huayan doctrines, did not seek such
mere spoken teachings. As it stands, this
would seem to contradict Linji’s statement
of several paragraphs above.

Don’t use your minds mistakenly
translates 莫錯用心 , a line found in the
Yuan version of the Platform Sutra of the
Sixth Patriarch: “Good friends, each of you
must personally make your own investigation. Don’t use your mind mistakenly” (t
48: 354b).
Dead bodies, referring to the varieties
of excess mental and emotional baggage
that people carry around, is found in various contexts in a number of Buddhist
works. For instance, the Xianyu jing 賢
愚經 (Sutra on the wise and foolish), the
Damamūka-nidāna Sutra translated into
Chinese in 445 by Huijue 慧覺, states:
At that time there was a great tortoise
that trampled on the ship with its feet.
The ship was destroyed and sank into the
sea. Sārthavāha and his wife and the ﬁve
hundred traders all died. It is the law of
the great sea not to receive dead bodies.
When the water swirls about in waves, the
yakṣas and rakṣasas cast them out upon
the shore. (t 4: 378b)

The Southern Nirvana Sutra has:
The Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra, like this, is
also inconceivable. Good young man, it is
like the great sea, which has eight inconceivable [qualities]. What are these eight?
One, it becomes gradually more and more
profound; two, it is diﬃcult to reach the
limit of its profundity; three, it has but
one salty taste; four, its tides do not exceed
their limits; ﬁve, it possesses all kinds of
treasures; six, giants dwell within it; seven,
it does not give lodging to dead bodies;

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 287

道流、爾欲得如法、但莫生疑。展則彌綸法界、收則絲髮不
立。歷歷孤明、未曾欠少。眼不見、耳不聞、喚作什麼物。古
人云、說似一物則不中。爾但自家看。更有什麼。說亦無盡、
各自著力。珍重。

“Followers of the Way, if you wish to be dharma as is, just have no
doubts. ‘Spread out, it ﬁlls the entire dharma realm; gathered in, the smallest hair cannot stand upon it.’ Distinctly and radiantly shining alone, it has
never lacked anything. No eye can see it, no ear can hear it—then by what
name can it be called? A man of old said, ‘To speak about a thing is to miss
the mark.’
“Just see for yourselves—what is there! I can keep on talking forever.
Each one of you must strive individually. Take care of yourselves.”
eight, all the countless rivers and the great
rains pour into it, yet it neither increases
nor decreases. (t 12: 558c; 805a)

there are no ﬂowers in the sky; they are
simply the delusions of the sick person.
(t 17: 913b)

The line is also found in Chan texts
(e.g., gy 2; x 68: 11a) and elsewhere. The
Linji text has 不停 (does not detain) for
the 不受 (does not receive) of the Xianyu
jing and the 不宿 (does not give lodging
to) of all other sources.

Spread out… cannot stand upon it.
See the words of Niutou Farong 牛頭法融
(594–657) in the Jueguan lun 絕觀論 (On
the cessation of notions):

When the sun above…. This sentence
uses a metaphor often employed in sutras,
though usually in more elaborate form.
For instance, the Avataṃsaka Sutra has
the following verse extolling a marvelous
light that the World-Honored One caused
to issue forth from his feet:
Just as, in the ﬁrst month of summer /
When the sky is clear and unobscured
by clouds,
The glorious sun shines forth in dazzling
radiance / And nowhere is there in the
ten directions that is not ﬂooded with
its light. (t 10: 100b)

When there is no cataract… the sky.
This expression is another adaptation of a
metaphor found several times in the Sutra
of Perfect Enlightenment:
For example, someone with an eye disease
may see flowers in the sky or a second
moon. Virtuous young men, in reality

What is meant by “spread out”? Illuminating and functioning—this is what is
meant by “spread out”. What is meant by
“rolled up”? Mind is tranquil and extinct,
without going or coming—this is what is
meant by “rolled up.” Spread out, it pervades the entire dharma realm; rolled up,
explicit traces of it cannot be found. (t
48: 941b)

Expressions resembling these of Linji and
Farong are found in many Chinese Buddhist texts. One of the earlier of them
is the Da anban shouyi jing 大安般守意
經 (The great mindfulness of breathing sutra), translated by An Shigao 安世
高 , who worked in Luoyang from about
147 until 170 (see t 15: 163b). The original source from which they derive is
unknown.
A man of old refers to Nanyue Huairang
(677–744), an heir of the Sixth Patriarch.
To speak about a thing is to miss
the mark translates 說 似 一 物 則 不 中 ,

288 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
a statement from the first conversation
between Nanyue and the Sixth Patriarch
as recorded in The Platform Sutra of the
Sixth Patriarch:
[Huairang] then went to study under the
Sixth Patriarch. When he went to make
obeisance, the Patriarch asked, “Where
do you come from?” [Huairang] replied,
“From Mount Song.” The Patriarch said,
“What is it that has come thus?” [Huairang]
replied, “To speak about a thing is to miss
the mark.” (t 48: 357b)

In the jc account of this episode (t 51:

240c) the opening lines differ slightly,
but the ﬁnal question and answer are the
same.
In the construction 說似, the 似 constitutes a directional suﬃx appended to the
verb 說. Sometimes 似 loses its directional
function and becomes a mere expletive
aﬃxed to the verb, thus forming a compound verb. The earliest example is found
in JL 6, in the section on Mazu: “Yinfeng…
returned, and related this to the master” 隱
峯…却迴舉似於師 (x51: 246b).

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 289

critical examinations
i

勘辨

黃檗、因入厨次、問飯頭、作什麼。飯頭云、揀衆僧米。黃檗
云、一日喫多少。飯頭云、二石五。黃檗云、莫太多麼。飯頭
云、猶恐少在。黃檗便打。飯頭卻擧似師。師云、我爲汝勘這
老漢。纔到侍立次、黃檗擧前話。師云、飯頭不會、請和尚代
一轉語。師便問、莫太多麼。

One day when Huangbo entered the kitchen he asked the head ricecook, “What are you doing?”
The cook said, “I’m picking over the rice for the monks.”
“How much do they eat in a day?” asked Huangbo.
“Two and a half shi,” said the cook.
“Isn’t that too much?” asked Huangbo.
“I’m afraid it isn’t enough,” replied the cook.
Huangbo struck him. Later the cook mentioned this to Linji. Linji said,
“I’ll test the old fellow for you.”
As soon as Linji came to attend Huangbo, Huangbo told him the story.
“The cook didn’t understand—Venerable Priest, kindly give a turningword in place of the cook,” said Linji, who then asked, “Isn’t that too
much?”
Critical examinations 勘辨 is a Chan
term for encounters where monks
exchange questions in order to ascertain
each other’s understanding. The ll, the
yk, and the Mingjue Chanshi yulu 明覺禪
師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master
Mingjue) are probably the ﬁrst examples
of Chan works having a section devoted to
such exchanges; this may relate to the fact
that all of these works were printed under
the supervision of Yuanjue Zongyan 圓覺
宗演 (n.d.) at Mount Gu 鼓 in Fuzhou 福州
during the Xuanhe 宣和 era (1119–1127) of
the Northern Song. Following the example of such works, “dialogue” sections were
sometimes included in later works, such
as the Nanyuan Chanshi yuyao 南院禪師
語要 (Essential sayings of Chan Master
Nanyuan) and the Shoushan yulu 首山語
錄 (Recorded sayings of Shoushan).

i
Head rice-cook 飯頭 was the monk in
charge of preparing meals. The word 頭 ,
literally “head,” is added to various words
such as “garden,” “ﬁre,” “medicine,” etc., to
denote the monk in charge of such things.
The “Chanmen guishi” 禪門規式 (Regulations of the Chan school) has:
We shall establish ten different duties
and call them “departments” 寮舍 . We
shall have one head monk for each such
department and put him in charge, letting
him supervise his men carrying out their
tasks. We shall call 飯頭 the one in charge
of the department of food, and the other
heads will be called in like manner. (jc 6;
t 51: 251a)

Two and a half shi. A shi 石 is a Chinese
bushel, about one and two-thirds bushels

290 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
黃檗云、何不道、來日更喫一頓。師云、說什麼來日、即今便
喫。道了便掌。黃檗云、這風顛漢、又來這裏捋虎鬚。師便喝
出去。後潙山問仰山、此二尊宿、意作麼生。仰山云、和尚作
麼生。潙山云、養子方知父慈。仰山云、不然。潙山云、子又
作麼生。仰山云、大似勾賊破家。

Huangbo said, “Well, why not say, ‘We’ll eat a meal again tomorrow!’”
“Why talk about tomorrow—eat it right now!” said Linji, slapping
Huangbo in the face.
“This lunatic has come here again to pull the tiger’s whiskers,” said
Huangbo. Linji shouted and went out.
Later, Guishan asked Yangshan, “What did these two worthies have in
mind?”
“What do you think, Venerable Priest?” asked Yangshan.
“Only when you have a child do you understand fatherly love,” said
Guishan.
“Not at all!” said Yangshan.
“Then what do you think?” asked Guishan.
“It’s more like, ‘To bring in a thief and ruin the house’,” replied Yangshan.
in U.S. dry measure, or 59.44 liters. (See
Reischauer 1955a, 50, n. 217.)
Turning word 一轉語 is a Chan term for
a word or phrase that reveals the speaker’s
degree of enlightenment or that transforms
the listener’s mind at a critical psychological moment. One of the best-known latter
usages of the term is wg, case 2.
Whenever Master Baizhang lectured an
old man would sit with the assembly and
listen to the teaching. When the assembly left so would the old man. Then one
day the old man remained, and the master asked him, “Who are you, standing in
front of me?” The old man said, “I am not
a human being. Long ago, in the time of
Kāśyapa Buddha, I was a priest living on
this mountain. A student happened to ask
me whether enlightened people too are
subject to the law of cause and effect. I
said that they are not, and for this I have
been reborn as a fox for ﬁve hundred lifetimes. I request a turning-phrase from
you so that I may be freed from this fox’s

body.” He then asked, “Are enlightened
people subject to the law of cause and
effect?” The master answered, “Enlightened people are clear about cause and
effect.” At these words the old man was
deeply enlightened. (t 48: 293a)

We’ll eat a meal again tomorrow 來日
更喫一頓 , traditionally interpreted as an
imperative meaning, “Take a meal tomorrow again,” can also be interpreted as an
indicative: “Tomorrow again one will take
a meal.” 一頓 means “one,” referring mainly
to meals and sometimes to rest or repose
or even to beatings, as in, “Take one blow
on the shoulder,” etc. Nowadays, though, it
almost always refers to a single meal.
To pull the tiger’s whiskers translates
捋虎鬚, an old saying designating a dan-

gerous exploit, or expressing admiration
for one. The word “again” is used since
Linji had earlier “pulled the tiger’s whiskers” by slapping Huangbo in the face (see
page 316, below).

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 291

ii
師問僧、什麼處來。僧便喝。師便揖坐。僧擬議。師便打。師
見僧來、便豎起拂子。僧禮拜。師便打。又見僧來、亦豎起拂
子。僧不顧。師亦打。

The master asked a monk, “Where do you come from?” The monk
shouted. The master saluted him and motioned him to sit down. The monk
hesitated. The master hit him. Seeing another monk coming, the master
raised his whisk. The monk bowed low. The master hit him. Seeing still
another monk coming, the master again raised his whisk. The monk paid no
attention. The master hit him, too.

iii
師、一日同普化、赴施主家齋次、師問、毛吞巨海、芥納須
彌。爲是神通妙用、本體如然。

One day when the master and Puhua were attending a dinner at a
patron’s house, the master asked, “‘A hair swallows up the great sea and a
mustard seed contains Mount Sumeru.’ Is this the marvelous activity of
supernatural power or is it original substance as it is?”
Guishan. See Introduction, note 16.
The exchange that follows is one of
nine similar episodes that appear in the
ll involving Guishan and his disciple
Yangshan, the other eight appearing in
the following “Xing lu” 行錄 (Record of
pilgrimages) section. All but the last two
of these are concerned with episodes that
occurred while Linji was at Huangbo’s
monastery, in the same district where the
temples of both Guishan and Yangshan
were located.
Yangshan. See Introduction, note 24.
Only when you have a child do you
understand fatherly love was a proverb of
that period. It would be incorrect here to
take the father as Huangbo and the son as
Linji, since Guishan is not referring to the
love of any speciﬁc father.
To bring in a thief and ruin the house
was another old proverb of that period. We

ﬁnd it stated in a somewhat adapted version in the Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment:
“It is like a man who adopts a thief as his
son; his family property and wealth in the
end will never be safe” (t 17: 919c).

iii
Puhua. See Introduction, note 23.
A hair swallows… Mount Sumeru.
Linji’s remark is apparently based upon
a description of the emancipated person
found in the Vimalakīrti Sutra:
[Such ones] can take the height and breadth
of Mount Sumeru and enclose them in a
mustard seed without any expansion or
diminution. The original form of Sumeru,
King of Mountains, remaining just as it
is, even the Four Guardian Kings and the
gods of the Trayastrimśās who live therein
do not recognize or know that they have
been enclosed…. Again, they can take
the four great seas and enclose them in a

292 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
普化踏倒飯床。師云、太麁生。普化云、這裏是什麼所在、說
麁說細。師來日、又同普化赴齋。問、今日供養、何似昨日。

Puhua kicked over the dinner table. “How coarse!” exclaimed the master.
“What place do you think this is—talking about coarse and ﬁne!” said
Puhua.
The next day the master and Puhua again attended a dinner. The master
asked, “How does today’s feast compare with yesterday’s?”
single hair-hole [pore] without disturbing
the ﬁshes, turtles, lizards, and other watery
creatures therein. The original form of
these great seas remains just as it is, even
the dragons and gods and Asuras who live
therein do not recognize or know that
they have been put in. (t 14: 546b-c)

Throughout this scene it is likely that Linji
and Puhua, in discussing this passage, are
thinking of the description of the dinner
given by the layman patron Vimalakīrti
for the Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī and his disciples, described earlier in the Vimalakīrti
Sutra, and likening their own presence at
the dinner party to that occasion.
Original substance as it is translates 本
體如然, an expression no doubt intended
to refer to the similar phrase “original
form as it is” 本相如故 in the Vimalakīrti
Sutra passage cited in the note above.
See also the following passage in Nanyue
Mingzan’s Ledao ge, found in the jc and
the zj.
It is not stupidity and dullness / But original nature as it is. (t 51: 461b)

In the Muhu ge 牧護歌 (Song of the herdsman) by Suxi 蘇溪 we read:
Even though I have no favorable attention
from kings and lords / My original substance is just as it is. (t 51: 462c)

The entire question, “Is this the marvelous activity… as it is” 爲是神通妙用, 本體
如然 , starts with the adverb 爲是 , which
indicates an alternative question; thus “爲
是 A B” means “Is it A or B?” Usually two
alternatives are oﬀered, on rare occasions

three. The standard form of this expression is “ 爲是 A 爲是 B,” as in the Lotus
Sutra: “Is this the ultimate dharma, or is
it a Way to be practiced?” 爲是窮境法, 爲
是所行道 (t 9: 6b).
Either of the two 爲是 compounds may
be dropped, however, as in, “Are you worried about worldly affairs, or are your
talents limited?” 爲是塵務經心 , 天分有限
(“Xianyuan” 賢媛 [Clever women] chapter of the Shishuo xinyu 世說新語 [A new
account of tales of the world]). Another
variation is 爲…, 爲…, the earliest examples of which appear in the Lotus Sutra,
e.g., “Am I mistaken or not mistaken?” 爲
失爲不失 (t 9: 11a). Other variants include
爲當 (or 爲復 ) A, 爲當 (or 爲復 ) B, and
rarely, 莫是…, 爲復….
All of these examples, with the exception of the last, appear in both Buddhist
and non-Buddhist literature throughout
the Six Dynasties, Tang, and Five Dynasties (see Kanda 1949). The form 爲凡, 爲
聖, “Are you a common man or a saint?”,
which appears a little later in the ll text,
has its origins in 爲…, 爲… and is related
to the 是… 是… (or 還是) of modern Chinese.
How coarse translates 太麁生, an example of the grammatical construction 太
+ adj. + 生 . In this formula, 太 serves to
intensify the meaning of the adjective,
while 生 is a suﬃx accompanying 太. The
combination as a whole, however, may be
seen to function as an emphatic predicate
(predicative) adjective, or, in other words,

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 293

普化依前踏倒飯床。師云、得即得、太麁生。普化云、瞎漢、
佛法說什麼麁細。師乃吐舌。

Puhua kicked over the dinner table as before. “Good enough,” said the master, “but how coarse!”
“Blind man!” said Puhua. “What’s buddhadharma got to do with coarse
and ﬁne?”
The master stuck out his tongue.
as an adjective that is invariably found as
a predicate.
Several other examples of this expression are found later in the Linji text, such
as 太多生, “too many”; 太高生, “too lofty”;
and 太無禮生 , “so lacking in manners”;
others, like 太難生, 太能生, 太貪生, and 太
痩生, may be found in the Youxian ku and
other materials.
How does today’s feast compare with
yesterday’s? translates 今日供養、何似昨
日. The colloquialism 何似, an expression
peculiar to the Tang and Five Dynasty
periods, was used in asking the relative
merits of two things, A and B. In the work
of the Tang poets Meng Haoran 孟活然
(689–740) and Bai Juyi 白居易 (772–846)
this expression carries the suggestion that,
from the standpoint of the questioner, B
is better than A, though this is not always
true for examples in the prose works of
the period.
In the case of certain examples from the
bianwen literature of Dunhuang, however,
the construction 何似 does not involve
comparison, but means “how” or “what” in
reference to only one thing, i.e., 我子心裏

何似, “What is in my child’s mind?” and 其
人形容何似, “What does that person look
like?” This use of 何似 is similar to that
of 何似許 or 何似生 . Both 許 and 生 are

simply suﬃxes.
The 似 in 何 似 is often mistakenly
assumed to have its usual meaning of “to
resemble.” However, the compound 何似 is
similar to 何如 in the written language. In
the spoken language of the Song and Yuan,
似 in the compounds 強似 and 勝似, both
meaning “better than,” is often replaced by
如; both expressions are equivalent to 於,
“than,” of the written language.
The master stuck out his tongue. Sticking out the tongue was an expression of
fear or surprise. See the Xuefeng yulu 雪峰
語錄 (Recorded sayings of Xuefeng):
The master addressed the group, saying,
“On South Mountain there is a terrapin-nosed snake. All of you better watch
out for him!” Yunmen took a stick and
poked it in the master’s face, posturing
as though he were afraid, spreading his
mouth and sticking out his tongue. (x
69: 82c–83a)

294 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

iv
師一日、與河陽木塔長老、同在僧堂地爐內坐。因說、普化每
日在街市、掣風掣顛。知他是凡是聖。言猶未了、普化入來。
師便問、汝是凡是聖。普化云、汝且道、我是凡是聖。師便
喝。普化以手指云、河陽新婦子、木塔老婆禪。臨濟小厮兒、
卻具一隻眼。師云、這賊。普化云賊賊、便出去。

One day when the master and the venerable old priests Heyang and
Muta were sitting together around the ﬁre-pit in the Monks’ Hall, the master
said, “Every day Puhua goes through the streets acting like a lunatic. Who
knows whether he’s an ordinary person or a sage?”
Before he had ﬁnished speaking Puhua came in. “Are you a commoner
or a sage?” the master asked.
“Now, you tell me whether I’m a commoner or a sage,” answered Puhua.
The master shouted.
Pointing his ﬁnger at them, Puhua said, “Heyang is a new bride, Muta is
a Chan granny, and Linji is a young menial, but he has the eye.”
“You thief!” cried the master.
“Thief, thief!” cried Puhua, and went out.

iv
Heyang and Muta. Nothing is known of
these two ﬁgures beyond what is recounted
in this exchange. This episode appears also
in zj 17; jc 10; and in the Puhua section of
Zongmen tongyao ji 宗門統要集 (Essential collection of the lineage of the Chan
school) 66, although the respective contents diﬀer somewhat.
Who knows translates 知他 , the traditional Japanese reading of which interprets
the word 他 as a third person pronoun,
making it the subject of “whether he’s an
ordinary person or a sage” 是凡是聖. 他 is
actually a suﬃx forming a compound with
知 and has no meaning of its own. 知他 is
the same as 不知 and usually introduces a
rhetorical question with a slightly ironical
connotation; 他 in itself has no such rhetorical function. A similar use of the word
他 is found in the compound 管他, mean-

ing “I don’t care if…,” which is much used
since the Song period.
知他 is frequently used in the ci poems of
the Northern and Southern Song, in Yuan
dramas 元曲, and in literary works such
as the Yuanchao mishi 元朝密史 (Secret
history of the Mongols), and the Shuihu
zhuan 水滸傳 (Outlaws of the marsh). This
example in the ll seems to be the earliest appearance of the form in literature,
except possibly in the novel Kaihe ji 開河
記, by an unknown author, where the following sentence is found: 蕭后謂曰, 知他是
甚圖畫, “Empress Xiao said, ‘Who knows
what kind of painting it is?’”
Puhua came in is invariably written
in older texts of the ll (as in the present
one) as 普化入來, while currently popular
texts have 普化入衆來. The older version
renders the context of the passage more
logically consistent.
Linji is a young menial, but he has the

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 295

v
一日、普化在僧堂前、喫生菜。師見云、大似一頭驢。普化便
作驢鳴。師云、這賊。普化云賊賊、便出去。

One day Puhua was eating raw vegetables in front of the Monks’ Hall.
The master saw him and said, “Just like an ass!”
“Heehaw, heehaw!” brayed Puhua.
“You thief!” said the master.
“Thief, thief!” cried Puhua, and went oﬀ.

vi
因普化、常於街市搖鈴云、明頭來、明頭打、暗頭來、暗頭
打、四方八面來、旋風打、虛空來、連架打。師令侍者去、纔
見如是道、便把住云、總不與麼來時如何。

Puhua was always going around the streets ringing a little bell and calling out,
Coming as brightness, I hit the brightness;
Coming as darkness, I hit the darkness;
Coming from the four quarters and eight directions, I hit like a
whirlwind;
Coming from empty sky, I lash like a ﬂail.
The master told his attendant to go and, the moment he heard Puhua say
these words, to grab him and ask, “If coming is not at all thus, what then?”
[The attendant went and did so.]
eye translates 臨濟小厮兒、卻具一隻眼 .
In Puhua’s biography in the jc and zj 17,
Puhua says (though in a diﬀerent context),
“Linji, a menial, has only one eye!” 臨濟小
廝兒、只具一隻眼 (t 51: 280b). This seems
not to be a laudatory statement. The same
version is in the Zhaozhou lu, in a context
similar to that mentioned above.

v
Raw vegetables translates 生菜, which
in modern Chinese refers only to a kind
of lettuce used as a salad green, but in
Tang times meant any kind of uncooked
vegetable. The jc has, “The master (Zhaozhou) asked the head vegetable-cook, ‘Are

we going to have a meal of raw vegetables
生菜 or cooked vegetables 熟菜 today?’” (t
51: 277c).

vi
Coming as brightness… lash like a
flail. This interpretation is based on the
verse as it appears in Puhua’s biography in
zj 17. The verse is full of implications, however, and has been interpreted in various
ways. Another possible reading is:
When one [it] comes as brightness, I hit
with brightness / When one [it] comes
as darkness, I hit with darkness.
When one [it] comes from the four corners and the eight directions, I hit like a

296 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
普化托開云、來日大悲院裏有齋。侍者回、擧似師。師云、我
從來疑著這漢。

Puhua pushed him away, saying, “There’ll be a feast tomorrow at Dabei
yuan.”
The attendant returned and told this to the master. The master said, “I’ve
always held wonder for that fellow.”

vii
有一老宿參師、未曾人事、便問、禮拜即是、不禮拜即是。師
便喝。老宿便禮拜。師云、好箇草賊。老宿云賊賊、便出去。

An old worthy came to see the master. Before presenting the customary
gift, he asked, “Is it proper to bow, or is it proper not to bow?”
The master shouted. The old worthy bowed low. “A ﬁne thief in the grass
you are!” said the master.
“Thief, thief!” cried the old worthy and started to go out.
whirlwind / When one [it] comes from
the void, I lash like a ﬂail.

The usual Japanese Zen interpretation of
brightness and darkness is that they represent diﬀerentiation and equality, respectively. There is a related statement in the
Nanquan yuyao 南泉語要 (Essential sayings of Nanquan), in the Song edition of
the Guzunsu yuyao 古尊宿語要 (Essential
sayings of the ancient worthies):
Brightness and darkness of themselves
come and go / Yet empty sky is motionless;
Myriad things of themselves come and go /
But there is no reﬂection whatsoever of
brightness and darkness upon them.
(x 68: 73a–b)

Dabei yuan 大悲院 was at this time
a small temple in the city of Zhenzhou.
According to the jc (t 51: 290a), it was
later presided over by a disciple of Linji’s
heir Sansheng Huiran.
I’ve always held wonder for that fellow is a comment that may be either
complimentary or derogatory. Identical
or similar phrases are found in the sec-

tion on Baizhang Huaihai in the jc (t 51:
250a) and bg (x 69: 7a), Deshan in the
jc (t 51: 318a), and Nanquan in the gy
(x 68: 69b). Linji himself employs it later
(Critical Examinations 11) in reference
to Deshan. The ambiguity of the expression “held wonder” 疑著 was perhaps not
unintentionally used by these masters. For
example, a note appended to the account
of this episode as recorded in the jc section on Deshan comments:
Master Ji 齊 of Dongchan once said, “For
instance, Linji said, ‘Hitherto I’ve always
held wonder for that fellow.’ Were these
words of assent or dissent? Or did they
have another meaning? Try to judge.” (t
51: 318a)

vii
Customary gift translates 人事, which,
as a colloquial term, was ordinarily a noun
meaning a present or oﬀering. The earliest such use of the term is found in the
chronicle of Emperor Wu 武 in Jin shu 晉
書 (Chronicles of the Jin) 3. Tongsu bian
9 gives ﬁve examples from the celebrated

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 297

師云、莫道無事好。首座侍立次、師云、還有過也無。首座
云、有。師云、賓家有過、主家有過。首座云、二倶有過。師
云、過在什麼處。首座便出去。師云、莫道無事好。後有僧擧
似南泉。南泉云、官馬相踏。

The master said, “Better not think you can get away with that.” [Later]
when the head monk was attending the master, the master asked, “Was there
any fault?”
The head monk said, “There was.”
“Whose fault was it, the guest’s or the host’s?” asked the master.
“Both were at fault,” answered the head monk.
“Where was the fault?” asked the master. The head monk started to go
out. The master said, “Better not think you can get away with that.”
Later a monk told the story to Nanquan. Nanquan said, “Fine horses
trampling one another.”
Tang poets Han Yu 韓愈, Bai Juyi, and Du
Mu 杜牧. Later, however, 人事 came to be
used as a verb meaning “to give a gift,” as
in the present instance. Another example
of this usage is found on page 316, below.
Nanquan is the common designation
for Puyuan 普願 (748–835), who lived on
Mount Nanquan 南泉 in Chizhou 池州 .
He was a disciple of Mazu, and since he
lived earlier than Linji some scholars have
doubted the reliability of this story. In the
jc text, the passage that begins with “Later
a monk” is omitted.
Nanquan was in the third generation of
the Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷讓 lineage. He
was a native of Xinzheng 新鄭 in Zhengzhou 鄭州 , in modern Henan, with the
family name of Wang 王. At the age of nine
he was ordained by a priest named Dahui
大慧 (n.d.) at the temple on Mount Dawei
大隗 in his native province. After taking
the full precepts on Mount Song 嵩 at the
age of thirty he studied the texts of the
Vinaya, then turned his attention to the
Laṅkāvatāra Sutra and Avataṃsaka Sutra.
Next he studied the doctrines of the Sanlun school, which is based on the works
of Nāgārjuna and his disciples. Becoming

interested in Chan, he called upon Mazu
Daoyi (709–788), under whom he is said
to have forgotten all that he had learned
and attained the Samādhi of Play 游戲
三昧.
In 795, after ﬁnishing his practice under
Mazu, Puyuan went to Mount Nanquan
and built himself a hermitage, where he
remained for the next thirty years. In 828
Lu Geng 陸亘 (764–834), the governor of
the city Xuancheng 宣城 in the same prefecture, invited the master to teach. Soon
a large assembly gathered around him at
his mountain temple, known as Nanquan
yuan 南泉院 . Among his most noteworthy successors were Changsha Jingcen 長
沙景岑 (n.d.), and Zhaozhou Congshen.
The master also continued his relationship with the governor, who eventually
became his disciple and dharma successor. Puyuan’s death is described as follows
in the jc:
When the master was about to die, the
head monk asked him, “Your Reverence,
a hundred years from now where will you
be?” “I shall be a water buﬀalo at the foot
of the hill,” said the master. “Will it be all
right for me to follow you?” asked the

298 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

viii
師因入軍營赴齋、門首見員僚。師指露柱問、是凡是聖。員僚
無語。師打露柱云、直饒道得、也祇是箇木橛。便入去。

One day the master entered an army camp to attend a feast. At the
gate he saw a staﬀ oﬃcer. Pointing to a pillar, he asked, “Is this secular or
sacred?”
The oﬃcer had no reply.
Striking the pillar, the master said, “Even if you could speak, this is still
only a wooden post.” Then he went in.

ix
師問院主、什麼處來。

The master said to the steward of the temple, “Where have you come
from?”
head monk. “If you follow me, you must
hold a stalk of grass in your mouth,” was
[Puyuan’s] reply.
At daybreak on the morning of 27 January 835, the master said to his disciples,
“The star has been fading and the lamp
growing dim for a long time. Do not say
that I came or went.” His words ceased,
and he passed away. He was in his eightyseventh year. (t 51: 259a–b; zd trans.,
273–274)

viii
Pillar translates 露 柱 , a compound
that may be more literally translated as
“exposed pillar.” It is not certain exactly
what this rather enigmatic term refers to,
although in Zen literature it is frequently
used metaphorically to indicate any nonsentient thing, the precise connotation
determined by the context. For example,
the biography of Changsha Zhenlang 長沙
振朗 in the jc states:
The master visited Shitou for instruction
and asked, “What is the meaning of the
Patriarch’s coming from the West?” Shitou
answered, “Ask that pillar out there.” The
master said, “I don’t understand.” Where-

upon Shitou remarked, “Neither do I.”
Upon hearing this the master was suddenly enlightened. (t 51: 311b)

Another example is found in the biography of Changsha Jingcen:
A monk asked, “[It is said that] motion is
the seed of the Dharma-King and motionlessness the root of the Dharma-King.
Now what about the Dharma-King?”
The master, pointing at an outdoor pillar,
remarked, “Why don’t you ask that great
gentleman?” (t 51: 275a)

For 露柱 used in another, more literal,
sense, see page 234, above.
Even if translates 直饒 , a compound
peculiar to the Tang. For 直 as an emphatic
adverb, see the comment on page 207,
above. Synonyms of 直饒 are 徑饒 , 假饒 ,
and 縱饒. After the Tang, however, the latter two compounds by and large came to
replace the former two.

ix
Steward translates 院主 , the monk in
charge of monastery management. In
later times the title 監事 was more often
used.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 299

主云、州中糶黃米去來。師云、糶得盡麼。主云、糶得盡。師
以杖面前畫一畫云、還糶得這箇麼。主便喝。師便打。典座
至。師擧前語。典座云、院主不會和尚意。師云、爾作麼生。
典座便禮拜。師亦打

“I’ve been to the provincial capital to sell the millet,” answered the steward.
“Did you sell all of it?” asked the master.
“Yes, I sold all of it,” replied the steward.
The master drew a line in front of him with his staﬀ and said, “But can
you sell this?” The steward gave a shout. The master hit him. The chief cook
came in. The master told him about the previous conversation.
The chief cook said, “The steward didn’t understand you.”
“How about you?” asked the master. The chief cook bowed low. The
master hit him, too.

x
有座主來相看次、師問、座主講何經說。主云、某甲荒虛、粗
習百法論。師云、有一人、於三乘十二分敎明得。有一人、於
三乘十二分敎明不得。

When a certain lecture master came to have an interview with Linji,
the master said to him, “What sutras and śāstras do you expound?”
“Insofar as my miserable abilities allow, I have made a cursory study of
the Baifa lun,” replied the lecture master.
The master said, “Suppose there was a man who had attained comprehension of the Three Vehicles’ twelve divisions of the teachings, and there
was another man who had not comprehended it, would there be any diﬀerence or not?”
Chief cook translates 典座 , the monk
responsible for the acquisition and storage of food and the upkeep of the kitchen
utensils. The term is still used in the same
sense in modern Japanese monasteries.
The Baizhang qinggui 百丈清規 (Baizhang’s
rules for purity) states:
The chief cook is responsible for feeding
the monks. He is to keep clean all offerings from believers, keep the food stores
replenished, take proper care of the kitchen

utensils and never handle them carelessly,
and teach lay believers to observe the regulations. (t 48: 1132c)

x
Baifa lun 百法論 is an abbreviated form
of the title Dasheng baifa mingmen lun
大乘百法明門論 (Clear introduction to
the one hundred dharmas). The Baifa lun
is a Yogācāra text attributed to the ﬁfthcentury Yogācārin Vasubandhu (Tianqin

300 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
是同是別。主云、明得即同、明不得即別。樂普爲侍者、在師
後立云、座主、這裏是什麼所在、說同說別。師回首問侍者、
汝又作麼生。侍者便喝。師送座主回來、遂問侍者、適來是汝
喝老僧。侍者云、是。師便打。

“For the one who had attained comprehension, it would be the same; for
the one who had not attained comprehension, it would be diﬀerent,” replied
the lecture master.
Lepu, who was standing behind the master attending him, said, “Lecture
master, where do you think you are, talking about ‘same’ and ‘diﬀerent’!”
Turning his head, the master asked Lepu, “Well, how about you?”
The attendant gave a shout. When the master returned from seeing the
lecture master oﬀ, he said to the attendant, “Was it to me that you shouted
just now?”
“Yes,” said the attendant. The master hit him.

xi
師聞第二代德山垂示云、道得也三十棒、道不得也三十棒、師
令樂普去問、道得爲什麼也三十棒、待伊打汝、接住棒送一
送、看他作麼生。

The master heard that Deshan of the second generation said, “Thirty
blows if you can speak; thirty blows if you can’t.” The master told Lepu to
go and ask Deshan, “‘Why thirty blows to one who can speak?’ Wait until he
hits at you, then grab his stick and give him a jab. See what he does then.”
天親 ), although the authenticity of this

attribution is in question. The text was
translated into Chinese by Xuanzang.
Suppose there was a man… replied the
lecture master. What Linji is asking, in
eﬀect, is whether a lecture master’s understanding of the buddhadharma is the
same as that of a Chan master. The lecture
master answers that with regard to what
they do understand about the buddhadharma they are the same, but with regard
to what they do not understand they
are quite different. The lecture master’s
answer implies, furthermore, that while
the understanding of buddhadharma

through the Three Vehicles’s twelve divisions of the teachings is discriminatory
in nature, there is also an intuitive way of
understanding that is not available to the
discriminatory powers of the mind. This
way of understanding, needless to say, is
at the crux of the succeeding exchange
between Linji and Lepu.
Lepu. See Introduction, note 34.

xi
Deshan of the second generation refers
to Linji’s contemporary, Deshan Xuanjian 德山宣鑑 , the disciple of Longtan
Chongxin who resided at the temple Gude

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 301

普到彼、如敎而問。德山便打。普接住送一送。德山便歸方
丈。普回擧似師。師云、我從來疑著這漢。雖然如是、汝還見
德山麼。普擬議。師便打。

When Lepu reached Deshan’s place he questioned him as instructed.
Deshan hit at him. Lepu seized the stick and gave Deshan a jab with it.
Deshan went back to his quarters.
Lepu returned and told Linji what had taken place. “I’ve always held
wonder for that fellow,” the master said. “Be that as it may, did you understand Deshan?”
Lepu hesitated. The master hit him.

xii
王常侍、一日訪師。同師於僧堂前看、乃問、這一堂僧、還看
經麼。師云、不看經。侍云、還學禪麼。師云、不學禪。侍
云、經又不看、禪又不學、畢竟作箇什麼。師云、總敎伊成佛
作祖去。侍云、金屑雖貴、落眼成翳。又作麼生。師云、將爲
爾是箇俗漢。

One day the Councilor Wang visited the master. When he met the master in front of the Monks’ Hall, he asked, “Do the monks of this monastery
read the sutras?”
“No, they don’t read sutras,” said the master.
“Then do they learn meditation?” asked the councilor.
“No, they don’t learn meditation,” answered the master.
“If they neither read sutras nor learn meditation, what in the world are
they doing?” asked the councilor.
“All I do is make them become buddhas and patriarchs,” said the master.
The councilor said, “‘Though gold dust is valuable, in the eyes it causes
cataracts.’”
“I always used to think you were just a common fellow,” said the master.
chanyuan 古德禪院 on Mount De 德 in
Langzhou 朗州 (see Introduction, note
10). The words “of the second generation”
are added to his name to distinguish him
from the earlier Deshan Zongyin 德山總
印 (n.d.), a priest of little historical importance who lived on Mount Sanjue 三角 in
Tanzhou 潭州 and was a disciple of Mazu.

xii
Though gold dust… cataracts. This
appears to have been a common saying
at the time, though the source has not so
far been identiﬁed. The saying is quoted
in numerous Chan texts, including the jc
section on Xingshan Weikuan 興善惟寬
(t 51: 255b) and the gy section on Wuzu

302 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xiii
師問杏山、如何是露地白牛。山云、吽吽。師云、啞那。山
云、長老作麼生。師云、這畜生。

The master asked Xingshan, “What is the white ox on the bare ground?”
“Moo, moo!” said Xingshan.
“A mute, eh?” said the master.
“Venerable sir, how about you?” said Xingshan.
“You beast!” said the master.
Fayan 五祖法演 (x 68: 139b). An anecdote
very similar to this one, and most likely
referring to the same incident, is found
in the jc:

Zhuzi bianlue 助字辨略 2 quotes a poem
by Shao Yaofu 邵堯夫 (i.e., Shao Yong 邵
雍 , 1011–1077), under the item 將 , and
explains,

The master [Xuefeng] said, “Once there
was an old master who was guiding an
official around the monastery. ‘We have
two or three hundred monks here, all of
them studying the buddhadharma,’ said
the old master. The oﬃcial replied, ‘A man
of old had a saying that started, “Though
gold dust is valuable”.’ What about that?”
Xuefeng asked Jingqing what he
thought about this story, and Jingqing
answered, “Until now I have been tossing
out bricks and getting jewels in return.”
(t 51: 328a)

將爲 indicates conjecture (or inference)
and is equivalent to the modern usage 只
道是 (“I have been [mistakenly] convinced

Jingqing’s answer is similar to the English expression, ‘Throw a sprat to catch a
whale.’”
I always used to think renders the conjunction 將爲 , which means “[Though]
I have hitherto believed that….” 將爲 is
usually followed by a subordinate clause,
indicating that what is really the situation is contrary to what one had believed
or been convinced of. This subordinate
clause is sometimes omitted, but even
then the sentence suggests that what one
has so far believed is incorrect. The character 爲 is frequently replaced by 謂, as in
the passage of the gy version of the ll that
corresponds to this (x 68: 30c). Another
example is to be found later in the text; see
page 326, below.

that…,” or, “I always [mistakenly] used to
think that…”).

During the Tang dynasty the synonym
將作 was used on rare occasions (see db,
251.5 and 742.2).

xiii
Xingshan. See Introduction, note 33.
What is the white ox on the bare
ground? The expressions “white ox” 白牛
and “bare ground” 露地 derive originally
from the famous parable of the burning
house in chapter 3 of the Lotus Sutra.
In the parable a rich father, in order to
induce his children to leave their house
that, without their realizing it, has caught
on fire, promises them all sorts of toys.
After the children have left the house
and are sitting safely outside on the “bare
ground,” he gives them each a cart drawn
by a “white ox.”
Later Buddhist thinkers have often
taken the two phrases out of context and
given them highly philosophical interpretations. The Xin Huayan jing lun 新華嚴經
論 (Treatise on the new translation of the
Avataṃsaka Sutra) of Li Tongxuan 李通

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 303
玄 (639–734), for example, interprets them
as follows:

The “bare ground” and the “white ox” illustrate the attainment of a place of perfect
nondependence. The “bare ground” is the
buddha-ground, since the buddha-wisdom has nothing that it depends or rests
upon. Therefore it is called “bare ground.”
The “white ox” is the dharmakāya, and
is merciful wisdom as well. Because the
dharmakāya is without form, it is called
white. (t 36: 733c)

In the Zen tradition the image of a white
ox on bare ground repeatedly appeared
as a theme of discussions and exchanges
between masters and their disciples, and
eventually gave rise to the famous “Ten
Oxherding Pictures,” a series of ten pictures, with accompanying poems, in which
the path of Zen training toward enlightenment is symbolically represented in the
form of a story about an oxherd (the student) tending an ox (the mind).
There are many other examples of anecdotes paralleling the one in the text. In
the following example the same question
evokes an answer identical to that of Linji;
interestingly, the protagonist is, again,
Deshan Xuanjian.
A monk asked the master [Deshan Xuanjian], “What is the white ox on the bare
ground?” The master said, “Moo, moo!”
“What sort of food does he live on?” asked
the monk. “Eat!” said the master. (x 67:
121b)

A nearly identical exchange is attributed
to Touzi Yiqing 投子義青 (1032–1083; x
67: 121b).
Zhaozhou Congshen gave two responses
to the same question at different occasions:
Someone asked, “What is the white ox on
the bare ground?” The master said, “In the
moonlight, color is of no use” 月下不用色.
(x 68: 79b)

Someone asked, “What is the white ox on
the bare ground?” The master said, “This
beast!” 者畜生 (gy 14; x 68: 84a).

Responses by other masters include, “A
cracked bowl!” 破盆子, by Yexian Guixing
葉縣歸省 (n.d.; x 68: 152a); and, “Even the
point of a needle can’t enter!” 針劄不入, by
Dongshan Shouchu 洞山守初 (910–990; x
68: 248b).
Moo, moo renders 吽吽 , which is the
onomatopoeia for the sound of bovine
lowing. Some Zen masters, however, use it
as an exclamation that has mystical connotations (perhaps because of the association with similar sounds in the dhāraṇī
chants) symbolizing the Source to which
all things return, or the wisdom of nondifferentiation.
Someone asked, “How would you say
it all in one word?” The master said,
“Moo! Moo! It hits my front teeth.” The
questioner stepped forward and said, “I
have had the privilege of receiving your
instruction.” The master said, “This fellow
is with a head and with no tail!” (gy 6; x
68: 37c)
When Ven. Cao 操 was walking with
Dagui 大潙, they suddenly saw a donkey
eating grass. The master snatched away
the grass the animal was eating and, turning to Dagui, said, “Moo! Moo!” Dagui
thereupon got on all fours and imitated
a donkey braying. The master cried, “The
beast!” Dagui then asked, “What did you
see right now?” Upon this the master
struck him. (zj 16)

A mute, eh? translates 啞那.That this is
a question is indicated by the ﬁnal particle
那. For examples of this particle in Chan
literature, see the Kattō gosen 葛藤語箋
(Notes on Zen terminology), by Mujaku
Dōchū, 66.

304 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xiv
師問樂普云、從上來、一人行棒、一人行喝。阿那箇親。普
云、總不親。師云、親處作麼生。普便喝。師乃打。

The master asked Lepu, “Up to now it has been the custom for some
people to use the stick and others to give a shout. Which comes closer [to
the heart of the recipient]?”
“Neither,” replied Lepu.
“What does come close?” asked the master.
Lepu shouted. The master hit him.

xv
師見僧來、展開兩手。僧無語。師云、會麼。云、不會。師
云、渾崙擘不開、與爾兩文錢。

The master, seeing a monk coming, spread his arms out wide. The monk
said nothing. “Do you understand?” the master asked.
“No, I don’t,” replied the monk.
“It’s impossible to break open Hunlun,” said the master. “I’ll give you a
couple coins.”

xvi
大覺到參。

Dajue came to see Linji.

xiv

xv

Which comes closer translates the sentence 阿那箇親 . The interrogative 阿那 ,
translated here as “which,” is peculiar to
the Tang dynasty and the period of the
Five Dynasties, although examples of 阿
used as a preﬁx with no meaning are frequently found from the time of the Six
Dynasties. The construction 阿那 is never
used by itself, but is always followed by
a noun or a pronoun. It is found in such
compounds as 阿那箇, “which one”; 阿那
經, “which sutra”; 阿那裏, “where”; and 阿
那邊, “where.”

Hunlun 渾崙 most commonly refers
either to a range of mountains west of
China, where legend says the Taoist
immortals and Queen Mother of the West
live, or to the state of original, undiﬀerentiated chaos.
Here, however, Linji seems to be saying
that he’ll give the monk some traveling
money to be on his way, as he’s a blockhead
who can’t understand.

xvi
Dajue. See Introduction, note 32. The
identiﬁcation of Dajue as Linji’s disciple in

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 305

師擧起拂子。大覺敷坐具。師擲下拂子。大覺收坐具、入僧
堂。衆僧云、這僧莫是和尚親故、不禮拜、又不喫棒。師聞、
令喚覺。覺出。師云、大衆道、汝未參長老。覺云不審、便自
歸衆。

The master raised his whisk. Dajue spread his sitting cloth. The master threw
down the whisk. Dajue folded up the cloth and went into the Monks’ Hall.
“That monk must be related to the Venerable Priest. He didn’t bow and
didn’t get hit,” said the monks.
Hearing of this, the master sent for Dajue. When Dajue came out, the
master said, “The monks are saying that you haven’t yet paid your respects
to the master.”
“How are you?” said Dajue and rejoined the monks.

xvii
趙州行腳時參師。遇師洗腳次、州便問、如何是祖師西來意。
師云、恰值老僧洗腳。州近前、作聽勢。師云、更要第二杓惡
水溌在。州便下去。

Zhaozhou while on a pilgrimage came to see Linji. The master happened
to be washing his feet when they met.
Zhaozhou asked, “What is the purpose of the Patriarch’s coming from
the West?”
“I just happen to be washing my feet,” replied the master.
Zhaozhou came closer and, cocking his ear, gave the appearance of listening. The master said, “I’m going to pour out a second dipper of dirty water.”
Zhaozhou departed.
tg 12 (x 78: 475a) and the Yuan and postYuan editions of the jc appears to be based
on the present passage.
Sitting cloth translates 坐具, a rectangular cloth mat about six feet by three feet
in size, made by sewing together three or
four layers of new and old cloth. It derived
from a mat, called a “niṣīdana” in Sanskrit, that was originally used by monks
for their daily sitting and sleeping.

xvii
Zhaozhou. See Introduction, note 28.
The Zhaozhou lu presents a diﬀerent ver-

sion of the present anecdote; see the following note.
I’m going to… dirty water. This translates 更要第二杓惡水溌在, the traditional
interpretation of which is, “Do you want
a second dipper of dirty water poured on
you?” This reading was probably influenced by a similar anecdote in the jc section on Cuiwei Wuxue 翠微無學 (n. d.):
One day the master [Cuiwei Wuxue] was
walking around the lecture hall when
Touzi 投子 came forward and, after bowing, asked, “How do you explain to people
the secret meaning of the coming from

306 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xviii
有定上座、到參問、如何是佛法大意。師下繩床、擒住與一
掌、便托開。定佇立。傍僧云、定上座、何不禮拜。定方禮
拜、忽然大悟。

When Elder Ding came to see Linji he asked, “What is the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma?” The master got down from his rope-bottomed
chair. Seizing Ding, he gave him a slap and pushed him away. Ding stood
still.
A monk standing by said, “Elder Ding, why don’t you bow?” Just as he
bowed, Ding attained great enlightenment.

xix
麻谷到參。敷坐具問、十二面觀音、阿那面正。

Mayu came to see Linji. Spreading his mat, he asked, “Which is the true
face of the Twelve-faced Guanyin?”
the West?” The master stopped walking
for a moment. Touzi pressed him, saying, “I beg you to give me some instruction!” The master said, “What’s the good of
wanting a second dipper of dirty water?”
更要第二杓惡水作麼. (t 51: 313c)

This incident also appears in gy 36, in the
section on Touzi (x 68: 237c–238a).
In the passage above Cuiwei’s remark is
clearly a question, but it is forced to read
Linji’s comment in a similar way as an
interrogative. Such a reading represents
a misunderstanding of the grammatical
function of 在 , the final particle of this
clause (see comment on page 178, above).
In the Zhaozhou lu version of this
exchange, Zhaozhou is washing his feet
when Linji approaches, asks the meaning
of the Patriarch’s coming from the West,
then comes closer to listen to Zhaozhou’s
answer. The latter’s reply is diﬀerent from
that given by Linji in the ll version: Zhaozhou says, “If you understand, then understand. If you don’t, then why go around

nibbling and pecking?” (x 68: 89b). Dōchū
reports that tg 10 and zh 9 follow the
version of this anecdote found in the ll,
but that wh 11, gy 14, and various other
texts all follow the version found in the
Zhaozhou lu.

xviii
Elder Ding. See Introduction, note 41.
Rope-bottomed chair translates 繩床 ,
a kind of chair introduced to China from
Central Asia during the Six Dynasties. It
was originally called a “barbarian seat” 胡
床, but this name was later abandoned. The
term 繩床 is found as early as the translation of the Chang ahan jing (t 1: 68b–c),
which dates from the period 399–416. For
further discussion, see FitzGerald 1965.

xix
Mayu. See Introduction, note 30.
Mayu came to see Linji…. The account
that follows is similar to one recorded in
zj 20, in the section on Ven. Mi 米和尚:

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 307

師下繩床、一手收坐具、一手搊麻谷云、十二面觀音、向什麼
處去也。麻谷轉身、擬坐繩床。師拈拄杖打。麻谷接卻、相捉
入方丈。

Getting down from the rope-bottomed chair, the master seized the mat
with one hand and with the other grabbed hold of Mayu. “Where has the
Twelve-faced Guanyin gone?” he asked.
Mayu jerked himself free and tried to sit on the chair. The master picked
up his stick and hit at him. Mayu grabbed the stick; holding it between
them, they entered the master’s quarters.
Linji asked the master [Mi], “The Twelvefaced Guanyin—is it not holy?” “It is,”
said the master. “But which is the original face?” Linji tried to give the master a
slap. “Gently, gently, if you please!” said the
master, whereupon Linji merely fanned
the air beside the master’s face.

In the jc section on Mayu Baoche 麻谷
寶徹 we ﬁnd still another incident of this
kind between Mayu and Danyuan Yingzhen 眈源應眞 (n.d.):
Danyuan asked, “Are all the faces of the
Twelve-faced Guanyin holy?” The master [Mayu] replied, “They are.” Danyuan
gave the master a slap. “I can see,” said the
master, “that you have not yet reached this
realm.” (t 51: 254a)

The Twelve-faced Guanyin, therefore,
would seem to have been a frequent topic
of discussion at this time. The text of the
ll found in sy 6, however, does not contain this passage; it is possibly a later addition.
The Twelve-faced Guanyin (see also
pages 128–129, above) is a manifestation
of the bodhisattva popular in Buddhist

esoteric schools, with the twelve faces
symbolizing the bodhisattva’s unlimited
functioning as she observes all sentient
beings. In this she is like the Thousandarm Guanyin. Guanyin in her twelve-faced
manifestation is said to have come into
existence when the bodhisattva, looking
upon all the suﬀering beings in the world,
was so afflicted that her head burst into
pieces. Amitābha Buddha put her head
back together with eleven extra heads, to
further aid her in her work of alleviating
the world’s suﬀering.
The image of the Twelve-faced Guanyin
customarily had eleven faces arranged
above a single large face, and was often
referred to as the Eleven-faced Guanyin.
The Shiyimian Guanyin shenzhou jing
十一面觀音神呪經 (Sutra on the Elevenfaced Guanyin dhāraṇī), translated into
Chinese by the sixth-century monk Yasogupta (Yeshe Jueduo 耶舍崛多 ) during
the Northern Zhou dynasty, is said to
have been the source of the Eleven-faced
Guanyin concept.

308 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xx
師問僧、有時一喝、如金剛王寶劍。有時一喝、如踞地金毛師
子。有時一喝、如探竿影草。有時一喝、不作一喝用。汝作麼
生會。僧擬議。師便喝。

The master asked a monk, “Sometimes a shout is like the Diamond
Sword of the Vajra King; sometimes a shout is like the golden-haired lion
crouching on the ground; sometimes a shout is like a weed-tipped ﬁshing
pole; sometimes a shout doesn’t function as a shout. How do you understand this?”
The monk hesitated. The master gave a shout.

xxi
師問一尼、善來惡來。尼便喝。師拈棒云、更道更道。尼又
喝。師便打。

The master asked a nun, “Well-come or ill-come?” The nun shouted.
“Go on, go on, speak!” cried the master, taking up his stick.
Again the nun shouted. The master hit her.

xx
The master asked a monk…. The following section has become known as
“Linji’s Four Shouts.”
The Diamond Sword of the Vajra King
is a symbol of extreme hardness and durability, often used in Chan texts to indicate
the sword of wisdom that cuts off delusion. The commentary to bl case 35, for
example, says, “If you wish to penetrate
a koan, you must be as thoroughly sharp
as the magnificent diamond sword” (t
48: 173c).
The golden-haired lion crouching on
the ground refers to a lion lying in wait for
its prey, a symbol of awesome strength and
power. Another example of this expression
is found in the verse to case 72 of the bl:
If you are a real lion with a golden mane,
how does it come that you are not crouching on the ground? For a real lion, before
jumping on his prey, hides his fangs and

claws, draws back, and lowers his body
to the ground. And regardless of the size
of the prey he utilizes his entire power in
order to get his objective. (t 48: 200c)

Weed-tipped ﬁshing pole. Commentators diﬀer widely in their interpretation of
what this is. Some take it to be a kind of
weed-trimmed pole used to probe the ﬁsh
from the bottom of the water or attract
them to one place. Others take it to be one
of two things: a pole tipped with feathers to attract ﬁsh to a particular place, or
weeds strewn on the surface of the water
to attract ﬁsh to their shade. Whatever the
exact meaning, it appears to be used here
as a metaphor for the methods of a Chan
master to test and guide his disciples.

xxi
Well-come or ill-come. According to
the Ahan jing 阿 含 經 (Āgama sutras),
the Buddha customarily greeted monks
who had newly left their homes to join

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 309

xxii
龍牙問、如何是祖師西來意。師云、與我過禪板來。牙便過禪
板與師。師接得便打。牙云、打即任打、要且無祖師意。牙後
到翠微問、如何是祖師西來意。微云、與我過蒲團來。牙便過
蒲團與翠微。翠微接得便打。

Longya asked Linji, “What is the purpose of the Patriarch’s coming from
the West?”
Linji said, “Hand me the backrest.” Longya handed the backrest to the
master. The master took it and hit him with it.
Longya said, “It’s all right that you hit me, but there still isn’t any purpose
in the Patriarch’s coming from the West.”
Later Longya went to see Cuiwei and asked him, “What is the purpose of
the Patriarch’s coming from the West?”
Cuiwei said, “Hand me the rush mat.” Longya handed the mat to Cuiwei.
Cuiwei took it and hit him with it.
the sangha with the words, “Well-come 善
來, bhikku!” Here Linji is punning on the
literal meaning of the greeting by coining the opposite phrase, “Ill-come!” The
Zengyi ahan jing states:
Then Mahākāśyapa, leading his ﬁve hundred disciples, went over to the place where
the Venerable One was, and touching his
head to the ground, saluted the Buddha’s
feet. Standing by his side, Mahākāśyapa
said, “I implore you, my Venerable Buddha, to let us be monks and let us practice
the practice of purity, for, according to the
general laws of the Buddha, if you, Venerable One, say, ‘Well-come, bhikku’, one
instantly becomes a monk.” Whereupon
the Venerable One said to Mahākāśyapa,
“Well-come, bhikku. But this dharma is
subtle. Practice well the practice of purity.”
Then the clothes of Mahākāśyapa and his
five hundred disciples transformed into
monk’s robes and their hair fell out by
itself, leaving them looking as though they
had shaved their heads seven days before.
(t 2: 621c–622a)

xxii
Longya. See Introduction, note 31.
Hand me the backrest 與我過禪板來 .
“Backrest” designated a board fastened by
cords to the back of the rope-bottomed
chair (see comment on page 306, above).
It later came to mean a board used as a
chin-rest; a depression in one end of the
board supported the chin, while the other
end rested in the lap. The word translated
as “hand me” (過 , “to give,” “to offer,” “to
hand”) is a Tang colloquialism. Here the
prepositional dative 與 is positioned at
the beginning of the sentence to make the
imperative polite.
Cuiwei 翠微 is the common designation
for Wuxue 無學 (n.d.), who lived at Cuiwei
on Mount Zhongnan 終南 near Chang’an.
He was the heir of Danxia Tianran 丹霞
天然 (738/39–824), and is also known by
the title Great Teacher Guangzhao 廣照
大師 . He is mentioned in zj 5, jc 14, and
elsewhere, but the details of his biography
are unknown.

310 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
牙云、打即任打、要且無祖師意。牙住院後、有僧入室請益
云、和尚行腳時、參二尊宿因緣、還肯他也無。牙云、肯即深
肯、要且無祖師意。

Longya said, “It’s all right that you hit me, but there still isn’t any purpose
in the Patriarch’s coming from the West.”
After Longya had become the master of a temple, a monk entered his
room to receive instruction. “I have heard,” the monk said, “that when you
were on pilgrimage, Venerable Priest, you had the opportunity to interview
two eminent elders. Did you acknowledge them?”
“I acknowledged them profoundly all right, but there still isn’t any purpose in the Patriarch’s coming from the West.”

xxiii
徑山有五百衆、少人參請。黃檗令師到徑山。乃謂師曰、汝到
彼作麼生。師云、某甲到彼、自有方便。

Five hundred monks were assembled at the monastery at Mount Jing,
but few asked the master for instruction. Huangbo ordered Linji to go to
Mount Jing, then asked, “What will you do when you get there?”
“When I get there I’ll know what to do,” said Linji.

xxiii
Mount Jing. For the history of the monastery on Mount Jing, see Introduction,
note 17. As mentioned in that note, it is not
clear who the master of Mount Jing was at
the time of Huangbo and Linji, when this
incident took place. One candidate is the
priest Jianzong 鑒宗 (d. 866), who, according to the jc (t 51: 279c), was a disciple
of Yanguan Qian and the second master
of Mount Jing. It appears likely, however,
that there was at least one other abbot of
the temple between the tenures of Jianzong and Daoqin (founder and ﬁrst master of Mount Jing), since Jianzong died in
866, or seventy-three years after Daoqin’s
death. Since Huangbo died in the period
between 847 and 859, either Jianzong or
his unknown predecessor could have
been master at the time of this incident.

The present anecdote suggests that the
“master of Mount Jing” was not a very
competent teacher, so he may well have
been the predecessor, who is unknown
today for just that reason.
The Linji section of both zh 9 and wz
2 contain somewhat a diﬀerent version of
this story. The zh text reads:
Though ﬁve hundred monks were living
at Mount Jing, few of them took instruction from the master. Every day they
marched in a procession around a big
tree in front of the Buddha Hall, reciting
the name of Guanyin. In this way [the
master] instructed his disciples. Since the
master of Mount Jing and Huangbo were
dharma brothers, the master sent a letter
to the latter, telling him about the situation stated above. Thereupon Huangbo
had Linji go to Mount Jing and question
him. (x 79: 82b)

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 311

師到徑山、裝腰上法堂、見徑山。徑山方擧頭、師便喝。徑山
擬開口、師拂袖便行。尋有僧問徑山、這僧適來有什麼言句、
便喝和尚。徑山云、這僧從黃檗會裏來。爾要知麼、且問取
他。徑山五百衆、太半分散。

Upon arriving at Mount Jing he went to the Dharma Hall, still in his traveling clothes, to see the master. As the master raised his head, Linji shouted,
and when the master started to open his mouth, Linji swung his sleeves [as
he turned] and left.
Shortly afterwards a monk asked the master, “What did you say just now
that made that monk shout at you, Venerable Priest?”
The master replied, “That monk came from Huangbo’s assembly. If you
want to know, go ask him.”
Of the ﬁve hundred monks at Mount Jing, the greater part drifted away.

xxiv
普化一日、於街市中、就人乞直裰。人皆與之。普化倶不要。
師令院主買棺一具。普化歸來。師云、我與汝做得箇直裰了
也。普化便自擔去、繞街市叫云、臨濟與我做直裰了也。我往
東門遷化去。市人競隨看之。普化云、我今日未、來日往南門
遷化去。如是三日、人皆不信。至第四日、無人隨看。獨出城
外、自入棺內、倩路行人釘之。即時傳布。市人競往開棺、乃
見全身脫去。祇聞空中鈴響、隱隱而去。

One day Puhua went about the streets asking people he met for a onepiece gown. They all oﬀered him one, but Puhua declined them all. Linji
had the steward of the temple buy a coﬃn, and when Puhua came back the
master said, “I’ve ﬁxed up a one-piece gown for you.”
Puhua put the coﬃn on his shoulders and went around the streets calling out, “Linji ﬁxed me up a one-piece gown. I’m going to the East Gate to
depart this life.” All the townspeople scrambled after him to watch.
“No, not today,” said Puhua,“but tomorrow I’ll go to the South Gate to depart
this life.”
After he had done the same thing for three days no one believed him
anymore. On the fourth day not a single person followed him to watch. He
went outside the town walls all by himself, got into the coﬃn, and asked a
passerby to nail it up. The news immediately got about. The townspeople all
came scrambling; upon opening the coﬃn, they saw he had vanished, body
and all. Only the sound of his bell could be heard in the sky, receding away:
tinkle… tinkle… tinkle….

312 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xxiv
One-piece gown refers to an article of
monk’s clothing in which the coat section
and the trousers are joined in one piece.
He had vanished, body and all translates 全身脫去; the image is that of a snake
or cicada that sheds its skin or shell and
then disappears. The death of Puhua is
described in the section on him in zj 17:
One day Puhua, carrying an armload of

record of pilgrimages
i

coffin-planks, went about town bidding
farewell to the townspeople, saying, “I’m
leaving this life.” People gathered in crowds
and followed him out of the east gate. He
then said, “No, not today!” The second day
he went to the south gate and the third
day to the west gate. By that time fewer
people were following him, and not many
believed him. On the fourth day he went
out of the north gate, but no one followed
him. He dug a tunnel, lined it with bricks,
and died therein.

行錄

師初在黃檗會下、行業純一。首座乃歎曰、雖是後生、與衆有
異。遂問、上座在此、多少時。師云、三年。首座云、曾參
問也無。師云、不曾參問。不知問箇什麼。首座云、汝何不去
問堂頭和尚、如何是佛法的的大意。師便去問。聲未絶、黃檗
便打。師下來。首座云、問話作麼生。師云、某甲問聲未絶、
和尚便打。某甲不會。首座云、但更去問。師又去問。黃檗又
打。如是三度發問、三度被打。

When Linji was one of the assembly of monks under Huangbo, he
was plain and direct in his behavior. The head monk praised him saying,
“Though he’s a youngster, he’s diﬀerent from the other monks.” So he asked,
“Honorable monk, how long have you been here?”
“Three years,” replied Linji.
“Have you ever asked for instruction?”
“No, I’ve never asked for instruction. I don’t know what to ask,” replied
Linji.
“Why don’t you go ask the head priest of this temple just what the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma is,” said the head monk.
Linji went and asked. Before he had ﬁnished speaking Huangbo hit him.
Linji came back. “How did your question go?” asked the head monk.
“Before I had ﬁnished speaking the master hit me. I don’t understand,”
said Linji.
“Then go and ask him again,” said the head monk.
So Linji went back and asked, and again Huangbo hit him. Thus Linji
asked the same question three times and was hit three times.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 313

師來白首座云、幸蒙慈悲、令某甲問訊和尚。三度發問、三度
被打。自恨障緣不領深旨。今且辭去。首座云、汝若去時、須
辭和尚去。師禮拜退。

Linji came back and said to the head monk, “It was so kind of you to
send me to question the master. Three times I asked him and three times
I was hit by him. I regret that some obstruction caused by my own past
karma prevents me from grasping his profound meaning. I’m going away
for awhile.”
The head monk said, “If you are going away, you should go take your
leave of the master.” Linji bowed low and withdrew.
Record of Pilgrimages translates 行錄,
a term that means, literally, “record of
actions.” All are accounts of the activities of a master compiled by his disciples
following the master’s death. It was after
the Tang that such compilations became
standard practice in Chan; later they
became the source material for biographical works like the zj and jc. The account
of Linji’s life in this record concentrates
on his younger years but includes at the
end a description of his death and a reproduction of the Memorial Inscription 塔記
attributed to Baoshou Zhao 寶壽沼, which
summarizes his life. See also Introduction, pages 65 and 84.

i
I regret that some obstruction caused
by my own past karma…. In Chan the
karmic causes and conditions that lead
to the realization of enlightenment are
referred to as 因緣. Karmic obstructions
that hinder such realization, as referred to
here by Linji, are known by the term 障緣,
which combines the character 障,“obstruction,” with 緣, “cause.” A similar term, used
in the jc version of this exchange, is 所恨
愚魯, “the stupidity of my nature”:
When, with your encouragement, I asked
the master my question, I received only
his stick. I regret the stupidity of my

nature. I will now leave on a pilgrimage.
(t 51: 290a)

It was customary in Chan that if a student practicing under a teacher sensed
after a certain period that no true aﬃnity or meeting of minds existed, then he
or she would go elsewhere in search of
instruction. Case 31 of the bl states that “if
the men of old found after a single word
that they had an affinity [with a certain
teacher] they would follow that teacher,
but if after a single word they found that
they had no aﬃnity, they would leave” (t
48: 170b). wh 5, in the chapter on Daowu
Zongzhi 道吾宗智, gives an example of a
lack of aﬃnity:
The master [Daowu] left Yaoshan and went
to see Nanquan. Nanquan asked, “What is
your name?” The master answered, “Zongzhi.” Nanquan asked again, “How do you
realize the realm where no wisdom 智 can
reach?” Zongzhi said, “It is absolutely forbidden to speak of it.” Then Nanquan said,
“You have spoken of it just now. Animal
horns will grow on your head.”
Three days later Zongzhi was sewing
with Yunyan [his real brother and fellow
monk] near the washroom. Nanquan
came out and, seeing them together, he
asked, “My dear Zhi, the other day we
talked, didn’t we, about how we shouldn’t
speak of the realm where no wisdom can
reach, and about how animal horns will

314 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
首座先到和尚處云、問話底後生、甚是如法。若來辭時、方便
接他。向後穿鑿成一株大樹、與天下人作陰涼去在。師去辭黃
檗。檗云、不得往別處去。汝向高安灘頭大愚處去、必爲汝說。

The head monk went to the master’s quarters before Linji and said, “The
young man who has been questioning you is a man of dharma. If he comes
to take his leave, please handle him expediently. In the future, with training,
he is sure to become a great tree that will provide cool shade for the people
of the world.”
Linji came to take his leave. Huangbo said, “You mustn’t go anywhere else
but to Dayu’s place by the river in Gao’an. He’s sure to explain things for you.”
grow on our heads if we do. But must we
practice it?” Zongzhi left and ran into the
Monks’ Hall; Nanquan returned to his
quarters. A little while later Zongzhi came
back and resumed his work. Yunyan asked
him, “Dear brother, why didn’t you answer
Heshang’s question a while ago?” Zongzhi
said, “You are very clever.”
Yunyan did not quite understand the
meaning of his brother’s remark. He went
to Nanquan and said, “I do not understand why my brother Zongzhi gave no
answer to your question a while ago. Will
you kindly explain it to me?” To this Nanquan said, “He can live within the realm of
the beasts.” Yunyan again said, “Please tell
me what you mean by ‘He can live within
the realm of the beasts’.” Nanquan then
said, “Did I not say, a little while back, that
we should not speak of the realm where
no wisdom can reach, and that if we do
animals horns will grow on our heads?
To understand this you should only
live within the realm of the beasts.” Still
Yunyan could not follow him.
The master, seeing his brother Yunyan
unable to grasp the point, said, “This man’s
karmic aﬃnity 因緣 does not seem to be
here.” So the two went back to Yaoshan,
their former teacher. “Why have you
returned so soon?” asked Yaoshan. Yunyan
answered, “It was only because our karmic
affinities did not connect there.” (x 80:
113b–c)

The same story appears, with slight variations, in zj 16, in the section on Nanquan.
Man of dharma translates 如法, literally
“dharma-like” or “in accord with dharma,”
a term of high praise for a steady, diligent
person who observes regulations and acts
with sincerity. See the Vimalakīrti Sutra:
As far as the buddhadharma is concerned,
if a monk persists in making discriminations, he cannot be considered dharmalike. Only if he does not make discriminations can he be called dharma-like. (t
14: 548a)

In the jc text of this passage, the term 奇
特 , “unusual,” is used in place of 如法 (t
51: 299b). See also the “Sermons” section
of the ll.
In the future translates 向後 , a Tang
colloquial adverb synonymous with 以後
or 已後.
Cool shade. Just as the shade of a great
tree provides relief from the heat of the
sun, a great Chan master alleviates the
suﬀering of sentient beings. The Nirvana
Sutra, “Shengxing pin” 聖行品 (Chapter
on holy practices), says: “If sentient beings
dwell in the cool shade of the buddha tree,
then all of their delusions and ills will vanish” (t 12: 449c, 691c).
Dayu’s place by the river in Gao’an. For
“Dayu” and “Gao’an,” see Introduction,
note 9.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 315

師到大愚。大愚問、什麼處來。師云、黃檗處來。大愚云、黃
檗有何言句。師云、某甲三度問佛法的的大意、三度被打。不
知某甲有過無過。大愚云、黃檗與麼老婆、爲汝得徹困。更來
這裏、問有過無過。師於言下大悟云、元來黃檗佛法無多子。
大愚搊住云、這尿床鬼子。

Linji arrived at Dayu’s temple. Dayu said, “Where have you come from?”
“I have come from Huangbo’s place,” replied Linji.
“What did Huangbo have to say?” asked Dayu.
“Three times I asked him just what the cardinal principle of the buddhadharma is and three times he hit me. I don’t know whether I was at fault
or not.”
“Huangbo is such a grandmother that he utterly exhausted himself with
your troubles!” said Dayu. “And now you come here asking whether you
were at fault or not!”
At these words Linji attained great enlightenment. “Ah, there isn’t so
much to Huangbo’s buddhadharma!” he cried.
Dayu grabbed hold of Linji and said, “You bed-wetting little devil!

Utterly exhausted translates the term
徹困 , an expression used also by such

masters as Guishan Lingyou, Xuefeng
Yicun 雪峯義存, Xuansha Shibei 玄沙師備
(835–908), and Lushan Guizong 廬山歸宗
(n.d.). The following passage is found in
the jc 9 section on Guishan Lingyou 潙山
靈祐 (771–853):
When the master assumed the high seat a
monk stepped forward and said, “I beg of
you to preach the dharma for the group.”
The master then answered, “I am totally
exhausted by you all 我爲汝得徹困也.” The
monk bowed low. In later years someone
related the incident to Xuefeng, who then
remarked, “Men of former times used to
have that kind of grandmotherly heart,
didn’t they.” (t 51: 265a)

Ah, there isn’t so much to Huangbo’s
buddhadharma translates 元來黃檗佛法
無多子, where the term 元來 implies a feeling of surprise, as of something that for
the ﬁrst time has been noticed. 無多子 is
similar in meaning to 無多事 and 無 …

多般, as in the phrases 無如許多般, “there
isn’t so much to do” (page 239, above)
and 無許多般道理 , “there really aren’t so
many problems” (page 267, above). This is
explained in Tongsu bian 32, which gives
as examples of the 無多子 construction
not only the present passage from the ll
but also a poem by Emperor Yang 煬 of
the Sui dynasty:

[無多子 ] is equivalent to today’s 沒多兒 ,
“there is not much….” 沒多兒 is found
in poetry, such as the following example
from Shao Yaofu’s anthology: 天聽雖高
只些子人情相去沒多兒 , “Though the lord
listens from above, the height is but slight;
though human passions seem various,
their variety is not great.”

Devil translates 鬼子, used in Chan as a
term both of abuse and, as in the present
case, of praise. One ﬁnds a similar usage
in Yuan drama, where 小鬼子 and 小鬼頭,
both meaning “devil,” are terms of endearment.

316 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
適來道有過無過、如今卻道、黃檗佛法無多子。爾見箇什麼道
理、速道速道。師於大愚脅下、築三拳。大愚托開云、汝師黃
檗、非于我事。師辭大愚、卻回黃檗。黃檗見來便問、這漢來
來去去、有什麼了期。師云、祇爲老婆心切。便人事了侍立。
黃檗問、什麼處去來。師云、昨奉慈旨、令參大愚去來。黃檗
云、大愚有何言句。師遂擧前話。黃檗云、作麼生得這漢來、
待痛與一頓。師云、說什麼待來、即今便喫。隨後便掌。黃檗
云、這風顛漢、卻來這裏捋虎鬚。師便喝。黃檗云、侍者、引
這風顛漢、參堂去。

You just asked whether you were at fault or not, and now you say, ‘There isn’t
so much to Huangbo’s buddhadharma.’ What did you just see? Speak, speak!”
Linji jabbed Dayu in the side three times. Shoving him away, Dayu said,
“You have Huangbo for a teacher. It’s not my business.”
Linji left Dayu and returned to Huangbo. Huangbo saw him coming and
said, “What a fellow! Coming and going, coming and going—when will it
end?”
“It’s all due to your grandmotherly kindness,” Linji said, and then presented the customary gift and stood waiting.
“Where have you been?” asked Huangbo.
“Recently you deigned to favor me by sending me to see Dayu,” said Linji.
“What did Dayu have to say?” asked Huangbo. Linji then related what had
happened. Huangbo said, “How I’d like to catch that fellow and give him a
good dose of the stick!”
“Why say you’d ‘like to’? Take it right now!” said Linji and immediately
gave Huangbo a slap.
“You lunatic!” cried Huangbo. “Coming back here and pulling the tiger’s
whiskers.” Linji gave a shout. “Attendant, get this lunatic out of here and take
him to the Monks’ Hall,” said Huangbo.

How I’d like to catch that fellow translates 作麼生得這漢來, traditionally read in
Japanese as somosan ka kono kan no kitaru
koto o en, meaning, roughly, “How I’d like
to get that fellow to come here!” However,
in this case the Chinese 來 is an auxiliary
verb accompanying the main verb 得, and
thus possesses none of its usual meaning
of “to come.” 說什麼得來 in the subsequent
paragraph has the same structure.

This structure—main verb + object +
來 —is often found from the mid-Tang.

An example in Yinhua lu 因話錄 (Notes
from conversations) 4, by Zhao Lin 趙璘,
reads 我弭當家沒處得盧皮遐來 , “We are
managing the house, [and we tell you that]
nowhere here [will] you ﬁnd Lu Pixia.”
Give him a good dose of the stick translates 待痛與一頓. In the colloquial language

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 317

後、潙山擧此話、問仰山、臨濟當時、得大愚力、得黃檗力。
仰山云、非但騎虎頭、亦解把虎尾。

Later Guishan, telling the story to Yangshan, asked, “On that occasion
did Linji get help from Dayu, or Huangbo?”
“He not only rode on the tiger’s head but also seized its tail,” replied
Yangshan.

ii
師栽松次、黃檗問、深山裏栽許多作什麼。師云、一與山門作
境致、二與後人作標榜。道了、將钁頭打地三下。黃檗云、雖
然如是、子已喫吾三十棒了也。師又以钁頭打地三下、作嘘嘘
聲。黃檗云、吾宗到汝、大興於世。

When Linji was planting pine trees, Huangbo asked, “What’s the good of
planting so many trees in the deep mountains?”
“First, I want to make a natural setting for the main gate. Second, I want
to make a landmark for later generations,” said Linji, thumping the ground
with his mattock three times.
“Be that as it may, you’ve already tasted thirty blows of my stick,” replied
Huangbo.
Again Linji thumped the ground with his mattock three times and
breathed out a great breath.
“Under you my line will ﬂourish throughout the world,” said Huangbo.
of this period the verb 待 meant not the
usual “to wait,” but “to want to” or “let
me…,” and is similar to the classical Chinese 欲, or to 要 (also commonly seen in
modern Chinese). 待 in this usage appeared
in literature later than 要; the compounds
欲待 and 待要 came afterwards.
He not only rode… its tail. This means
that Linji fully grasped the teachings of
both men.
The image is a common one in Chan
works. For example, the “Puquan ji” 瀑
泉集 (Anthology of Puquan) in Mingjue
Chanshi yulu 明覺禪師語錄 (Recorded
sayings of Chan Master Mingjue) 4, has 踞
虎頭收虎尾, “to sit on the tiger’s head and
seize the tiger’s tail” (t 47: 693a).

ii
When Linji was planting pine trees….
This section, well known in the Zen traditional as “The story of Linji planting pine
trees,” also appears as case 38 of the bl (t
48: 175c). In the version of the story found
in the jc, however, the trees Linji is planting are cryptomerias 杉, and not pines 松
(t 51: 290b).
Landmark translates the term 標榜 ,
literally a plaque hung up in front of
someone’s house that praised his or her
virtuous qualities. For this the jc substitutes the word 古記, which means “ancient
record,” i.e., a pronouncement or prophesy
handed down for the sake of posterity (t
51: 290b).

318 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
後潙山擧此語、問仰山、黃檗當時、祇囑臨濟一人、更有人
在。仰山云、有。祇是年代深遠、不欲擧似和尚。潙山云、
雖然如是、吾亦要知。汝但擧看。仰山云、一人指南、呉越令
行、遇大風即止。讖風穴和尚也。

Later Guishan related these words to Yangshan. “On that occasion did
Huangbo put his trust only in Linji, or will there also be someone else?” he
asked.
“There will be,” replied Yangshan. “But he’ll come so far in the future that
I don’t want to tell you about him, Venerable Priest.”
“Be that as it may, I’d like to know. Come on, try and tell me,” said
Guishan.
Yangshan said, “One man heading south: Wu and Yue well-governed.
When one meets the Great Wind he stops.” (Prophesying Venerable Fengxue)

iii
師侍立德山次、山云、今日困。師云、這老漢寐語作什麼。山
便打。師掀倒繩床。山便休。

When Linji was attending Deshan, Deshan said, “I’m tired today.”
“Old man,” said Linji, “what’s the good of talking in your sleep?”
Deshan hit him. Linji overturned the rope-bottomed chair. Deshan
desisted.
But he’ll come so far in the future. “But”
here translates 祇是 (also written 祗是, 只
是, or 止是), a Tang colloquialism usually
used in the sense of “intently” or “solely,”
as in most examples in the db and in all
eleven examples found in the ll except
for the present one. Its use in the sense
of “but,” “however,” as in this instance, is
infrequent even in the db, and seems to
have become more common only later.
We might therefore surmise that this
exchange between Guishan and Yangshan
was arranged in a somewhat later style of
wording.
Be that as it may… said Guishan. The
version of this exchange as recorded in the
jc diﬀers slightly up until this point:
Guishan related this story to Yangshan and
asked, “Would you say that Huangbo in this

last pronouncement was putting his trust
in Linji alone, or did he have some other
meaning besides?” Yangshan replied, “He
was putting his trust in Linji, but he was
also indicating something in the future.”
Guishan asked, “What was this something
in the future?” Yangshan replied, “A man
indicating the South….” (t 51: 290c)

One man heading south… he stops. This
passage, being a prophesy, is appropriately
obscure. Later commentators have usually
taken it to refer to Fengxue Yanzhao, as in
the note to this eﬀect immediately after the
prophesy (see next note). The interpretation of the prophesy is as follows.
Fengxue, the fourth patriarch of the
Linji school, studied originally under
Xuefeng Yicun and others, but on their
advice went to Ruzhou to visit Nanyuan

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 319
Huiyong, and thus joined the lineage of
the Linji school. “One man heading south”
is thus taken to refer not to the direction
south but to Nanyuan Huiyong, whose
name means “Huiyong of the South Monastery.”
Wu and Yue, the names of two ancient
states in south-central China near the
mouth of the Yangzi, and hence in the
southeast part of the Tang empire, are not
so easily explained. The names may allude
to the fact that Fengxue was originally
from this region, or (if one does not limit
the prophesy to Fengxue) to the fact that
there were disciples of Linji spreading his
teaching in this region.
“When one meets the Great Wind he
stops” may refer to the fact that after leaving Nanyuan, Fengxue traveled to Dafeng
大風 (Great Wind) Mountain and settled
there in an old temple called Fengxue 風
穴 (Wind Cave), from whence he took
his name.
It appears that among Fengxue’s own
disciples the prophesy was given quite
a different meaning, namely that, when
Linji’s teaching had been handed down
as far as Fengxue, those teachings would
“stop” 止, i.e., come to an end. Fengxue is
depicted as having been deeply troubled
by this prophesy, and therefore to have
worked especially hard to revive the Linji
school. The Shoushan Shengnian yulu 首山
省念語錄 (Recorded sayings of Shoushan
Shengnian), gives the following account:
One day, when Fengxue saw the master
[Shengnian] waiting on him, he began to
weep, and said to him, “Alas for the way of
Linji! It has come down to me, and now it
appears it will fall to the ground!” When
Shoushan asked if no one was worthy of
succession, Fengxue answered that his
students, though bright, did not see selfnature. Shoushan suggested that he check
further. Later, in the Dharma Hall, Fengxue
said,“The World-Honored looked upon the
assembly with his blue-lotus eyes. At that
moment, what was the Buddha preaching?

If you say he was preaching by not preaching, you are burying the Old Sage. So tell
me, what was he preaching?”
Shoushan Shengnian shook his sleeves
and left. Fengxue threw down his staﬀ and
returned to his quarters. His attendant,
following after him, asked, “Why didn’t
Shengnian answer you?”
“Because he understood,” replied Fengxue. (x 68: 50c)

However, the original meaning of the word
止 in such a word relation as this (遇…止)
seems to have been just “to stay.” For
instance, the following passage appears in
the section on Guishan in zj 16:
Later [Guishan] went on a pilgrimage to
Mount Tiantai and paid his respects…. A
number of monks followed him. On the
street in Tangxing 唐興 he met a hermit,
who took his hand to guide him, then gave
out a big laugh and said, “This man, during his remaining years, will enjoy good
fortune, and the older he becomes the
brighter he will become. If he meets 遇
a tan 潭 he will stay 止 there, if he meets
a gui 潙 he will stay there.” Guishan later
lived in Tanzhou 潭州 on Mount Gui 潙.
The hermit was none other than Hanshan
the poet himself.

Prophesying Venerable Fengxue. This
note seems to have been appended to
the ll text from very early times. The jc
relates how Fengxue received the teachings of the Linji line, then says, “After this,
in accordance with the prophesy of Yangshan, he merged into the world and gathered disciples, and from this time onward
Nanyuan’s teachings ﬂourished greatly in
many regions” (t 51: 302b).
Thus it is apparent that by the time the
jc was compiled in 1005 the prophesy was
regarded as referring to Fengxue. In later
times, however, more attention was paid
to Yangshan’s statement that the subject
of the prophesy would “come so far in the
future” that he has no desire to talk about
it. It was argued that Fengxue followed
too soon after Linji to ﬁt this description,

320 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

iv
師普請鋤地次、見黃檗來、拄钁而立。黃檗云、這漢困那。師
云、钁也未擧、困箇什麼。黃檗便打。師接住棒、一送送倒。
黃檗喚維那、維那扶起我。維那近前扶云、和尚爭容得這風顛
漢無禮。黃檗纔起、便打維那。師钁地云、諸方火葬、我這裏
一時活埋。後潙山問仰山、黃檗打維那、意作麼生。仰山云、
正賊走卻、邏蹤人喫棒。

Once, during group work, Linji was hoeing the ground. Seeing Huangbo
coming, he stopped and stood leaning on his mattock.
“Is this guy tired already?” said Huangbo.
“I haven’t even lifted my mattock yet. How could I be tired?” answered
Linji.
Huangbo hit at him. Linji seized Huangbo’s stick, jabbed him with it,
and knocked him down.
Huangbo called to the duty-monk, “Duty-monk! Help me up!”
The duty-monk came running and helped him up. “Venerable Priest,
how can you let this lunatic get away with such rudeness?” he said.
Huangbo no sooner got to his feet than he hit the duty-monk.
Hoeing the ground, Linji said, “Everywhere else the dead are cremated,
but here I immediately bury them alive.”
Later Guishan asked Yangshan, “What did Huangbo have in mind when
he hit the duty-monk?”
“The real thief escapes, and his pursuer gets the stick,” answered
Yangshan.
and attempts were made to ﬁnd an appropriate ﬁgure later in history. Thus a note
appended to zh 9 (x 79: 90a) argues that
the prophesy must refer to Dahui 大慧
(1089–1163), who did much to spread Linji
Chan in the southern Wu and Yue regions.
Mujaku Dōchū mentions a theory that
it referred to Yanxi Guangwen 偃溪廣聞
(1189–1263). Dōchū also mentions commentators like the Japanese master Tōyō
Eichō 東陽英朝 (1428–1504), who felt the
prophesy referred not to a particular individual but to the notion that the teachings
themselves would continue until the end
of the present era (“when the Great Wind
comes”), and then come to an end.

iv
Group work translates 普 請 , which
originally meant “to assemble people,” but
not necessarily for the sake of labor, as it
came to signify later. Group labor was a
time when all the monks of a monastery
joined together in some kind of productive work, often farming. In early Indian
Buddhist communities productive labor
was strictly forbidden, but Chan, with its
emphasis on self-sufficiency, made such
work a regular part of the monastic life.
The most famous expression of this outlook is the maxim of Baizhang Huaihai, “A
day of no working—a day of no eating” (x

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 321

v
師一日、在僧堂前坐。見黃檗來、便閉卻目。黃檗乃作怖勢、
便歸方丈。師隨至方丈禮謝。首座在黃檗處侍立。黃檗云、此
僧雖是後生、卻知有此事。首座云、老和尚腳跟不點地、卻證
據箇後生。黃檗自於口上打一摑。首座云、知即得。

One day Linji was sitting in front of the Monks’ Hall. Seeing Huangbo
coming, he closed his eyes. Giving the appearance of being frightened,
Huangbo returned to his quarters. Linji followed him there and bowed low.
The head monk was attending Huangbo. Huangbo said to him, “Though
he’s a youngster, he knows about this matter.”
“Venerable Priest, your own feet aren’t on solid ground, yet you give
recognition to this youngster,” said the head monk.
Huangbo gave himself a slap on the mouth.
“It’s all right as long as you know it,” said the head monk.
69: 7b). This standpoint is also expressed
in Baizhang’s memorial inscription, written by Chen Xu 陳詡: “Baizhang’s practice
is exactly the same as his disciples’, and
therefore he shares their toil” (t 48: 1156b).
For more information on Chan monastic
labor, see Nakamura 1955.
Duty-monk translates 維那, the senior
monk who was in charge of supervising
the personnel and work activities of the
monastery. The term 維那 is a combination of translation and transliteration, 維
being an abbreviation of 綱維 , “supervisor,” and 那 , pronounced na, representing the last syllable of the Sanskrit term
“karma-dāna,” which is the Sanskrit term
for the oﬃce of duty-monk.

v
Your own feet aren’t on solid ground.
For a similar statement, see the section
on Xuefeng Yicun 雪峯義存 in zj 7, where
it says,
The master [Xuefeng] addressed the
assembly, saying, “It is like a mirror. If a
foreigner stands in front of it, it shows a
foreigner. If a Chinese stands in front of

it, it shows a Chinese.” A monk told this to
Xuansha 玄沙. “What happens if another
mirror comes and stands in front of it?”
said Xuansha. The monk went back and
reported this to Xuefeng. “In that case
both the foreigner and the Chinese will be
hidden from sight,” said Xuefeng. When
the monk in turn reported this answer to
Xuansha, he said, “That country priest! His
feet are not even planted on solid ground
腳跟不踏實地 .” Sometime later Xuansha
went to visit Xuefeng. Xuefeng held one
foot in his hand and hopped along on the
other. “What are you doing?” asked Xuansha. “Look, my feet are not even planted
on solid ground!” answered Xuefeng.

Huangbo gave himself a slap on the
mouth. In the original, the verb 掴 means
“to strike someone with one’s ﬁst or open
hand.” Here, however, it is used as a numerary adjunct for blows. See the section on
Dasui Fazhen 大隨法眞 in the jc:
One day when the monks were assembled
before him, the master [Fazhen] held his
mouth in an odd way as though he were
suffering from paralysis. “Is there anyone who can cure my mouth for me?”
he asked.

322 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

vi
師在堂中睡。黃檗下來見、以拄杖打板頭一下。師擧頭、見是
黃檗、卻睡。黃檗又打板頭一下、卻往上間、見首座坐禪、乃
云、下間後生卻坐禪、汝這裏妄想作什麼。首座云、這老漢作
什麼。黃檗打板頭一下、便出去。後、潙山問仰山、黃檗入僧
堂、意作麼生。仰山云、兩彩一賽。

Linji was sleeping in the [Monks’] Hall. Huangbo came in, and, seeing
him, struck the front plank [of the sitting platform] once with his staﬀ. Linji
lifted his head, and seeing it was Huangbo, went back to sleep.
Huangbo again struck the front plank, and went to the upper part of the
hall. Seeing the head monk sitting in meditation, he said, “That youngster
down in the lower part of the hall is sitting in meditation; what’re you doing
here, cooking up wild fancies?”
“What’s this old man up to?” said the head monk.
Huangbo struck the front plank once more and left.
Later Guishan asked Yangshan, “What do you make of Huangbo in the
Monks’ Hall?”
“Two wins, one match,” replied Yangshan.
Immediately the monks began falling
over each other in their haste to bring
him some medicine, and, when the news
reached the lay believers, many of them
sent medicine as well, but the master
would not accept any of it. Seven days
later the master gave himself a slap on
the mouth, bringing it back to its normal
shape. “All these years I have been ﬂapping
my lips [talking to the monks], and now
there is no one who can cure my mouth!”
(t 51: 286b)

It’s all right as long as you know it. The
meaning here is probably the same as in a
similar example found in the Zhaozhou lu,
in gy 13: “It’s all right as long as you know
your mistake” 自知罪過即得 (x 68: 80b).

vi
Upper part of the hall. The Monk’s Hall
traditionally faced east; the north side was
called the upper part 上間 and the south
side the lower part 下間. New students sat

in the lower part, while longtime students
sat in the upper part.
Two wins, one match translates 兩彩一
賽, where the character 彩 designates the
winning spots on a pair of dice, while 賽
means a match or competition. “Two” 兩
may be interpreted to mean either that
one of the players won twice or that both
players won, that is, that Huangbo won
over both Linji and the head monk, or that
Huangbo, Linji, and the head monk all
won in their relations with each other. The
traditional Japanese interpretation, which
mistakenly takes 彩 to mean simply the
spots on the dice and 賽 to mean a pair of
dice, is that the spots on both dice or both
throws of the dice were the same, i.e., that
sleeping and meditating are equivalent to
each other.
In this passage as it appears in the Song
and Yuan editions of the jc, the wording
and meaning of the phrase are reversed

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 323

vii
一日普請次、師在後行。黃檗回頭、見師空手、乃問、钁頭在
什麼處。師云、有一人將去了也。黃檗云、近前來、共汝商
量箇事。師便近前。黃檗豎起钁頭云、祇這箇、天下人拈掇不
起。師就手掣得、豎起云、爲什麼卻在某甲手裏。黃檗云、今
日大有人普請。便歸院。

One day during the group work, Linji was going along behind the others.
Huangbo looked around, and, seeing that Linji was empty-handed, asked,
“Where is your mattock?”
“Somebody took it away from me,” said Linji.
“Come here,” said Huangbo. “I want to talk the matter over with you.”
Linji stepped forward. Huangbo lifted up his mattock and said, “Just this
people on the earth cannot hold up.”
Linji snatched the mattock from Huangbo’s grasp and held it high. “Then
why is this in my hand now?” he asked.
“Today there’s a man who really is working,” said Huangbo, and returned
to the temple.
to read 一彩兩賽, “one win, two matches.”
In this case the phrase was probably interpreted to mean that Huangbo had one
match with Linji and one match with the
head monk, of which he won one and lost
one. The Ming edition of the jc, however,
agrees with the reading in the ll. It would
seem, therefore, that the wording and
interpretation of Yangshan’s answer varied
in diﬀerent periods.
These two phrases, 兩彩一賽 and 一彩兩
賽, are found in other Chan works, though
in no more illuminating a context than the
present. See, for example, the section on
Huangbo in jc 12 (t 51: 290b) and the section on Yunmen in gy 18 (x 68: 115c and
117b). See also case 2 of the wg, Wumen’s
verse on the main case, “Baizhang and
the Fox”:
Not falling and not being blind / Two
wins, one match 兩采一賽.
Not blinded and not falling / A thousand
mistakes, ten thousand mistakes.
(t 48: 293b)

vii
Hold up translates 拈掇 , which originally meant weighing something by putting it on the palm of the hand. In this passage of the ll, however, the word seems to
have lost the meaning of “to weigh” and is
used merely in the sense of taking something up in the hand.
Today there’s a man who really is
working. A related statement is found in
the section on Guishan in zj 16:
Yangshan returned from the fields. The
master [Guishan] asked, “Were there
many men working in the fields? Yangshan stuck his hoe into the ground, folded
his hands and stood where he was. The
master said, “Today there is a man who is
really cutting grass!”

There are records suggesting that the custom in ancient Chan monasteries was to
stop work and celebrate whenever anyone attained enlightenment during the
outdoor work period. There is a passage

324 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
後潙山問仰山、钁頭在黃檗手裏、爲什麼卻被臨濟奪卻。仰山
云、賊是小人、智過君子。

Sometime later Guishan asked Yangshan, “The mattock was in Huangbo’s hand. How could it have been taken away by Linji?”
“The thief is an inferior fellow, but in cleverness he surpasses his superiors,” answered Yangshan.

viii
師爲黃檗馳書去潙山。時仰山作知客。接得書、便問、這箇是
黃檗底、那箇是專使底。師便掌。仰山約住云、老兄知是般
事、便休。同去見潙山。潙山便問、黃檗師兄多少衆。師云、
七百衆。潙山云、什麼人爲導首。

Linji went to Guishan bearing a letter from Huangbo. Yangshan, who at
that time was in charge of receiving guests, took the letter and said, “This is
Huangbo’s; where’s the messenger’s?” Linji slapped at him.
Yangshan seized Linji and said, “Brother, since you know this much,
that’s enough.” Then they went together to see Guishan.
Guishan asked, “How many students has my brother Huangbo?”
“Seven hundred,” answered Linji.
“Who is their leader?” asked Guishan.
depicting such a situation in fascicle 1
of the Dahui pushuo 大慧普說 (The discourses of Chan Master Dahui Pujue), in
the chapter entitled “Zhengxinsi rushanzhu qing pushuo” 政信寺如山主請普說:
In olden times the monks in Chan temples used to go for outdoor work every
day, very much unlike present-day monks
who never so much as dip their ten ﬁngers
in water and are unconcerned about the
various aﬀairs of the temple, who always
wear ﬁne clothes and eagerly accept oﬀerings from the people, and who are utterly
lacking in shame. There were none such
as these in the old days, when each monk
carried a sickle and a spade. That was the
way they lived then, exactly as the saying
goes, “A day of no working—a day of no
eating.” And if, during their outdoor work,
a monk attained enlightenment, the other
monks would stop work on the spot.

viii
Since you know this much, that’s
enough translates 知是般事便休 , traditionally read in Japanese as koretsura no
ji o shiraba, sunawachi kyū seyo, meaning,
“If you know this, then take a rest.” But 休
here does not have its literal meaning of
“to rest,” but implies instead that “we may
let the matter rest,” i.e., that “it is all right,”
“nothing more needs to be done,” etc.
Leader translates 導首 , the equivalent
of 長老 and usually indicating the leader
of the monastery, that is, the Chan master.
For example, in the section on Jiashan
Shanhui in zj 7, it says:
The master asked a monk, “Where did you
come from?” “From Xinfeng 新豐 ,” the
monk replied. “And who is the leader 導
首 of the group there?” the master asked.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 325

師云、適來已達書了也。師卻問潙山、和尚此間多少衆。潙山
云、一千五百衆。師云、太多生。潙山云、黃檗師兄亦不少。
師辭潙山。仰山送出云、汝向後北去、有箇住處。師云、豈有
與麼事。仰山云、但去、已後有一人佐輔老兄在。此人祇是有
頭無尾、有始無終。師後到鎮州、普化已在彼中。師出世、普
化佐賛於師。師住未久、普化全身脫去。

“He has just delivered a letter to you,” replied Linji. Then Linji, in his
turn, asked Guishan, “Venerable Priest, how many students do you have
here?”
“Fifteen hundred,” answered Guishan.
“That’s a lot!” said Linji.
“My brother Huangbo also has no small number,” said Guishan.
Linji took his leave of Guishan. As Yangshan was seeing him oﬀ, he said
“Later on you’ll go to the north and there’ll be a place for you to stay.”
“How can that be?” said Linji.
“Just go,” replied Yangshan. “Afterwards there’ll be a man to help you, my
venerable brother. He’ll have a head but no tail, a beginning but no end.”
Later Linji arrived in Zhenzhou; Puhua was already there. When Linji
became head of a temple, Puhua was of help to him. But the master had not
been there very long when Puhua just vanished, body and all.
The monk replied, “The first part of his
name is Liang 良 [good] and the second
part Jie 价 [good] [referring to the master
Dongshan Liangjie].

When Linji became head of a temple
translates 師出世 , in which 出世 literally
means “to go out into the world.” The
word is originally seen in the “Fangbian”
方便 (Skillful means) chapter of the Lotus
Sutra, where the buddhas are described
as “going out and appearing in the world”
in order to save all living beings. In Chan

the term means to assume the priesthood
of a temple and devote one’s efforts to
preaching the dharma. A representative
example of this usage is found in the section on Jingshan Hongyan 徑山鴻諲 in zj
19, where it says:
When the master ﬁrst came out into the
world 出世 he did not know all the skillful
means for teaching and could not seem to
acquire a calm and moderate approach.
Therefore he did not preach the dharma.
After two years had gone by, however, he
suddenly had a change of heart.

326 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

ix
師因半夏上黃檗、見和尚看經。師云、我將謂是箇人、元來是
揞黑豆老和尚。

Linji came up to Mount Huangbo in the middle of the summer session.
Seeing Huangbo reading a sutra, he said, “I always used to think you were
a man. Now I see you’re just a black-bean-eating old priest!”

ix
Linji came up to Mount Huangbo….
This section, called “Linji poxia yinyuan”
臨濟破夏因緣 (How Linji violated the rules
of the summer session), has traditionally
been regarded as one of the most important koans in the text, and the incident it
relates as central to the formation of the
Linji school.
Summer session translates 夏 (lit.,
“summer”), also known as 安 居 (Skr.,
varṣa). This was originally a retreat that
took place during the three months of the
Indian rainy season in the summer. One
theory hypothesizes that it lasted from the
sixteenth day of the fourth lunar month
until the ﬁfteenth day of the seventh lunar
month; another that it lasted from the sixteenth day of the fifth month until the
ﬁfteenth day of the eighth month. During
this period monks gathered to practice
meditation, and it was forbidden for anyone to arrive or leave while the period was
in session. The violation of these regulations was called 破夏 (lit., “breaking the
[summer] retreat”).
I always used to think… old priest.
These phrases express the speaker’s feeling
of surprise. For example, in the description of Huangbo’s initial encounter with
Baizhang, described in zj 16, we read:
[Huangbo] went to Baizhang and asked,
“How do you, Heshang, teach your students about the matter the patriarchs have
handed down to us?” Baizhang was silent
for a long while. Then Huangbo said, “You

cannot cut oﬀ your followers.” Baizhang
responded, “I always used to think that
you were just a man,” and, rising to his
feet, he went to his room. As he was about
to shut the door, the master [Huangbo]
said, “What I came to see you about is
only to be given this certiﬁcate 印信.” Baizhang turned around and said, “If so, you
shouldn’t from now on fall short of my
expectations.”

The character 揞, which means “to hide, to
suppress,” is diﬃcult to explain. In the version of this anecdote found in the jc the
text reads 唵, which means to eat with the
hand, and this is almost certainly correct.
The “black beans” 黑豆 are a metaphor for
the printed or written characters in the
sutras.
A somewhat similar story is found in
the section on Yangshan in the jc:
When the master [Yangshan] was living
at Guanyin Temple, he posted a notice
saying that he could not give instruction at those times when he was reading
the sutras. Later a monk came to pay his
respects, and, seeing that the master was
engaged in reading a sutra, stood by his
side and waited for him to ﬁnish. When
the master had ﬁnished he rolled up the
text, then asked, “Do you understand?”
“I have not read the sutra. How could I
understand?” the monk replied. “Later you
certainly will,” said the master.
The monk went to visit Yantou 巖頭
(828–887), who asked, “Where did you
come from?” “I have come from Guanyin
Temple in Jiangxi,” said the monk. “And
what sort of instruction did the priest

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 327

住數日、乃辭去。黃檗云、汝破夏來、不終夏去。師云、某甲
暫來禮拜和尚。黃檗遂打、趁令去。師行數里、疑此事、卻回
終夏。師一日、辭黃檗。檗問、什麼處去。師云、不是河南、
便歸河北。黃檗便打。師約住與一掌。黃檗大笑、乃喚侍者、
將百丈先師禪板机案來。師云、侍者、將火來。黃檗云、雖然
如是、汝但將去。已後坐卻天下人舌頭去在。

Linji stayed a few days and then tried to take his leave. Huangbo said,
“You came in violation of the rules of the summer session, and now you’re
leaving before it’s over.”
“I came for a little while to pay my respects to you, Venerable Priest,”
said Linji.
Huangbo hit him and chased him out. After he had gone a few li, Linji,
thinking the matter over, returned to the temple and ﬁnished the summer
session.
One day he took his leave of Huangbo. Huangbo asked, “Where are you
going?”
“If I don’t go to Henan, I’ll return to Hebei,” replied Linji.
Huangbo hit at him. Linji seized Huangbo and gave him a slap. Laughing heartily, Huangbo called to his attendant, “Bring me the backrest and
armrest that belonged to my late teacher Baizhang.”
“Attendant, bring me some ﬁre!” cried Linji.
“Be that as it may, just take them with you. In the future you’ll cut oﬀ the
tongues of every man on earth,” said Huangbo.
there have to give?” asked Yantou, whereupon the monk told him of the earlier
incident. Yantou said, “That old teacher!
I used to think that he was completely
buried in old paper, but now I see that he
is still alive!” (t 51: 283c)

If I don’t go to Henan, I’ll return to
Hebei. This sentence, 不是江南, 便歸江北,
can also be translated “I’m not going to
Henan, but to Hebei.”
Bring me the backrest…Baizhang.
According to the commentary section of
bl 68, Huaihai gave his backrest 禪版 (see
page 309, above) and cushion to Huangbo
and his staff and whisk to Guishan, but
there are various versions to the story.
Here, by calling for Huaihai’s backrest and

armrest, Huangbo is indicating that he
recognizes Linji as the heir to the teaching
that he himself received from Huaihai.
The term 枕案 , translated as “armrest,”
originally referred to a table, but here it
refers to a kind of chair against which a
meditator rests his back and legs when tired
from long sitting. The term also appears in
the Fahua yishu 法華義疏 (Commentary on
the meaning of the Lotus Sutra) of Jizang 吉
藏 (549–623), and therefore it would be
natural to consider this meditation instrument to have been one of those introduced
originally from India to China (t 34: 524a).
Cut oﬀ the tongues translates 坐卻; the
text in the jc reads 坐斷. For a discussion
of these terms see page 167, above.

328 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
後潙山問仰山、臨濟莫辜負他黃檗也無。仰山云、不然。潙山
云、子又作麼生。仰山云、知恩方解報恩。潙山云、從上古
人、還有相似底也無。仰山云、有。祇是年代深遠、不欲擧似
和尚。潙山云、雖然如是、吾亦要知。子但擧看。仰山云、祇
如楞嚴會上、阿難讚佛云、將此深心奉塵剎、是則名爲報佛
恩。豈不是報恩之事。潙山云、如是如是。見與師齊、減師半
德。見過於師、方堪傳授。

Later, Guishan asked Yangshan, “Didn’t Linji abuse Huangbo’s trust?”
“Not at all!” said Yangshan.
“Well then, what do you think?”
“Only one who recognizes beneﬁcence can requite it,” said Yangshan.
“From ancient times to the present, has there been anyone like him?” asked
Guishan.
“Yes there has, but he lived so long ago I don’t want to tell you about him,
Venerable Priest,” replied Yangshan.
“Be that as it may, I’d like to know. Come on, try and tell me,” said Guishan.
Yangshan said, “At the Śūraṅgama assembly, Ānanda, in praising the
Buddha, said, ‘With my whole heart I shall serve all beings throughout the
myriad worlds. This is called “requiting the Buddha’s beneﬁcence”.’
Isn’t this [also] an example of requiting beneﬁcence?”
“Just so, just so!” replied Guishan. “One whose insight is the same as his
teacher’s lacks half of his teacher’s power. Only one whose insight surpasses
his teacher’s is worthy to be his heir.”
Only one who recognizes beneﬁcence
can requite it. In the Taigong jiajiao 太公
家教, a book of popular proverbs written
by an unknown author during the middle
Tang period and thereafter widely read
into the Ming era, it is written, “One who
recognizes and requites beneﬁcence is a
true gentleman; one who fails to requite
beneﬁcence is not a human being.”
Śūraṅgama assembly refers to the Śūraṅgama Sutra, from which Ānanda’s praise
for the Buddha’s teaching is quoted. A
Tantric work, the sutra is said to have
been translated in 705 by an Indian monk
named Pāramiti, though there are other
accounts of its origin. It was an inﬂuential
work in the formation of Chan doctrine,

and was very popular from Tang times
onward as a topic for lectures. The verses
would therefore have been well known to
Chan monks of the time.
Ānanda, after hearing the Buddha’s
preaching, thanks him on behalf of the
entire assembly:
You are the mysteriously profound
Dhāraṇī / The immovable Honored
One, the King of Śūraṅgama;
Ones like you are seldom found in the
world.
You have eliminated the myriad false
thoughts / I accumulated over millions
of kalpas,
So I could acquire a dharma body /
Before asaṃkhyeya kalpas had gone by.
I now wish to attain the state of buddha-

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 329

x
師到達磨塔頭。塔主云、長老、先禮佛、先禮祖。師云、佛祖
倶不禮。塔主云、佛祖與長老是什麼寃家。師便拂袖而出。

Linji arrived at Bodhidharma’s memorial tower. The master of the tower
said to him, “Venerable sir, will you pay homage ﬁrst to the Buddha or to
Bodhidharma?”
“I don’t pay homage to either the Buddha or to Bodhidharma,” said Linji.
“Venerable sir, why are the Buddha and Bodhidharma your enemies?”
asked the master of the tower.
Linji swung his sleeves and left.
hood and become a Treasure King / To
save beings [as numerous as] the sands
of the Ganges.
With all my heart I will serve all beings
throughout the myriad worlds / This
is called requiting the Buddha’s beneﬁcence. (t 19: 119b)

Only one whose insight… his heir. The
same remark is attributed to Baizhang,
who made it in a conversation with his
student Huangbo:
One day when Huangbo went to see the
master [Baizhang] and was taking his
leave, he said, “I would like to visit Master
Mazu to pay my respects.” Baizhang said,
“Mazu has already passed away.” “But I
wonder,” asked Huangbo, “what kind of
teaching he gave to his students.” Baizhang… then said, “The buddhadharma is
no triﬂing matter. When I was with Master
Mazu he once gave a great shout that left
me deaf for three days.” Upon hearing this
Huangbo let out a gasp. Baizhang asked,
“Don’t you intend to carry on Mazu’s
teaching?” “No, Reverend, I do not. Today
I heard you speak of Mazu and could perceive his marvelous functioning. Yet I have
never known Mazu’s true being. If I were
to succeed to his dharma, I would surely
forfeit my descendants,” replied Huangbo.
“Just so! Just so!” replied the master. “One
whose insight is the same as his teacher’s
lacks half his teacher’s power. Only one

whose insight surpasses his teacher’s is
worthy to be his heir. You certainly seem
to possess insight surpassing that of your
teacher.” (gy 1; x 68: 5a)

x
Memorial tower translates 塔頭, a small
hall or tower built by a teacher’s disciples
on the site of his grave. Bodhidharma’s
memorial tower was at Wuban 吳坂 on
Mount Xiong’er 熊耳 (“Bear’s Ear Mountain”) in Henan, where the master was said
to have been buried. bz 8 reports:
Then Bodhidharma said to Huike, “I shall
clarify what the buddha-nature is, using
the four volumes of the Laṇkāvatara
sutra, and I want you to know this: since
coming to China I have been served poison in my food six times, but each time I
successfully removed it. Now Putiliuzhi
Sanzang 菩提流支三藏 [Bodhiruci] and
Guangtong Fashi 光統法師 have mixed
poison in my food again, but I shall not
remove it this time. Why not? Because I
now have an heir to whom I can transmit
my dharma.”
Bodhi dharma entered nirvana after
this, that is, in the ninteenth year of Dahe
大和 , in the reign of Emperor Xiaoming
孝明 , the eighth sovereign of the Latter
Wei dynasty, and was buried at Wuban on
Xiongershan….
The Tang-dynasty emperor Daizong 代

330 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xi
師行腳時、到龍光。光上堂。師出問云、不展鋒鋩、如何得勝。
光據坐。師云、大善知識、豈無方便。光瞪目云、嗄。師以手指
云、這老漢、今日敗闕也。

Linji, while on a pilgrimage, arrived at the place of Longguang. Longguang had already ascended the high seat [to give a discourse] when Linji
advanced and asked, “Without unsheathing the point of a weapon, how can
one win a battle?”
Longguang straightened up in his seat.
“Has the venerable teacher no expedient [means]?” asked Linji.
Staring ﬁxedly at Linji, Longguang exhaled loudly.
Linji pointed his ﬁnger at Longguang and said, “Today you lose, old man.”

xii
到三峯。平和尚問曰、什麼處來。師云、黃檗來。平云、黃檗
有何言句。師云、金牛昨夜遭塗炭、直至如今不見蹤。

Linji arrived at Sanfeng. Venerable Ping asked him, “Where did you
come from?”
“I came from Huangbo,” replied Linji.
“What does Huangbo have to say?” asked Ping.
Linji said:
The golden ox met with disaster last night,
And no one has seen a trace of it since.
宗 (727–779) gave him the posthumous
name Chan Master Yuanjue 圓覺禪師 and
named his memorial tower the Kongguan
Zhi Ta 空觀之塔.

xi
Longguang 龍 光 (n.d.). Nothing is
known of this particular Longguang.
Straightened up in his seat translates
the expression 據坐, which literally means
“to lean on the chair” or “to sit on the
chair.” From its context in Chan literature,
however, it appears to have the meaning
given in the translation. See, for example,
the following passage in the section on
Wuxie Lingmo 五洩靈默 (747–818) in the

jc, which describes Lingmo’s ﬁrst visit to
Shitou:
Still in his traveling clothes, [Lingmo]
went straight to Shitou’s quarters and, seeing Shitou seated there, said, “If you can
enlighten me in a single word, I will stay.
If not, I will leave!” Shitou straightened up
in his seat 據坐. The master [Lingmo] left.
(t 51: 254b)

xii
Linji arrived at Sanfeng. Ven. Ping….
Neither the place Sanfeng 三峯 nor the
person Ven. Ping 平和尚 have been identiﬁed. Sanfeng, meaning “three peaks,” is a
common place name in China.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 331

平云、金風吹玉管、那箇是知音。師云、直透萬重關、不住淸
霄內。平云、子這一問太高生。師云、龍生金鳳子、衝破碧琉
璃。平云、且坐喫茶。又問、近離甚處。師云、龍光。平云、
龍光近日如何。師便出去。

Ping said:
The autumn wind blows a ﬂute of jade;
Who is he who knows the tune?
Linji said:
He goes right through the manifold barrier,
And stays not even within the clear sky.
“Your question is much too lofty,” said Ping.
Linji said:
The dragon’s given birth to a golden phoenix
Who breaks through the azure dome of heaven.
“Do sit down and have some tea,” said Ping. Then he asked, “Where have
you been recently?”
“At Longguang,” said Linji.
“How is Longguang these days?” asked Ping.
At that Linji went oﬀ.
The golden ox met with disaster
translates 塗炭, lit., “mud and ashes”; the
implication here is that the golden ox was
swallowed up in mud or melted down by
intense heat. A somewhat similar expression is found in the section on Nanquan in
zj 16. The section on Longshan 龍山 in the
jc has, “Two clay oxen were ﬁghting and
walked into the sea; since then no one has
had any news of them” (t 51: 263a).
Much too lofty can be interpreted as a
compliment of Linji’s lofty understanding,
but it seems more likely that it is intended
sarcastically. See the section on Qingyuan
Xingsi 靑原行思 (660?–740) in the jc:
When Xiqian arrived [at Nanyue Huairang’s place] he asked, “If one does not
admire the sages [outside] nor prize
his own holy spirit within, what then?”
Huairang replied, “Your question is too
lofty. Why don’t you ask at a lower level?”

Xiqian then said, “I would rather transmigrate forever than ask the sages for the
way of self-emancipation.” Huairang had
no reply. (t 51: 240b)

The dragon’s given birth to a golden
phoenix. The dragon and the phoenix
symbolize Huangbo and Linji. It was customary to speak of eminent teachers and
disciples in such terms, as in the Chan
saying, “A dragon gives birth to a dragon
child; a phoenix gives birth to a phoenix,”
meaning that a good teacher naturally
produces good students (see, for example,
the zj 4 section on Danxia Tianran). But
Linji gives the saying an added twist by
making a dragon give birth to a phoenix.
The azure dome of heaven translates
碧瑠璃 , meaning, lit., “blue lapis lazuli.”

The expression can be interpreted in two
ways. It is usually used as an epithet for
the clear blue color of either the ocean or

332 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xiii
到大慈。慈在方丈內坐。師問、端居丈室時如何。慈云、寒松
一色千年別、野老拈花萬國春。師云、今古永超圓智體、三山
鎖斷萬重關。慈便喝。師亦喝。慈云、作麼。師拂袖便出。

Linji arrived at the place of Daci. Daci was sitting in his quarters. Linji
asked, “How is it with you when you’re sitting erect in your quarters?” Daci
replied:
The green of the winter pines endures a thousand years.
An aged rustic picks a ﬂower and in myriad lands it’s spring.
Linji answered:
Forever transcending past and present is the body of perfect wisdom.
Blocking the way to the Three Mountains there is a manifold barrier.
Daci gave a shout. Linji also shouted.
“Well?” said Daci. Linji swung his sleeves and left.
the sky, and has been so translated here,
but it can also indicate a phoenix egg, in
which case the image would be that of a
young phoenix pecking its way out of an
azure-colored shell.
The term 瑠璃, however, often means a
circle, which brings to mind the roundness of sky and sea. There is a verse by
Mazu that says, “The golden chick pecks
through the lapis lazuli shell; the jade
hare pushes open the blue sea gate.” If the
golden fowl and the jade hare are taken
to be symbolic of the sun and the moon,
respectively, the “lapis lazuli shell” is, logically, just a metaphor for the sky.

xiii
Daci. This refers to the master Daci
Huanzhong 大慈寰中 (780–862). Huanzhong was a native of Puzhou 蒲州 ; his
family name was Lu 廬 . Huanzhong’s
mother died when he was still a child;
after the mourning period was finished
he became a monk at the temple Tongzisi 童子寺 in Bingzhou 并州 , and later

received the precepts at Chongyue 崇嶽.
After studying the vinaya he went to study
under Baizhang Huaihai, whose dharma
heir he became. He later lived on Mount
Daci 大慈 in Zhejiang Province. During the suppression of Buddhism under
Emperor Wuzong 武宗 (r. 814–846) in
844 he returned to lay life, but shaved
his head once again when Xuanzong 宣
宗 (810–859) ascended the throne and
ended the persecution. He was accorded
the posthumous title Great Teacher Xingkong 性空大師.
Three Mountains. The name “Three
Mountains” (Sanshan 三 山 ) is usually
taken to refer to the three mythical mountains known as Penglai 蓬來 , Fangzhang
方 丈 , and Yingzhou 瀛 州 , which were
believed to be situated in the middle of
the sea to the east of China, and to be the
home of Taoist immortals.
Dōchū, however, interprets the name
to refer to an actual range of mountains
located southwest of Jinling 金陵 . This

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 333

xiv
到襄州華嚴。嚴倚拄杖、作睡勢。師云、老和尚瞌睡作麼。嚴
云、作家禪客、宛爾不同。師云、侍者、點茶來、與和尚喫。
嚴乃喚維那、第三位安排這上座。

Linji arrived at the temple of Huayan in Xiangzhou. Huayan was leaning on his staﬀ, giving the appearance of being asleep. Linji said, “Venerable
Priest, what’s the good of dozing?”
“A true Chan adept is clearly diﬀerent!” said Huayan.
“Attendant, make some tea and serve it to the Venerable Priest to drink,”
said Linji. Huayan called the duty-monk and said, “Place this honorable
monk in the third seat.”
range overlooks the Yangzi and is marked
by a row of three peaks. It is thus a famous
landmark in the neighborhood of Daci,
where Linji was at the time. Dōchū quotes
the following line from a poem by Li Bo
entitled “Deng Jinling Fenghuangtai” 登金
陵鳳凰臺 (Ascending the Phoenix Terrace
at Jinling): “The Three Mountains are half
sunk from sight beyond the blue sky.”

xiv
The temple of Huayan in Xiangzhou
translates 襄州華嚴. Huayan yuan 華嚴院
was the name of a temple—probably the
Huayan yuan 華嚴院 on Mount Lumen
鹿門 mentioned in the jc (t 51: 364b)—
located in the area of Xiangyangxian 襄陽
縣 in present-day Hebei Province. The jc
identiﬁes a certain Chan Master Chuzhen
處眞禪師 as the resident priest at Huayan
yuan, but as this ﬁgure lived much later
than Linji he could not have been there at
the time of Linji’s visit. Some commentators identify the Huayan in this anecdote
as Huayan Zhizang 華嚴智藏, a disciple of
Mazu, but on the basis of what is known
of Zhizang from jc 8 and sg 11, he would
seem to have had no connection with
Xiangzhou.
Make some tea. In China tea has been
drunk from very early times to refresh

the spirit and ward oﬀ drowsiness. Legend
traces its use among Chan monks back to
Bodhidharma, but many other masters
have promoted its use to ward of drowsiness and maintain health. In the section
on Wuzhu 無住 (714–774) in the Dunhuang versions of the Lidai fabao ji 歷代法
寶記 (Chronicles of the dharma treasure)
there is a passage that reads:
That day, when the priest [Wuzhu] was
drinking tea, there arrived about thirty
military oﬃcers and other oﬃcials from
the government, who saluted the priest
and sat down. One of them said to Wuzhu
that he seemed quite fond of tea. “Yes, I
am,” replied Wuzhu, who then recited a
verse:
Deep in the valleys grows this heavenly
plant/A suitable guide to the Way.
Woodcutters pick its leaves / And its
delicious ﬂavor ﬁlls their bowls;
It stills and clears the delusions of
thought / The bright mind illuminates
the highest state
Without exhausting one’s energy / The
dharma gate opens before one’s eyes.
(t 51: 193b)

My ō a n Yō s a i ( E i s a i ) 明 庵 榮 西
(1141–1218), the Japanese priest honored as
the ﬁrst person to introduce the tradition
of Linji Chan (J., Rinzai Zen) to Japan,

334 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xv
到翠峯。峯問、甚處來。師云、黃檗來。峯云、黃檗有何言
句、指示於人。師云、黃檗無言句。峯云、爲什麼無。師云、
設有、亦無擧處。峯云、但擧看。師云、一箭過西天。

When Linji reached Cuifeng’s place, Cuifeng asked, “Where did you
come from?”
“I came from Huangbo,” said Linji.
“What words does Huangbo use to instruct people?” asked Cuifeng.
“Huangbo has no words,” said Linji.
“Why not?” asked Cuifeng.
“Even if he had any, I wouldn’t know how to state them,” answered Linji.
“Come on, try and tell me,” said Cuifeng.
“The arrow has ﬂown oﬀ to the Western Heaven,” said Linji.

xvi
到象田。師問、不凡不聖、請師速道。田云、老僧祇與麼。師
便喝云、許多禿子、在這裏覓什麼椀。

Linji visited Xiangtian and said to him,“[It’s] neither secular nor sacred—
please, master, speak!”
“I’m just this way,” Xiangtian replied.
Linji shouted and said, “What kind of vittles are all these baldpates looking for here!”

xvii
到明化。化問、來來去去作什麼。師云、祇徒踏破草鞋。化
云、畢竟作麼生。師云、老漢話頭也不識。

Linji arrived at Minghua’s place. Minghua asked, “What’s the good of all
this coming and going!”
“I’m just trying to wear out my straw sandals,” said Linji.
“What for, then?” asked Minghua.
“Old man, you don’t even know the subject of the conversation!” replied
Linji.
promoted the use of tea upon returning
to Japan after completing his training in
China. One of his remaining writings
is the treatise Kissa yōjōki 喫茶養生記
(Drinking tea to promote life).

The third seat is traditionally taken to
be the seat of the head of the “lower hall,”
that is, the back section of the meditation
hall (see comment on page 133, above).
The first seat was occupied by the head

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 335
of the upper hall, while the second was
allocated to his assistant, the third to the
head of the lower hall, and the fourth to
his assistant.
The head of the lower hall played an
important part in assisting the Chan master in the instruction of the other monks,
and it was therefore a position of great
honor.

xv
Cuifeng 翠 峯 . Nothing is known of
Cuifeng.
The arrow has flown off to the Western Heaven. The expression indicates
being long gone and far away, without
so much as a trace remaining. A similar
statement, made by Yunmen, is found in
the yk: “An arrow has ﬂown to Silla, and
in the land of Great Han everyone talks’”
(t 47: 547c).

xvi
Xiangtian 象 田 and Minghua 明 化 .
Nothing is known of either Xiangtian or
Minghua.

xvii
I’m just trying to wear out my straw
sandals translates the sentence 祇徒踏破
草鞋. In Chinese colloquial language the
words represented by the characters 祇
and 徒 are adverbial in function and convey a more or less similar meaning, with
祇 signifying “merely” or “at most” and
徒 signifying “vainly” or “uselessly.” Both

characters can probably be dispensed with
in the written language.
Here the two characters are used
together in what is for all appearances a
compound word. However, since another
example of such a usage has never been
found, it is possible that it may not be a
compound at all. For purposes of the present translation we have assumed that 徒 is
of the same meaning as its homophone 圖
(“desire,” “try”); these two characters are
often used interchangeably, as if synonymously, in the Dunhuang manuscripts.
The Zuting shiyuan quotes a phrase, 徒什
麼 , from the yk and maintains that “the
character 徒 must be written 圖 , which
means ‘to desire’” (x 64: 320b). Another
possibility is that the characters 徒 and 待
(“want”) have been confused because of
their close resemblance (many instances
of this can be found in the Dunhuang
manuscripts).
You don’t even know the subject of
the conversation. A similar statement is
found in the bl, case 49:
“When the golden ﬁsh has slipped through
the net, what does he do for food?” asked
Sansheng. Xuefeng replied, “I’ll tell you
after you’ve gotten out of the net.” Sansheng responded, “You’re a teacher of ﬁfteen hundred students, and you don’t even
know what I’m talking about!” Xuefeng
answered, “I have all I can do tending to
temple aﬀairs.”

336 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xviii
往鳳林。路逢一婆。婆問、甚處去。師云、鳳林去。婆云、恰
值鳳林不在。師云、甚處去。婆便行。師乃喚婆。婆回頭。師
便打。

When Linji was going to Fenglin’s place, he met an old woman on the
road. “Where are you going?” she asked.
“I’m going to Fenglin’s place,” replied Linji.
“Fenglin happens to be away just now,” said the old woman.
“Where did he go?” asked Linji.
At that the old woman walked away.
Linji called to her. The old woman turned her head. Linji hit her.

xviii
Fenglin 鳳林. Nothing is known of this
ﬁgure.
Linji hit her 師 便 打 . This sentence
appears as “Linji then walked away” 師便
行 in the ll text found in the sy, in tg 11
(x 78: 474c); in zh 9 (x 79: 82c); and in gy
5 (x 68: 32c). In view of the circumstances
this would seem to make better sense,
since there was presumably some distance
between Linji and the old woman when he
called to her and she turned her head, and
it is hard to imagine him running up and
hitting her.
The following passage appears in the
Xuefeng Huikong Chanshi yulu 雪峯慧空禪
師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master
Xuefeng Huikong; 1183):
At the beginning of the Zhenghe 政和
era [1111–1117] I [Huikong] received from
Master Xin of Shigong [Shigong Xin 石鞏
新] a copy of Mazu’s Sijia lu. At the back
there was an account of the interview
between Linji and the old woman that
read, “The old woman asked Linji, ‘Where
are you going?’ ‘I am going to Fenglin,’
replied Linji. ‘Fenglin is away just now,’
said the old woman. ‘Where has he gone?’
Linji asked. The old woman walked away.

Linji called to her. The old woman turned
her head. Linji then walked away 濟便行.”
(x 69: 253b)

Huikong reports that he was delighted
with this version of the story, but adds
that in the new edition of the Sijia lu
published in his time, the ﬁnal lines read,
“The old woman turned her head. Linji
said, ‘Who says he is away?’ 誰道不在 .”
Huikong considers this change to greatly
weaken the eﬀectiveness of the anecdote,
and suggests that it must have been a later
addition by someone who did not understand the point of the original version (x
69: 253b).
The version with the comment “Who
says he is away?” is found in the present
text of the Zongmen tongyao ji as recorded
in the Dainihon kōtei zōkyō 大日本校訂
藏經 (Kyoto edition of the revised Buddhist canon) (31:1:79d), and is cited in
a note in zh 9 (x 79: 82c), wh 11 (x 80:
222c), the Zhiyue lu 指月錄 (Pointing at
the moon record; x 83: 550c), and several
other collections. It is not possible now
to determine which version of the story
is the earliest, but it should be noted that
diﬀerent accounts have been in existence
since Song times.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 337

xix
到鳳林。林問、有事相借問、得麼。師云、何得剜肉作瘡。林
云、海月澄無影、遊魚獨自迷。師云、海月既無影、遊魚何得
迷。鳳林云、觀風知浪起、翫水野帆飄。師云、孤輪獨照江山
靜、自笑一聲天地驚。林云、任將三寸輝天地、一句臨機試道
看。

Linji arrived at Fenglin. Fenglin said, “There is something I wish to ask
you. May I?”
“Why gouge out [good] ﬂesh and make a wound?” replied Linji.
Fenglin said:
The moon shines on the sea, there are no shadows
Yet the gamboling ﬁsh get lost.
Linji replied:
Since shadowless is the moon over the sea,
How can the gamboling ﬁsh get lost!
Fenglin said:
Watching the wind I know the arising of waves;
[And see boats] asport on the water with ﬂuttering sails.
Linji replied:
The solitary moon alone does shine—rivers and mountains are
still;
One laugh from me startles both heaven and earth.
Fenglin said:
Your tongue may illumine heaven and earth, but
Try speaking a word apropos of the moment.

xix
Why gouge out [good] ﬂesh and make
a wound translates 何得剜肉作瘡 , which
can also be rendered, “Why have you
gouged out a piece of your good healthy
ﬂesh to make a wound?” The emphasis on
the intentional injuring of a healthy body
implies the despoiling of one’s own original nature. In the yk there is a passage in
which Yunmen says, “One who says that
the dharma body eats rice is gouging out
a piece of ﬂesh to make a wound” (t 47:
557b).

One laugh from me startles both
heaven and earth. This line is most likely
based on the following passage in the
biography of Yaoshan Weiyan, found in zj
4; sg 17; and in the jc:
The master [Weiyan] one night ascended
Mount Yao and was walking about on top.
When the clouds suddenly parted and the
moon appeared he gave a great laugh, the
sound of which carried over ninety li to
the east of Liyang 澧陽, so that people from
the area all supposed that it came from a
neighboring house. The next morning
they began to question each other and

338 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
師云、路逢劍客須呈劍、不是詩人莫獻詩。鳳林便休。師乃有
頌、大道絶同、任向西東、石火莫及、電光罔通。潙山問仰
山、石火莫及、電光罔通。從上諸聖、將什麼爲人。仰山云、
和尚意作麼生。潙山云、但有言說、都無寔義。仰山云、不
然。潙山云、子又作麼生。仰山云、官不容針、私通車馬。

Linji replied:
If on the road you meet a swordsman, oﬀer him your sword;
To a man who’s not a poet, don’t present a poem.
Fenglin desisted. Linji then recited this verse:
The Great Way deﬁes comparison—one goes east or west at will.
No spark from ﬂint can go so fast, nor lightning ﬂash pass by.
Guishan asked Yangshan, “If no spark from ﬂint can go so fast, nor lightning ﬂash pass by, how did the old-time sages save men?”
“What do you think, Venerable Priest?” asked Yangshan.
Guishan said, “No words have actual signiﬁcance.”
“Not so,” disagreed Yangshan.
“Then what do you think?” asked Guishan.
“Oﬃcially, a needle is not permitted to enter; privately, carriages can get
through.”
carried their inquiry as far as Yueshan,
where Weiyan’s disciples told them, “Last
night the priest gave a great laugh on top
of the mountain.” (t 51: 312b)

To a man who’s not a poet, don’t present a poem. This was a popular saying of
the time, and is quoted in numerous works.
For example, see the section on Muzhou 睦
州 in the jc:
A monk asked, “What is the true intention of the Sixth Patriarch?” The master
[Muzhou] replied, “I like anger; I don’t
care for jollity.” The monk asked, “Why is
that?” The master replied, “If you meet a
swordsman on the road, offer him your
sword; if a man is not a poet, don’t discuss
poetry with him.” (t 51: 291b)

No words have actual signiﬁcance. This
is a quotation from the Śūraṅgama Sutra.
In a discussion of the tathāgatagarbha, the
following passage appears several times:

Not understanding that whatever manifests does so according to karma, worldly
people mistakenly assign its origin to
causes, conditions, or spontaneity. This
[misunderstanding] arises from the discrimination and reasoning of the conscious mind, and is nothing but words and
explanations without actual signiﬁcance.
(t 19: 117c)

Oﬃcially, a needle… get through. This
appears to have been a popular saying of the
time. In the xg mention is made of a priest
named Daoxing 道興 , who put up guests
at his temple although this was strictly
forbidden by the government at the time.
Asked how he could break the law in this
fashion, he replied with the saying quoted
here, indicating that he had ways of getting
around the official ruling (t 50: 623b). A
popular fable found among the Dunhuang
manuscripts mentions a sparrow who was
imprisoned for usurping a swallow’s home,

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 339

xx
到金牛。牛見師來、橫按拄杖、當門踞坐。師以手敲拄杖三
下、卻歸堂中第一位坐。牛下來見、乃問、夫賓主相見、各具
威儀。上座從何而來、太無禮生。師云、老和尚道什麼。牛擬
開口。師便打。牛作倒勢。師又打。牛云、今日不著便。潙山
問仰山、此二尊宿、還有勝負也無。仰山云、勝即總勝、負即
總負。

Linji arrived at Jinniu’s place. Jinniu saw him coming and, holding a
stick crosswise, sat down at the gate. Linji struck the stick three times with
his hand, then entered the [Monks’] Hall and seated himself in the ﬁrst
seat.
Jinniu came in, saw him, and said, “In an interview between host and
guest, each should conform to the prescribed formalities. Where do you
come from, Elder Monk, that you are so rude?”
“What are you talking about, Old Priest?” replied Linji.
Jinniu started to open his mouth, and Linji hit him. Jinniu gave the
appearance of falling down. Linji hit him again. Jinniu said, “I’m not doing
so well today.”
Guishan asked Yangshan, “In the case of these two venerable ones, was
there a winner or a loser?”
“Call it a victory, then both won; call it a loss, then both lost,” replied
Yangshan.
and who attempted to bribe the guard into
freeing him while quoting this same saying
(see the db, 252, “Yanzi fu” 燕子賦 [The fable
of a swallow]).

xx
Jinniu 金牛 is the name of a temple in
Zhenzhou 鎮州. According to the “Zhendingfu Dinglin Tongfa Dashi taming” 眞
定府定林通法大師塔銘 (Memorial tower
inscription for Great Teacher Dinglin
Tongfa), contained in Changshan zhenshi
zhi 常山貞石志 13, the temple was the site
of a memorial tower to a certain Chan
Master Jinniu 金牛禪師, who died in the
Kaiyuan 開元 era (713–741); hence the
temple’s name.

In jc 8 mention is made of a certain
Jinniu Heshang of Zhen, a dharma-heir
of Mazu. It is recorded that he cooked
the monk’s rice himself, and, as he carried
the rice into the hall, he always did a little
dance, clapping his hands, roaring with
laughter, and shouting, “Bodhisat tvas,
come get your rice!” He seems to have
lived a little earlier than Linji, but, since
the Jinniu in the text is addressed as “Old
Priest,” it may refer to the same man.
Call it a victory… both lost. Editor’s
note: The original translation, “The winner indeed won; the loser indeed lost,” has
been changed in accordance with subsequent research in Yanagida 1977 and
Iriya 1989.

340 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i

xxi
師臨遷化時、據坐云、吾滅後、不得滅卻吾正法眼藏。三聖出
云、爭敢滅卻和尚正法眼藏。師云、已後有人問爾、向他道什
麼。三聖便喝。師云、誰知吾正法眼藏、向這瞎驢邊滅卻。言
訖、端然示寂。

When the master was about to pass away, he seated himself and said,
“After I am extinguished, do not let my True Dharma Eye be extinguished.”
Sansheng came forward and said, “How could I let your True Dharma Eye
be extinguished!”
“Later on, when somebody asks you about it, what will you say to him?”
asked the master.
Sansheng gave a shout.
“Who would have thought that my True Dharma Eye would be extinguished upon reaching this blind ass!” said the master. Having spoken these
words, sitting erect, the master revealed his nirvana.

xxi
True Dharma Eye translates 正法眼藏,
which refers to the fundamental principles
of Buddhism handed down generation by
generation from the Buddha to the Chan
masters. The ninth-century text bz has:
Before the Buddha entered nirvana he said
to his disciple Mahakaśyapa, “I possess the
pure Dharma Eye, the Ineﬀable Mind of
Nirvana, the True Form of the Formless
that I now entrust to you. You must transmit it and not allow it to come to an end.”
Mahakaśyapa respectfully acknowledged
his willingness, and accordingly received
the teaching.

Later, in fascicle 3 of the same work,
when the ninth Indian patriarch, Buddhamitra (Futuomituo 伏駄密陀), is similarly described as transmitting the teaching to his heir, he speaks of it as the “Eye
of the True Dharma” 正法眼藏. See also the
note on the “ancestral school,” page 118.
Sansheng. See Introduction, note 36.
There is considerable doubt as to just
when this story of the exchange between

Linji and Sansheng first appeared. The
original jc compiled in 1005, from which
the Song and Yuan editions were printed,
did not contain any such passage. Its earliest appearance outside of the ll itself is in
tg 10, where the account of Linji’s death,
taken from the jc, is combined with the
description of the exchange between Linji
and Sansheng (x 78: 468a).
In the Chanlin sengbao zhuan 禪林僧
寶傳 (Biographies of monks of the Chan
school) we find the following exchange
between Fengxue and Nanyuan:
Nanyuan asked, “Have you heard the story
of Linji’s death?” “Yes,” replied Fengxue.
Nanyuan continued, “Linji said, ‘Who
would have thought that my True Dharma
Eye would be extinguished upon reaching
this blind ass!’ All his life Linji was like
a lion, ready to kill a man the minute he
saw him. Why, when he was about to die,
did he bow and scrape and hang his tail
between his legs like that?”
Fengxue replied, “If the secret transmission had come to an end, it would have
meant the annihilation of all the former
masters.”

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 341

xxii
師諱義玄、曹州南華人也。俗姓邢氏。幼而頴異、長以孝聞。
及落髮受具、居於講肆、精究毘尼、博賾經論。俄而歎曰、此
濟世之醫方也、非敎外別傳之旨。

The master’s name as a monk was Yixuan. He was a native of the prefecture of Nanhua in the province of Cao. His family name was Xing. As a child
he was exceptionally brilliant, and when he became older he was known
for his ﬁlial piety. After shaving his head and receiving the full precepts, he
frequented lecture halls; he mastered the vinaya and made a thorough study
of the sutras and śāstras.
Suddenly [one day] he said with a sigh, “These are prescriptions for helping the world, not the principle of the transmission outside the scriptures.”
Again Nanyuan asked, “Why didn’t
Sansheng reply?” “He was a true disciple,
familiar with the master and permitted to
enter his room, quite diﬀerent from mere
travelers who passed by outside the gate,”
said Fengxue. Nanyuan nodded his head.
(x 79: 496c)

xxii
The master’s name as a monk was
Yixuan. The summary of Linji’s life that
follows is a reproduction of the Memorial Inscription 塔記 attributed to Baoshou Zhao 寶壽沼 . The stele inscription
refers to the Record of Pilgrimages, and
it is therefore obvious that the latter was
already in existence when the inscription
was composed. The stele text is found
also in the gy, at the end of the recorded
sayings of Xinghua Cunjiang 興化存奬 (x
68: 35a), where it is preﬁxed by the words
“Memorial Tower Inscription of Linji Huizhao Chanshi” 臨濟慧照禪師塔記.
“Name as a monk” translates 諱 ,
the name that a monk receives from his
ordaining teacher. The literal meaning of
the term is “tabooed name,” since later,
when the monk has acquired students of
his own, the students avoid using it when
addressing him as a sign of respect.
The Province of Cao 曹州 is a region

in present-day Shandong. According to the
Dushi fangyu jiyao 讀史方輿紀要 (Essentials of historical geography of China)
the region was named Caozhou 曹州 in
the Latter Zhou dynasty (late sixth c.),
renamed Jiyinjun 濟陰郡 during the succeeding Zui dynasty, then renamed several more times during the Tang dynasty.
After the Ganyuan 乾元 era (758–759),
however, it reverted to Caozhou.
Lecture halls translates 講肆, lit., “lecture shops.” These were temples or places
of assembly in the cities where people
gathered to hear talks on the Buddhist
teachings. Monks often traveled about
listening to a variety of lectures.
The transmission outside the scriptures. The concept of a “separate tradition outside the scriptures” is of course
very old in Chan, and is considered one
of its fundamental teachings. The earliest known occurrence of the expression
is in the Xuemai lun 血脈論 (Treatise on
the transmission), attributed to Bodhidharma:
The arisings of the three realms all trace
back to the One Mind. The former buddhas and later buddhas transmitted it
from mind to mind without depending
on written words. (t 48: 373b)

342 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
即更衣游方、首參黃檗、次謁大愚。其機緣語句、載于行錄。
既受黃檗印可、尋抵河北。鎮州城東南隅、臨滹沱河側、小
院住持。其臨濟因地得名。時普化先在彼、佯狂混衆、聖凡莫
測。師至即佐之。師正旺化、普化全身脫去。乃符仰山小釋迦
之懸記也。

Then he changed his robe and traveled on a pilgrimage. First he studied
under Huangbo. Then he visited Dayu. What was said on those occasions
has been set down in the “Record of Pilgrimages.”
After receiving the seal of dharma from Huangbo, the master went
to Hebei and became priest of a small temple on the banks of the Hutuo
River, outside the southeast corner of the capital of Zhenzhou. Because of
its location the temple was called “Linji” (“Overlooking the Ford”). By that
time Puhua was already there. Pretending to be crazy, Puhua mixed with the
people and no one could tell whether he was a sage or a commoner. When
the master arrived there Puhua was of help to him. When the master’s teaching began to ﬂourish, Puhua vanished, body and all. This agreed with the
prediction made by Yangshan, the “Little Śākya.”
Huangbo has a similar remark in the cf:
When the First Patriarch arrived from
India, he pointed directly to the mind, by
which one may see into his real nature and
become a buddha, and did not use words
or explanations. (t 48: 384a)

However, apart from the ll, the earliest
appearance of the exact expression “separate tradition outside the scriptures” 教外
別傳 seems to be a Song-dynasty work, an
introduction to the Lengqie abaduoluobao
jing 楞伽阿跋多羅寶經 (Laṅkāvatāra Sutra)
by Jiang Zhiqi 蔣之奇 (1030–1104). The
present passage may thus be the origin of
this expression.
Seal of dharma 印可. See pages 145 and
195, above.
Yangshan, the “Little Śākya” 仰山小釋
迦 is an expression that originates in the

Indian master replied. “When did you
depart?” asked Yangshan. “This morning,”
answered the Indian. “And what took you
so long?” asked Yangshan. The Indian said,
“I was roaming around the mountains
and idling by the rivers along the way.”
Yangshan replied, “There is no question
about your ability to roam abroad by
means of supernatural powers, but as for
your knowledge of buddhadharma, that
you will have to get from me!” The Indian
said, “I came to this eastern land merely
with the intention of paying my respects
to Mañjuśrī, but quite unexpectedly I
meet a little Śākya!”
He then presented Yangshan with an
Indian book written on palm leaves and,
after making a bow, rose up into the sky
and departed. Because of this Yangshan
was referred to as “the little Śākya.” (t 47:
586a)

biography of Yangshan, where it is written:

The same story appears in zh 8 (x 79: 75c).

An Indian master appeared from the sky
before Yangshan. “Where have you come
from?” asked Yangshan. “From India,” the

Mo Junhe 默君和. For the identity and
story of Mo Junhe, see Introduction, pages
98–99, note 25.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 343

適丁兵革、師即棄去。太尉默君和、於城中捨宅爲寺、亦以臨
濟爲額、迎師居焉。後拂衣南邁、至河府。府主王常侍、延以
師禮。住未幾、即來大名府興化寺、居于東堂。師無疾、忽一
日攝衣據坐、與三聖問答畢、寂然而逝。時唐咸通八年丁亥、
孟陬月十日也。門人以師全身、建塔于大名府西北隅。

It happened that local fighting broke out, and Linji abandoned the
temple. The Grand Marshal, Mo Junhe, donated his house inside the town
walls and made it into a temple. Hanging up a plaque there, inscribed with
the old name “Linji,” he had the master make it his residence.
Later the master tucked up his robes and went south to the prefecture of
He. The governor of the prefecture, Councilor Wang, extended to him the
honors due a master. After staying for a short while, the master went to Xinghua temple in Daming Prefecture, where he lived in the Eastern Hall.
Suddenly one day the master, although not ill, adjusted his robes, sat
erect, and when his exchange with Sansheng was ﬁnished, quietly passed
away. It was on the tenth day of the ﬁrst month in the eighth year of Xiantong of the Tang dynasty.
His disciples built a memorial tower for the master’s body in the northwest corner of the capital of Daming Prefecture.
Hanging up a plaque there, inscribed
with the old name “Linji”. In other words,
although the location of his residence was
no longer the Temple Overlooking the
Ford, the master still used his old name
Linji. Originally the “plaque” 額 was a kind
of license showing that the temple was
authorized by the government; temples
without such authorization were called
“plaque-less temples,” and there were constant eﬀorts during the Tang to eliminate
such establishments. It is possible that
in the present case the authorization for
Linji’s temple was issued not by the central Tang government, but by the regional
oﬃcials who had usurped political power
in that region.

Later, the master… south to the prefecture of He. See Introduction, pages
74–76.
Xinghua temple… Eastern Hall. See
Introduction, pages 76–77.
The tenth day of the ﬁrst month in
the eighth year of Xiantong of the Tang
dynasty. This corresponds to 18 February 867, a date diﬀerent from that given
in other texts. For a consideration of the
most likely date of Linji’s death, see Introduction, page 77.
His disciples built a stupa for the
master’s body translates 門人以師全身, in
which the expression 全身, “whole body,”
signifies that Linji’s body was not cremated but interred.

344 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
勅謚慧照禪師、塔號澄靈。合掌稽首、記師大略。住鎮州保壽
嗣法小師延沼謹書。鎮州臨濟慧照禪師語錄終。住大名府興化
嗣法小師存獎校勘。永享九年八月十五日板在法性寺東經所。

The emperor decreed that the master be given the posthumous title Meditation Master Huizhao [“Illuminating Wisdom”] and his stupa be called
Chengling [“Translucent Spirit”]. Joining my hands with palms together and
bowing low my head, I have recorded in summary the life of the master.
Respectfully inscribed by the humble heir Yanzhao of Baoshou in
Zhenzhou.
Here ends the Recorded Sayings of Chan Master Linji Huizhao of
Zhenzhou.
Collated by the humble heir Cunjiang of Xinghua in Daming
Prefecture.
Posthumous title. The custom of conferring posthumous titles upon eminent
monks began under the Northern Wei
dynasty (ﬁfth and early sixth c.). It then
fell out of use and was not revived until
the Tang, when Empress Wu (685–704)
conferred the posthumous title Chan
Master Datong 大通禪師 upon Shenxiu 神
秀 (606?–706), traditional founder of the
Northern school of Chan.
The custom of giving stupa names 塔
號 appears to have started with Emperor

Xuanzong (r. 713–755). The present passage gives Linji’s stupa name as Chengling
澄靈 (Clear [or Pure] Spirit), while the
zj and other sources on Linji’s life give it
as Chengxu 澄虛 (Clear [or Translucent]
Emptiness).
Yanzhao of Baoshou. Concerning the
identity of this figure, see Introduction,
page 101, note 37.
Xinghua. See Introduction, page 101,
note 38.

t e x t a n d c o m m e n t a r y | 345

preface 鎮州臨濟慧照禪師語録序
延康殿學士金紫光祿大夫眞定府路安撫使兼馬歩軍都總管兼知
成德軍府事馬防、撰。黃檗山頭、曾遭痛棒。大愚肋下、方
解築拳。饒舌老婆、尿床鬼子。這風顛漢、再捋虎鬚。巖谷栽
松、後人標榜。钁頭斸地、幾被活埋。肯箇後生、驀口自摑。
辭焚机案、坐斷舌頭。不是河南、便歸河北。院臨古渡、運濟
往來。把定要津、壁立萬仭。奪人奪境、陶鑄仙陀。三要三
玄、鈐鎚衲子。常在家舍、不離途中。無位眞人、面門出入。
兩堂齊喝、賓主歷然。照用同時、本無前後。菱花對像、虛谷
傳聲。妙應無方、不留朕跡。拂衣南邁、戾止大名。興化師
承、東堂迎侍。銅瓶鐵鉢、掩室杜詞。松老雲閑、曠然自適。
面壁未幾、密付將終。正法誰傳、瞎驢邊滅。圓覺老演、今
爲流通。點撿將來、故無差舛。唯餘一喝、尚要商量。具眼禪
流、冀無賺擧。宣和庚子中秋日謹序。

Preface to the Recorded Sayings of
Chan Master Linji Huizhao of Zhenzhou
Compiled by Ma Fang, Scholar of the Yankang Hall; Gentleman of the Gold
and Purple Rank in attendance at Imperial Banquets; Emissary in Charge
of Keeping Order in Zhending Circuit; concurrently Chief Commandant
of Cavalry and Infantry Forces; concurrently Administrator of Chengde
Military Prefecture.
On top of Mount Huangbo he met the painful stick.
On Dayu’s ribs he could use his ﬁst.
“Garrulous grandmother!” “Bed-wetting little devil!”
“This lunatic, twice pulling the tiger’s whiskers!”
In a rocky gorge he planted pines, a landmark for later
generations.
He dug the ground with his mattock; the others were nearly
buried alive.
Having approved the youngster, Huangbo slapped himself right
on the mouth.
On leaving, Linji wanted to burn the armrest; he’ll cut oﬀ the
tongues [of everyone].
If he didn’t go to Henan, he’d return to Hebei.
His temple overlooked the old ferry landing—he carried travelers
across the stream.

346 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
He guarded the vital ford like an escarpment ten thousand spans
high.
Snatching away the man or the surroundings, he shaped and
fashioned superlative students.
With his Three States and Three Fundamentals, he forged and
tempered black-robed monks.
He’s always at home, yet forever on the way.
The true man without rank went in and out the face.
The monks of the two halls gave equal shouts, but guest and host
were obvious.
Illumination and action are simultaneous, fundamentally without
front or back.
A mirror confronting a form, an empty valley echoing a sound.
Marvelously responding in any direction, he left not a trace
behind.
Tucking up his robe, he journeyed southward, then went to stay
in Daming.
Xinghua took him as his teacher and attended him in the Eastern
Hall.
Still using the copper pitcher and iron bowl, he closed his room
and stopped his words.
As the pines grew old and the clouds idled, he found boundless
contentment within himself.
He had not long sat facing the wall when the secret transmission
neared its end.
To whom was the true dharma transmitted? It was extinguished
upon reaching the blind ass!
Old Yan of Yuanjue has now undertaken to circulate this text.
It has been examined and corrected, therefore it contains no error
or confusion.
There is still one more shout coming; it needs further consideration:
Chan students who have the eye [to see], I entreat you not to
exploit this text.
Preface respectfully composed on the day of the midautumn festival, the year Gengzi of the Xuanhe era [1120].

Chinese Text

鎮州臨濟慧照禪師語錄
住三聖嗣法小師慧然集

Discourses 上堂
i 府主王常侍、與諸官請師升座。師上堂云、山僧今日事不獲已、曲順人
情、方登此座。若約祖宗門下、稱揚大事、直是開口不得、無爾措足處。
山僧此日以常侍堅請、那隱綱宗。還有作家戰將、直下展陣開旗麼。對眾
證據看。僧問、如何是佛法大意。師便喝。僧禮拜。師云、這箇師僧、卻
堪持論。問、師唱誰家曲、宗風嗣阿誰。師云、我在黃檗處、三度發問、
三度被打。僧擬議。師便喝、隨後打云、不可向虛空裏釘橛去也。有座主
問、三乘十二分教、豈不是明佛性。師云、荒草不曾鋤。主云、佛豈賺人
也。師云、佛在什麼處。主無語。師云、對常侍前、擬瞞老僧。速退速
退。妨他別人請問。復云、此日法筵、爲一大事故。更有問話者麼。速致
問來。爾纔開口、早勿交涉也。何以如此。不見釋尊云、法離文字、不屬
因不在緣故。爲爾信不及、所以今日葛藤。恐滯常侍與諸官員、昧他佛
性。不如且退。喝一喝云、少信根人、終無了日。久立珍重。
ii 師、因一日到河府。府主王常侍、請師升座。時麻谷出問、大悲千手眼、
那箇是正眼。師云、大悲千手眼、那箇是正眼、速道速道。麻谷拽師下
座、麻谷卻坐。師近前云、不審。麻谷擬議。師亦拽麻谷下座、師卻坐。
麻谷便出去。師便下座。
iii 上堂。云、赤肉團上有一無位眞人、常從汝等諸人面門出入。未證據者
看看。時有僧出問、如何是無位眞人。師下禪床、把住云、道道。其僧擬
議。師托開云、無位眞人是什麼乾屎橛。便歸方丈。
iv 上堂。有僧出禮拜。師便喝。僧云、老和尚莫探頭好。師云、爾道落在什
麼處。僧便喝。又有僧問、如何是佛法大意。師便喝。僧禮拜。師云、爾
道好喝也無。僧云、草賊大敗。師云、過在什麼處。僧云、再犯不容。師
便喝。是日兩堂首座相見、同時下喝。僧問師、還有賓主也無。師云、賓
主歷然。師云、大衆、要會臨濟賓主句、問取堂中二首座。便下座。
v 上堂。僧問、如何是佛法大意。師豎起拂子。僧便喝。師便打。又僧問、
如何是佛法大意。師亦豎起拂子。僧便喝。師亦喝。僧擬議。師便打。師
乃云、大衆、夫爲法者、不避喪身失命。我二十年、在黃檗先師處、三度
問佛法的的大意、三度蒙他賜杖。如蒿枝拂著相似。如今更思得一頓棒

349

350 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
喫。誰人爲我行得。時有僧出衆云、某甲行得。師拈棒與他。其僧擬接。
師便打。
vi 上堂。僧問、如何是劍刄上事。師云、禍事、禍事。僧擬議。師便打。
問、祇如石室行者、踏碓忘卻移腳、向什麼處去。師云、沒溺深泉。師乃
云、但有來者、不虧欠伊。總識伊來處。若與麼來、恰似失卻。不與麼
來、無繩自縛。一切時中、莫亂斟酌。會與不會、都來是錯。分明與麼
道。一任天下人貶剝。久立珍重。
vii 上堂。云、一人在孤峯頂上、無出身之路。一人在十字街頭、亦無向背。
那箇在前、那箇在後。不作維摩詰、不作傅大士。珍重。
viii 上堂。云、有一人、論劫在途中、不離家舍。有一人、離家舍、不在途
中。那箇合受人天供養。便下座。
ix 上堂。僧問、如何是第一句。師云、三要印開朱點側、未容擬議主賓分。
問、如何是第二句。師云、妙解豈容無著問、漚和爭負截流機。問、如何
是第三句。師云、看取棚頭弄傀儡、抽牽都來裏有人。師又云、一句語須
具三玄門、一玄門須具三要、有權有用。汝等諸人、作麼生會。下座。
x 師晩參示衆云、有時奪人不奪境、有時奪境不奪人、有時人境倶奪、有時
人境倶不奪。時有僧問、如何是奪人不奪境。師云、煦日發生鋪地錦、瓔
孩垂髮白如絲。僧云、如何是奪境不奪人。師云、王令已行天下遍、將軍
塞外絶烟塵。僧云、如何是人境兩倶奪。師云、并汾絶信、獨處一方。僧
云、如何是人境倶不奪。師云、王登寶殿、野老謳歌。師乃云、今時學佛
法者、且要求眞正見解。若得眞正見解、生死不染、去住自由。不要求殊
勝、殊勝自至。道流、祇如自古先德、皆有出人底路。如山僧指示人處、
祇要爾不受人惑。要用便用、更莫遲疑。如今學者不得、病在甚處。病在
不自信處。爾若自信不及、即便忙忙地徇一切境轉、被他萬境回換、不
得自由。爾若能歇得念念馳求心、便與祖佛不別。爾欲得識祖佛麼。祇爾
面前聽法底是。學人信不及、便向外馳求。設求得者、皆是文字勝相、終
不得他活祖意。莫錯、諸禪德。此時不遇、萬劫千生、輪回三界、徇好境
掇去、驢牛肚裏生。道流、約山僧見處、與釋迦不別。今日多般用處、欠
少什麼。六道神光、未曾間歇。若能如是見得、祇是一生無事人。大德、
三界無安、猶如火宅。此不是爾久停住處。無常殺鬼、一刹那間、不揀貴
賤老少。爾要與祖佛不別、但莫外求。爾一念心上淸淨光、是爾屋裏法身
佛。爾一念心上無分別光、是爾屋裏報身佛。爾一念心上無差別光、是爾
屋裏化身佛。此三種身、是爾即今目前聽法底人。祇爲不向外馳求、有此
功用。據經論家、取三種身爲極則。約山僧見處、不然。此三種身是名
言、亦是三種依。古人云、身依義立、土據體論。法性身、法性土、明知
是光影。大德、爾且識取弄光影底人、是諸佛之本源、一切處是道流歸舍
處。是爾四大色身、不解說法聽法。脾胃肝膽、不解說法聽法。虛空不解
說法聽法。是什麼解說法聽法。是爾目前歷歷底、勿一箇形段孤明、是這
箇解說法聽法。若如是見得、便與祖佛不別。但一切時中、更莫間斷、觸

c h i n e s e t e x t | 351
目皆是。祇爲情生智隔、想變體殊、所以輪回三界、受種種苦。若約山僧
見處、無不甚深、無不解脫。道流、心法無形、通貫十方。在眼曰見、在
耳曰聞、在鼻嗅香、在口談論、在手執捉、在足運奔。本是一精明、分爲
六和合。一心既無、隨處解脫。山僧與麼說、意在什麼處。祇爲道流一切
馳求心不能歇、上他古人閑機境。道流、取山僧見處、坐斷報化佛頭、十
地滿心、猶如客作兒、等妙二覺、擔枷鎖漢、羅漢辟支、猶如厠穢、菩提
涅槃、如繋驢橛。何以如此、祇爲道流不達三祇劫空、所以有此障礙。若
是眞正道人、終不如是。但能隨緣消舊業、任運著衣裳、要行即行、要坐
即坐、無一念心希求佛果。緣何如此。古人云、若欲作業求佛、佛是生死
大兆。大德、時光可惜。祇擬傍家波波地、學禪學道、認名認句、求佛求
祖、求善知識意度。莫錯、道流。爾祇有一箇父母、更求何物。爾自返照
看。古人云、演若達多失卻頭、求心歇處即無事。大德、且要平常、莫作
模樣。有一般不識好惡禿奴、便即見神見鬼、指東劃西、好晴好雨。如是
之流、盡須抵債、向閻老前、吞熱鐵丸有日。好人家男女、被這一般野狐
精魅所著、便即捏怪。瞎屡生、索飯錢有日在。
xi 師示衆云、道流、切要求取眞正見解、向天下橫行、免被這一般精魅惑
亂。無事是貴人。但莫造作、祇是平常。爾擬向外傍家求過、覓腳手。錯
了也。祇擬求佛、佛是名句。爾還識馳求底麼。三世十方佛祖出來、也祇
爲求法。如今參學道流、也祇爲求法。得法始了。未得、依前輪回五道。
云何是法。法者是心法。心法無形、通貫十方、目前現用。人信不及、便
乃認名認句、向文字中、求意度佛法。天地懸殊。道流、山僧說法、說什
麼法。說心地法。便能入凡入聖、入淨入穢、入眞入俗。要且不是爾眞俗
凡聖、能與一切眞俗凡聖、安著名字。眞俗凡聖、與此人安著名字不得。
道流、把得便用、更不著名字、號之爲玄旨。山僧說法、與天下人別。祇
如有箇文殊普賢、出來目前、各現一身問法、纔道咨和尚、我早辨了也。
老僧穩坐、更有道流、來相見時、我盡辨了也。何以如此。祇爲我見處
別、外不取凡聖、內不住根本、見徹更不疑謬。
xii 師示衆云、道流、佛法無用功處、祇是平常無事。屙屎送尿、著衣喫飯、
困來即臥。愚人笑我、智乃知焉。古人云、向外作工夫、總是癡頑漢。爾
且隨處作主、立處皆眞。境來囘換不得。縱有從來習氣、五無間業、自爲
解脫大海。今時學者、總不識法、猶如觸鼻羊、逢著物安在口裏。奴郎不
辨、賓主不分。如是之流、邪心入道、鬧處即入。不得名爲眞出家人、正
是眞俗家人。夫出家者、須辨得平常眞正見解、辨佛辨魔、辨眞辨僞、辨
凡辨聖。若如是辨得、名眞出家。若魔佛不辨、正是出一家入一家。喚作
造業衆生、未得名爲眞出家。祇如今有一箇佛魔、同體不分、如水乳合、
鵝王喫乳。如明眼道流、魔佛倶打。爾若愛聖憎凡、生死海裏浮沈。
xiii 問、如何是佛魔。師云、爾一念心疑處是魔。爾若達得萬法無生、心如幻
化、更無一塵一法、處處淸淨是佛。然佛與魔、是染淨二境。約山僧見
處、無佛無衆生、無古無今、得者便得、不歷時節。無修無證、無得無

352 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
失。一切時中、更無別法。設有一法過此者、我說如夢如化。山僧所說
皆是。道流、即今目前孤明歷歷地聽者、此人處處不滯、通貫十方、三界
自在。入一切境差別、不能回換。一刹那間、透入法界、逢佛說佛、逢祖
說祖、逢羅漢說羅漢、逢餓鬼說餓鬼。向一切處、游履國土、敎化衆生、
未曾離一念。隨處淸淨、光透十方、萬法一如。道流、大丈夫兒、今日方
知本來無事。祇爲爾信不及、念念馳求、捨頭覓頭、自不能歇。如圓頓
菩薩、入法界現身、向淨土中、厭凡忻聖。如此之流、取捨未忘、染淨心
在。如禪宗見解、又且不然。直是現今、更無時節。山僧說處、皆是一期
藥病相治、總無實法。若如是見得、是眞出家、日消萬兩黃金。道流、莫
取次被諸方老師印破面門、道我解禪解道。辯似懸河、皆是造地獄業。若
是眞正學道人、不求世間過、切急要求眞正見解。若達眞正見解圓明、方
始了畢。
xiv 問、如何是眞正見解。師云、爾但一切入凡入聖、入染入淨、入諸佛國
土、入彌勒樓閣、入毘盧遮那法界、處處皆現國土、成住壞空。佛出于
世、轉大法輪、卻入涅槃、不見有去來相貌。求其生死、了不可得。便入
無生法界、處處游履國土、入華藏世界、盡見諸法空相、皆無實法。唯有
聽法無依道人、是諸佛之母。所以佛從無依生。若悟無依、佛亦無得。若
如是見得者、是眞正見解。學人不了、爲執名句、被他凡聖名礙、所以障
其道眼、不得分明。祇如十二分敎、皆是表顯之說。學者不會、便向表顯
名句上生解。皆是依倚、落在因果、未免三界生死。爾若欲得生死去住、
脫著自由、即今識取聽法底人。無形無相、無根無本、無住處、活撥撥
地。應是萬種施設、用處祇是無處。所以覓著轉遠、求之轉乖。號之爲祕
密。道流、爾莫認著箇夢幻伴子。遲晩中間、便歸無常。爾向此世界中、
覓箇什麼物作解脫。覓取一口飯喫、補毳過時、且要訪尋知識。莫因循逐
樂。光陰可惜、念念無常。麁則被地水火風、細則被生住異滅四相所逼。
道流、今時且要識取四種無相境、免被境擺撲。
xv 問、如何是四種無相境。師云、爾一念心疑、被地來礙。爾一念心愛、
被水來溺。爾一念心嗔、被火來燒。爾一念心喜、被風來飄。若能如是辨
得、不被境轉、處處用境。東涌西沒、南涌北沒、中涌邊沒、邊涌中沒、
履水如地、履地如水。緣何如此。爲達四大如夢如幻故。道流、爾祇今
聽法者、不是爾四大、能用爾四大。若能如是見得、便乃去住自由。約山
僧見處、勿嫌底法。爾若愛聖、聖者聖之名。有一般學人、向五臺山裏求
文殊。早錯了也。五臺山無文殊。爾欲識文殊麼。祇爾目前用處、始終不
異、處處不疑、此箇是活文殊。爾一念心無差別光、處處總是眞普賢。爾
一念心自能解縛、隨處解脫、此是觀音三昧法。互爲主伴、出則一時出。
一即三、三即一。如是解得、始好看敎。
xvi 師示衆云、如今學道人、且要自信。莫向外覓。總上他閑塵境、都不辨邪
正。祇如有祖有佛、皆是敎迹中事。有人拈起一句子語、或隱顯中出、便
即疑生、照天照地、傍家尋問、也大忙然。大丈夫兒、莫祇麼論主論賊、

c h i n e s e t e x t | 353
論是論非、論色論財、論說閑話過日。山僧此間、不論僧俗、但有來者、
盡識得伊。任伊向甚處出來、但有聲名文句、皆是夢幻。卻見乘境底人、
是諸佛之玄旨。佛境不能自稱我是佛境。還是這箇無依道人、乘境出來。
若有人出來、問我求佛、我即應淸淨境出。有人問我菩薩、我即應慈悲境
出。有人問我菩提、我即應淨妙境出。有人問我涅槃、我即應寂靜境出。
境即萬般差別、人即不別。所以應物現形、如水中月。道流、爾若欲得如
法、直須是大丈夫兒始得。若萎萎隨隨地、則不得也。夫如㽄嗄[上音西下
所嫁切]之器、不堪貯醍醐。如大器者、直要不受人惑。隨處作主、立處皆
眞。但有來者、皆不得受。爾一念疑、即魔入心。如菩薩疑時、生死魔得
便。但能息念、更莫外求。物來則照。爾但信現今用底、一箇事也無。爾
一念心生三界、隨緣被境、分爲六塵。爾如今應用處、欠少什麼。一刹那
間、便入淨入穢、入彌勒樓閣、入三眼國土、處處遊履、唯見空名。
xvii 問、如何是三眼國土。師云、我共爾入淨妙國土中、著淸淨衣、說法身
佛。又入無差別國土中、著無差別衣、說報身佛。又入解脫國土中、著光
明衣、說化身佛。此三眼國土、皆是依變。約經論家、取法身爲根本、報
化二身爲用。山僧見處、法身即不解說法。所以古人云、身依義立、土據
體論。法性身、法性土、明知是建立之法、依通國土。空拳黃葉、用誑小
兒。蒺藜菱刺、枯骨上覓什麼汁。心外無法、內亦不可得、求什麼物。爾
諸方言道、有修有證。莫錯。設有修得者、皆是生死業。爾言六度萬行齊
修。我見皆是造業。求佛求法、即是造地獄業。求菩薩、亦是造業。看經
看敎、亦是造業。佛與祖師、是無事人。所以有漏有爲、無漏無爲、爲淸
淨業。有一般瞎禿子、飽喫飯了、便坐禪觀行、把捉念漏、不令放起、厭
喧求靜、是外道法。祖師云、爾若住心看靜、擧心外照、攝心內澄、凝心
入定、如是之流、皆是造作。是爾如今與麼聽法底人、作麼生擬修他證他
莊嚴他。渠且不是修底物、不是莊嚴得底物。若敎他莊嚴、一切物即莊
嚴得。爾且莫錯。道流、爾取這一般老師口裏語、爲是眞道、是善知識不
思議、我是凡夫心、不敢測度他老宿。瞎屡生、爾一生祇作這箇見解、辜
負這一雙眼。冷噤噤地、如凍凌上驢駒相似。我不敢毀善知識、怕生口
業。道流、夫大善知識、始敢毀佛毀祖、是非天下、排斥三藏敎、罵辱諸
小兒、向逆順中覓人。所以我於十二年中、求一箇業性、知芥子許不可
得。若似新婦子禪師、便即怕趁出院、不與飯喫、不安不樂。自古先輩、
到處人不信、被遞出、始知是貴。若到處人盡肯、堪作什麼。所以師子
一吼、野干腦裂。道流、諸方說、有道可修、有法可證。爾說證何法、修
何道。爾今用處、欠少什麼物、修補何處。後生小阿師不會、便即信這般
野狐精魅、許他說事、繋縛人、言道理行相應、護惜三業、始得成佛。
如此說者、如春細雨。古人云、路逢達道人、第一莫向道。所以言、若人
修道道不行、萬般邪境競頭生。智劍出來無一物、明頭未顯暗頭明。所以
古人云、平常心是道。大德、覓什麼物。現今目前聽法無依道人、歷歷地
分明、未曾欠少。爾若欲得與祖佛不別、但如是見、不用疑誤。爾心心不

354 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
異、名之活祖。心若有異、則性相別。心不異故、即性相不別。
xviii 問、如何是心心不異處。師云、爾擬問、早異了也、性相各分。道流、
莫錯。世出世諸法、皆無自性、亦無生性。但有空名、名字亦空。爾祇
麼認他閑名爲實。大錯了也。設有、皆是依變之境。有箇菩提依、涅槃
依、解脫依、三身依、境智依、菩薩依、佛依。爾向依變國土中、覓什麼
物。乃至三乘十二分敎、皆是拭不淨故紙。佛是幻化身、祖是老比丘。爾
還是娘生已否。爾若求佛、即被佛魔攝。爾若求祖、即被祖魔縛。爾若有
求皆苦。不如無事。有一般禿比丘、向學人道、佛是究竟、於三大阿僧祇
劫、修行果滿、方始成道。道流、爾若道佛是究竟、緣什麼八十年後、向
拘尸羅城、雙林樹間、側臥而死去。佛今何在。明知與我生死不別。爾
言、三十二相八十種好是佛。轉輪聖王應是如來。明知是幻化。古人云、
如來擧身相、爲順世間情。恐人生斷見、權且立虛名。假言三十二、八十
也空聲。有身非覺體、無相乃眞形。爾道、佛有六通、是不可思議。一切
諸天、神仙、阿修羅、大力鬼、亦有神通。應是佛否。道流、莫錯。祇如
阿修羅、與天帝釋戰、戰敗領八萬四千眷屬、入藕絲孔中藏。莫是聖否。
如山僧所擧、皆是業通依通。夫如佛六通者、不然。入色界不被色惑、入
聲界不被聲惑、入香界不被香惑、入味界不被味惑、入觸界不被觸惑、入
法界不被法惑。所以達六種色聲香味觸法皆是空相、不能繋縛此無依道
人。雖是五蘊漏質、便是地行神通。道流、眞佛無形、眞法無相。爾祇麼
幻化上頭、作模作樣。設求得者、皆是野狐精魅、並不是眞佛、是外道見
解。夫如眞學道人、並不取佛、不取菩薩羅漢、不取三界殊勝。迥無獨
脫、不與物拘。乾坤倒覆、我更不疑。十方諸佛現前、爲一念心喜、三塗
地獄頓現、無一念心怖。緣何如此。我見諸法空相、變即有、不變即無。
三界唯心、萬法唯識。所以夢幻空花、何勞把捉。唯有道流、目前現今
聽法底人、入火不燒、入水不溺、入三塗地獄、如遊園觀、入餓鬼畜生、
而不受報。緣何如此。無嫌底法。爾若愛聖憎凡、生死海裏沈浮。煩惱由
心故有、無心煩惱何拘。不勞分別取相、自然得道須臾。爾擬傍家波波地
學得、於三祇劫中、終歸生死。不如無事、向叢林中、床角頭交腳坐。道
流、如諸方有學人來、主客相見了、便有一句子語、辨前頭善知識。被學
人拈出箇機權語路、向善知識口角頭攛過、看爾識不識。爾若識得是境、
把得便抛向坑子裏。學人便即尋常、然後便索善知識語。依前奪之。學人
云、上智哉、是大善知識。即云、爾大不識好惡。如善知識、把出箇境
塊子、向學人面前弄。前人辨得、下下作主、不受境惑。善知識便即現半
身、學人便喝。善知識又入一切差別語路中擺撲。學人云、不識好惡老
禿奴。善知識歎曰、眞正道流。如諸方善知識、不辨邪正。學人來問、菩
提涅槃、三身境智、瞎老師便與他解說。被他學人罵著、便把棒打他、言
無禮度。自是爾善知識無眼、不得嗔他。有一般不識好惡禿奴、即指東劃
西、好晴好雨、好燈籠露柱。爾看、眉毛有幾莖。這箇具機緣。學人不
會、便即心狂。如是之流、總是野狐精魅魍魎。被他好學人嗌嗌微笑、

c h i n e s e t e x t | 355
言瞎老禿奴惑亂他天下人。道流、出家兒且要學道。祇如山僧、往日曾向
毘尼中留心、亦曾於經論尋討。後方知是濟世藥、表顯之說、遂乃一時抛
卻、即訪道參禪。後遇大善知識、方乃道眼分明、始識得天下老和尚、
知其邪正。不是娘生下便會、還是體究練磨、一朝自省。道流、爾欲得如
法見解、但莫受人惑。向裏向外、逢著便殺。逢佛殺佛、逢祖殺祖、逢羅
漢殺羅漢、逢父母殺父母、逢親眷殺親眷、始得解脫、不與物拘、透脫自
在。如諸方學道流、未有不依物出來底。山僧向此間、從頭打。手上出
來手上打。口裏出來口裏打。眼裏出來眼裏打。未有一箇獨脫出來底。皆
是上他古人閑機境。山僧無一法與人、祇是治病解縛。爾諸方道流、試不
依物出來、我要共爾商量。十年五歳、並無一人。皆是依草附葉、竹木
精靈、野狐精魅、向一切糞塊上亂咬。瞎漢、枉消他十方信施、道我是出
家兒、作如是見解。向爾道、無佛無法、無修無證。祇與麼傍家擬求什
麼物。瞎漢、頭上安頭。是爾欠少什麼。道流、是爾目前用底、與祖佛不
別。祇麼不信、便向外求。莫錯。向外無法、內亦不可得。爾取山僧口裏
語、不如休歇無事去。已起者莫續、未起者不要放起、便勝爾十年行腳。
約山僧見處、無如許多般、祇是平常。著衣喫飯、無事過時。爾諸方來
者、皆是有心求佛求法、求解脫、求出離三界。癡人、爾要出三界、什
麼處去。佛祖是賞繋底名句。爾欲識三界麼。不離爾今聽法底心地。爾一
念心貪是欲界。爾一念心瞋是色界。爾一念心癡是無色界、是爾屋裏家具
子。三界不自道、我是三界。還是道流、目前靈靈地照燭萬般、酌度世界
底人、與三界安名。大德、四大色身是無常。乃至脾胃肝膽、髪毛爪齒、
唯見諸法空相。爾一念心歇得處、喚作菩提樹。爾一念心不能歇得處、
喚作無明樹。無明無住處、無明無始終。爾若念念心歇不得、便上他無明
樹、便入六道四生、披毛戴角。爾若歇得、便是淸淨身界。爾一念不生、
便是上菩提樹、三界神通變化、意生化身、法喜禪悅、身光自照。思衣羅
綺千重、思食百味具足、更無橫病。菩提無住處、是故無得者。道流、
大丈夫漢、更疑箇什麼。目前用處、更是阿誰。把得便用、莫著名字、號
爲玄旨。與麼見得、勿嫌底法。古人云、心隨萬境轉、轉處實能幽。隨流
認得性、無喜亦無憂。道流、如禪宗見解、死活循然。參學之人、大須
子細。如主客相見、便有言論往來。或應物現形、或全體作用、或把機
權喜怒、或現半身、或乘師子、或乘象王。如有眞正學人、便喝先拈出一
箇膠盆子。善知識不辨是境、便上他境上、作模作樣。學人便喝。前人不
肯放。此是膏肓之病、不堪醫。喚作客看主。或是善知識不拈出物、隨學
人問處即奪。學人被奪、抵死不放。此是主看客。或有學人、應一箇淸
淨境、出善知識前。善知識辨得是境、把得抛向坑裏。學人言、大好善知
識。即云、咄哉、不識好惡。學人便禮拜。此喚作主看主。或有學人、披
枷帶鎖、出善知識前。善知識更與安一重枷鎖。學人歡喜、彼此不辨。呼
爲客看客。大德、山僧如是所擧、皆是辨魔揀異、知其邪正。道流、寔情
大難、佛法幽玄、解得可可地。山僧竟日與他說破、學者總不在意。千遍

356 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
萬遍、腳底踏過、黑沒焌地、無一箇形段、歷歷孤明。學人信不及、便
向名句上生解。年登半百、祇管傍家負死屍行、檐卻檐子天下走。索草鞋
錢有日在。大德、山僧說向外無法、學人不會、便即向裏作解、便即倚壁
坐、舌拄上齶、湛然不動、取此爲是祖門佛法也。大錯。是爾若取不動淸
淨境爲是、爾即認他無明爲郎主。古人云、湛湛黑暗深坑、寔可怖畏。
此之是也。爾若認他動者是、一切草木皆解動、應可是道也。所以動者是
風大、不動者是地大。動與不動、倶無自性。爾若向動處捉他、他向不動
處立。爾若向不動處捉他、他向動處立。譬如潜泉魚、鼓波而自躍。大
德、動與不動、是二種境。還是無依道人、用動用不動。如諸方學人來、
山僧此間、作三種根器斷。如中下根器來、我便奪其境、而不除其法。或
中上根器來、我便境法倶奪。如上上根器來、我便境法人倶不奪。如有出
格見解人來、山僧此間、便全體作用、不歷根器。大德、到這裏、學人著
力處不通風、石火電光即過了也。學人若眼定動、即沒交涉。擬心即差、
動念即乖。有人解者、不離目前。大德、爾檐鉢嚢屎檐子、傍家走求佛求
法。即今與麼馳求底、爾還識渠麼。活撥撥地、祇是勿根株。擁不聚、撥
不散。求著即轉遠、不求還在目前、靈音屬耳。若人不信、徒勞百年。
道流、一刹那間、便入華藏世界、入毘盧遮那國土、入解脫國土、入神通
國土、入淸淨國土、入法界、入穢入淨、入凡入聖、入餓鬼畜生、處處討
覓尋、皆不見有生有死、唯有空名。幻化空花、不勞把捉、得失是非、
一時放卻。道流、山僧佛法、的的相承、從麻谷和尚、丹霞和尚、道一和
尚、盧山拽石頭和尚、一路行遍天下。無人信得、盡皆起謗。如道一和尚
用處、純一無雜、學人三百五百、盡皆不見他意。如盧山和尚、自在眞
正、順逆用處、學人不測涯際、悉皆忙然。如丹霞和尚、翫珠隱顯、學人
來者、皆悉被罵。如麻谷用處、苦如黃檗、近皆不得。如石鞏用處、向
箭頭上覓人、來者皆懼。如山僧今日用處、眞正成壞、翫弄神變、入一切
境、隨處無事、境不能換。但有來求者、我即便出看渠。渠不識我、我便
著數般衣、學人生解、一向入我言句。苦哉、瞎禿子無眼人、把我著底
衣、認青黃赤白。我脫卻入淸淨境中、學人一見、便生忻欲。我又脫卻、
學人失心、忙然狂走、言我無衣。我即向渠道、爾識我著衣底人否。忽爾
回頭、認我了也。大德、爾莫認衣。衣不能動、人能著衣。有箇淸淨衣、
有箇無生衣、菩提衣、涅槃衣、有祖衣、有佛衣。大德、但有聲名文句、
皆悉是衣變。從臍輪氣海中鼓激、牙齒敲磕、成其句義。明知是幻化。
大德、外發聲語業、內表心所法。以思有念、皆悉是衣。爾祇麼認他著底
衣爲寔解。縱經塵劫、祇是衣通。三界循還、輪回生死。不如無事。相逢
不相識、共語不知名。今時學人不得、蓋爲認名字爲解。大策子上、抄死
老漢語、三重五重複子裹、不敎人見、道是玄旨、以爲保重。大錯。瞎屡
生、爾向枯骨上、覓什麼汁。有一般不識好惡、向敎中取意度商量、成於
句義。如把屎塊子、向口裏含了、吐過與別人。猶如俗人打傳口令相似、
一生虛過。也道我出家、被他問著佛法、便即杜口無詞、眼似漆突、口如

c h i n e s e t e x t | 357
楄檐。如此之類、逢彌勒出世、移置他方世界、寄地獄受苦。大德、爾波
波地往諸方、覓什麼物、踏爾腳板闊。無佛可求、無道可成、無法可得。
外求有相佛、與汝不相似。欲識汝本心、非合亦非離。道流、眞佛無形、
眞道無體、眞法無相。三法混融、和合一處。辨既不得、喚作忙忙業識衆
生。
xix 問、如何是眞佛眞法眞道、乞垂開示。師云、佛者心淸淨是。法者心光
明是。道者處處無礙淨光是。三即一、皆是空名、而無寔有。如眞正學道
人、念念心不間斷。自達磨大師從西土來、祇是覓箇不受人惑底人。後遇
二祖、一言便了、始知從前虛用功夫。山僧今日見處、與祖佛不別。若第
一句中得、與祖佛爲師。若第二句中得、與人天爲師。若第三句中得、自
救不了。
xx 問、如何是西來意。師云、若有意、自救不了。云、既無意、云何二祖得
法。師云、得者是不得。云、既若不得、云何是不得底意。師云、爲爾向
一切處馳求心不能歇。所以祖師言、咄哉丈夫、將頭覓頭。爾言下便自回
光返照、更不別求、知身心與祖佛不別、當下無事、方名得法。大德、
山僧今時、事不獲已、話度說出許多不才淨。爾且莫錯。據我見處、寔無
許多般道理。要用便用、不用便休。祇如諸方說六度萬行、以爲佛法、我
道、是莊嚴門佛事門、非是佛法。乃至持齋持戒、擎油不澗、道眼不明、
盡須抵債、索飯錢有日在。何故如此。入道不通理、復身還信施。長者八
十一、其樹不生耳。乃至孤峯獨宿、一食卯齋、長坐不臥、六時行道、
皆是造業底人。乃至頭目髓腦、國城妻子、象馬七珍、盡皆捨施、如是等
見、皆是苦身心故、還招苦果。不如無事、純一無雜。乃至十地滿心菩
薩、皆求此道流蹤跡、了不可得。所以諸天歡喜、地神捧足、十方諸佛、
無不稱歎。緣何如此。爲今聽法道人、用處無蹤跡。
xxi 問、大通智勝佛、十劫坐道場、佛法不現前、不得成佛道。未審此意如
何。乞師指示。師云、大通者、是自己於處處、達其萬法無性無相、名爲
大通。智勝者、於一切處不疑、不得一法、名爲智勝。佛者心淸淨、光明
透徹法界、得名爲佛。十劫坐道場者、十波羅蜜是。佛法不現前者、佛
本不生、法本不滅、云何更有現前。不得成佛道者、佛不應更作佛。古人
云、佛常在世間、而不染世間法。道流、爾欲得作佛、莫隨萬物。心生種
種法生、心滅種種法滅。一心不生、萬法無咎。世與出世、無佛無法、亦
不現前、亦不曾失。設有者、皆是名言章句、接引小兒、施設藥病、表顯
名句。且名句不自名句、還是爾目前昭昭靈靈、鑒覺聞知照燭底、安一切
名句。大德、造五無間業、方得解脫。
xxii 問、如何是五無間業。師云、殺父害母、出佛身血、破和合僧、焚燒經像
等、此是五無間業。云、如何是父。師云、無明是父。爾一念心、求起滅
處不得、如響應空、隨處無事、名爲殺父。云、如何是母。師云、貪愛爲
母。爾一念心、入欲界中、求其貪愛、唯見諸法空相、處處無著、名爲害
母。云、如何是出佛身血。師云、爾向淸淨法界中、無一念心生解、便處

358 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
處黑暗、是出佛身血。云、如何是破和合僧。師云、爾一念心、正達煩惱
結使、如空無所依、是破和合僧。云、如何是焚燒經像。師云、見因緣
空、心空、法空、一念決定斷、迥然無事、便是焚燒經像。大德、若如是
達得、免被他凡聖名礙。爾一念心、祇向空拳指上生寔解、根境法中虛捏
怪。自輕而退屈言、我是凡夫、他是聖人。禿屡生、有甚死急、披他師子
皮、卻作野干鳴。大丈夫漢、不作丈夫氣息、自家屋裏物不肯信、祇麼向
外覓、上他古人閑名句、倚陰博陽、不能特達。逢境便緣、逢塵便執、觸
處惑起、自無准定。道流、莫取山僧說處。何故。說無憑據、一期間圖畫
虛空、如彩畫像等喩。道流、莫將佛爲究竟。我見猶如厠孔、菩薩羅漢、
盡是枷鎖、縛人底物。所以文殊仗劍、殺於瞿曇、鴦掘持刀、害於釋氏。
道流、無佛可得。乃至三乘五性、圓頓敎迹、皆是一期藥病相治、並無實
法。設有、皆是相似、表顯路布、文字差排、且如是說。道流、有一般禿
子、便向裏許著功、擬求出世之法。錯了也。若人求佛、是人失佛。若
人求道、是人失道。若人求祖、是人失祖。大德、莫錯。我且不取爾解經
論、我亦不取爾國王大臣、我亦不取爾辯似懸河、我亦不取爾聰明智慧、
唯要爾眞正見解。道流、設解得百本經論、不如一箇無事底阿師。爾解
得、即輕蔑他人。勝負修羅、人我無明、長地獄業。如善星比丘、解十二
分敎、生身陷地獄、大地不容。不如無事休歇去。飢來喫飯、睡來合眼。
愚人笑我、智乃知焉。道流、莫向文字中求。心動疲勞、吸冷氣無益。不
如一念緣起無生、超出三乘權學菩薩。大德、莫因循過日。山僧往日、未
有見處時、黑漫漫地。光陰不可空過、腹熱心忙、奔波訪道。後還得力、
始到今日、共道流如是話度。勸諸道流、莫爲衣食。看世界易過、善知識
難遇。如優曇花時一現耳。爾諸方聞道有箇臨濟老漢、出來便擬問難、
敎語不得。被山僧全體作用、學人空開得眼、口總動不得。懵然不知以何
答我。我向伊道、龍象蹴踏、非驢所堪。爾諸處祇指胸點肋、道我解禪解
道、三箇兩箇、到這裏不奈何。咄哉、爾將這箇身心、到處簸兩片皮、誑
謼閭閻。喫鐵棒有日在。非出家兒、盡向阿修羅界攝。夫如至理之道、非
諍論而求激揚、鏗鏘以摧外道。至於佛祖相承、更無別意。設有言敎、落
在化儀三乘五性、人天因果。如圓頓之敎、又且不然。童子善財、皆不求
過。大德、莫錯用心。如大海不停死屍。祇麼擔卻、擬天下走。自起見
障、以礙於心。日上無雲、麗天普照。眼中無翳、空裏無花。道流、爾欲
得如法、但莫生疑。展則彌綸法界、收則絲髮不立。歷歷孤明、未曾欠
少。眼不見、耳不聞、喚作什麼物。古人云、說似一物則不中。爾但自家
看。更有什麼。說亦無盡、各自著力。珍重。

Critical Examinations 勘辨
i 黃檗、因入厨次、問飯頭、作什麼。飯頭云、揀衆僧米。黃檗云、一日喫
多少。飯頭云、二石五。黃檗云、莫太多麼。飯頭云、猶恐少在。黃檗便
打。飯頭卻擧似師。師云、我爲汝勘這老漢。纔到侍立次、黃檗擧前話。

c h i n e s e t e x t | 359
師云、飯頭不會、請和尚代一轉語。師便問、莫太多麼。黃檗云、何不
道、來日更喫一頓。師云、說什麼來日、即今便喫。道了便掌。黃檗云、
這風顛漢、又來這裏捋虎鬚。師便喝出去。後潙山問仰山、此二尊宿、意
作麼生。仰山云、和尚作麼生。潙山云、養子方知父慈。仰山云、不然。
潙山云、子又作麼生。仰山云、大似勾賊破家。
ii 師問僧、什麼處來。僧便喝。師便揖坐。僧擬議。師便打。師見僧來、便
豎起拂子。僧禮拜。師便打。又見僧來、亦豎起拂子。僧不顧。師亦打。
iii 師、一日同普化、赴施主家齋次、師問、毛吞巨海、芥納須彌。爲是神通
妙用、本體如然。普化踏倒飯床。師云、太麁生。普化云、這裏是什麼
所在、說麁說細。師來日、又同普化赴齋。問、今日供養、何似昨日。普
化依前踏倒飯床。師云、得即得、太麁生。普化云、瞎漢、佛法說什麼麁
細。師乃吐舌。
iv 師一日、與河陽木塔長老、同在僧堂地爐內坐。因說、普化每日在街市、
掣風掣顛。知他是凡是聖。言猶未了、普化入來。師便問、汝是凡是聖。
普化云、汝且道、我是凡是聖。師便喝。普化以手指云、河陽新婦子、木
塔老婆禪。臨濟小厮兒、卻具一隻眼。師云、這賊。普化云賊賊、便出
去。
v 一日、普化在僧堂前、喫生菜。師見云、大似一頭驢。普化便作驢鳴。師
云、這賊。普化云賊賊、便出去。
vi 因普化、常於街市搖鈴云、明頭來、明頭打、暗頭來、暗頭打、四方八面
來、旋風打、虛空來、連架打。師令侍者去、纔見如是道、便把住云、總
不與麼來時如何。普化托開云、來日大悲院裏有齋。侍者回、擧似師。師
云、我從來疑著這漢。
vii 有一老宿參師、未曾人事、便問、禮拜即是、不禮拜即是。師便喝。老
宿便禮拜。師云、好箇草賊。老宿云賊賊、便出去。師云、莫道無事好。
首座侍立次、師云、還有過也無。首座云、有。師云、賓家有過、主家有
過。首座云、二倶有過。師云、過在什麼處。首座便出去。師云、莫道無
事好。後有僧擧似南泉。南泉云、官馬相踏。
viii 師因入軍營赴齋、門首見員僚。師指露柱問、是凡是聖。員僚無語。師打
露柱云、直饒道得、也祇是箇木橛。便入去。
ix 師問院主、什麼處來。主云、州中糶黃米去來。師云、糶得盡麼。主云、
糶得盡。師以杖面前畫一畫云、還糶得這箇麼。主便喝。師便打。典座
至。師擧前語。典座云、院主不會和尚意。師云、爾作麼生。典座便禮
拜。師亦打。
x 有座主來相看次、師問、座主講何經說。主云、某甲荒虛、粗習百法論。
師云、有一人、於三乘十二分敎明得。有一人、於三乘十二分敎明不得。
是同是別。主云、明得即同、明不得即別。樂普爲侍者、在師後立云、座
主、這裏是什麼所在、說同說別。師回首問侍者、汝又作麼生。侍者便

360 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
喝。師送座主回來、遂問侍者、適來是汝喝老僧。侍者云、是。師便打。
xi 師聞第二代德山垂示云、道得也三十棒、道不得也三十棒、師令樂普去
問、道得爲什麼也三十棒、待伊打汝、接住棒送一送、看他作麼生。普到
彼、如敎而問。德山便打。普接住送一送。德山便歸方丈。普回擧似師。
師云、我從來疑著這漢。雖然如是、汝還見德山麼。普擬議。師便打。
xii 王常侍、一日訪師。同師於僧堂前看、乃問、這一堂僧、還看經麼。師
云、不看經。侍云、還學禪麼。師云、不學禪。侍云、經又不看、禪又不
學、畢竟作箇什麼。師云、總敎伊成佛作祖去。侍云、金屑雖貴、落眼成
翳。又作麼生。師云、將爲爾是箇俗漢。
xiii 師問杏山、如何是露地白牛。山云、吽吽。師云、唖那。山云、長老作麼
生。師云、這畜生。
xiv 師問樂普云、從上來、一人行棒、一人行喝。阿那箇親。普云、總不親。
師云、親處作麼生。普便喝。師乃打。
xv 師見僧來、展開兩手。僧無語。師云、會麼。云、不會。師云、渾崙擘不
開、與爾兩文錢。
xvi 大覺到參。師擧起拂子。大覺敷坐具。師擲下拂子。大覺收坐具、入僧
堂。衆僧云、這僧莫是和尚親故、不禮拜、又不喫棒。師聞、令喚覺。覺
出。師云、大衆道、汝未參長老。覺云不審、便自歸衆。
xvii 趙州行腳時參師。遇師洗腳次、州便問、如何是祖師西來意。師云、恰値
老僧洗腳。州近前、作聽勢。師云、更要第二杓惡水溌在。州便下去。
xviii 有定上座、到參問、如何是佛法大意。師下繩床、擒住與一掌、便托開。
定佇立。傍僧云、定上座、何不禮拜。定方禮拜、忽然大悟。
xix 麻谷到參。敷坐具問、十二面觀音、阿那面正。師下繩床、一手收坐具、
一手搊麻谷云、十二面觀音、向什麼處去也。麻谷轉身、擬坐繩床。師拈
拄杖打。麻谷接卻、相捉入方丈。
xx 師問僧、有時一喝、如金剛王寶劍。有時一喝、如踞地金毛師子。有時一
喝、如探竿影草。有時一喝、不作一喝用。汝作麼生會。僧擬議。師便
喝。
xxi 師問一尼、善來惡來。尼便喝。師拈棒云、更道更道。尼又喝。師便打。
xxii 龍牙問、如何是祖師西來意。師云、與我過禪板來。牙便過禪板與師。
師接得便打。牙云、打即任打、要且無祖師意。牙後到翠微問、如何是祖
師西來意。微云、與我過蒲團來。牙便過蒲團與翠微。翠微接得便打。牙
云、打即任打、要且無祖師意。牙住院後、有僧入室請益云、和尚行腳
時、參二尊宿因緣、還肯他也無。牙云、肯即深肯、要且無祖師意。
xxiii 徑山有五百衆、少人參請。黃檗令師到徑山。乃謂師曰、汝到彼作麼生。
師云、某甲到彼、自有方便。師到徑山、裝腰上法堂、見徑山。徑山方擧
頭、師便喝。徑山擬開口、師拂袖便行。尋有僧問徑山、這僧適來有什麼

c h i n e s e t e x t | 361
言句、便喝和尚。徑山云、這僧從黃檗會裏來。爾要知麼、且問取他。徑
山五百衆、太半分散。
xxiv 普化一日、於街市中、就人乞直裰。人皆與之。普化倶不要。師令院主買
棺一具。普化歸來。師云、我與汝做得箇直裰了也。普化便自擔去、繞街
市叫云、臨濟與我做直裰了也。我往東門遷化去。市人競隨看之。普化
云、我今日未、來日往南門遷化去。如是三日、人皆不信。至第四日、
無人隨看。獨出城外、自入棺內、倩路行人釘之。即時傳布。市人競往開
棺、乃見全身脫去。祇聞空中鈴響、隱隱而去。

Record of Pilgrimages 行錄
i 師初在黃檗會下、行業純一。首座乃歎曰、雖是後生、與衆有異。遂問、
上座在此、多少時。師云、三年。首座云、曾參問也無。師云、不曾參
問。不知問箇什麼。首座云、汝何不去問堂頭和尚、如何是佛法的的大
意。師便去問。聲未絶、黃檗便打。師下來。首座云、問話作麼生。師
云、某甲問聲未絶、和尚便打。某甲不會。首座云、但更去問。師又去
問。黃檗又打。如是三度發問、三度被打。師來白首座云、幸蒙慈悲、令
某甲問訊和尚。三度發問、三度被打。自恨障緣不領深旨。今且辭去。首
座云、汝若去時、須辭和尚去。師禮拜退。首座先到和尚處云、問話底後
生、甚是如法。若來辭時、方便接他。向後穿鑿成一株大樹、與天下人作
陰涼去在。師去辭黃檗。檗云、不得往別處去。汝向高安灘頭大愚處去、
必爲汝說。師到大愚。大愚問、什麼處來。師云、黃檗處來。大愚云、黃
檗有何言句。師云、某甲三度問佛法的的大意、三度被打。不知某甲有過
無過。大愚云、黃檗與麼老婆、爲汝得徹困。更來這裏、問有過無過。師
於言下大悟云、元來黃檗佛法無多子。大愚搊住云、這尿床鬼子、適來道
有過無過、如今卻道、黃檗佛法無多子。爾見箇什麼道理、速道速道。師
於大愚脅下、築三拳。大愚托開云、汝師黃檗、非于我事。師辭大愚、卻
回黃檗。黃檗見來便問、這漢來來去去、有什麼了期。師云、祇爲老婆心
切。便人事了侍立。黃檗問、什麼處去來。師云、昨奉慈旨、令參大愚去
來。黃檗云、大愚有何言句。師遂擧前話。黃檗云、作麼生得這漢來、
待痛與一頓。師云、說什麼待來、即今便喫。隨後便掌。黃檗云、這風顛
漢、卻來這裏捋虎鬚。師便喝。黃檗云、侍者、引這風顛漢、參堂去。
後、潙山擧此話、問仰山、臨濟當時、得大愚力、得黃檗力。仰山云、非
但騎虎頭、亦解把虎尾。
ii 師栽松次、黃檗問、深山裏栽許多作什麼。師云、一與山門作境致、二與
後人作標榜。道了、將钁頭打地三下。黃檗云、雖然如是、子已喫吾三十
棒了也。師又以钁頭打地三下、作嘘嘘聲。黃檗云、吾宗到汝、大興於
世。後潙山擧此語、問仰山、黃檗當時、祇囑臨濟一人、更有人在。仰山
云、有。祇是年代深遠、不欲擧似和尚。潙山云、雖然如是、吾亦要知。

362 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
汝但擧看。仰山云、一人指南、呉越令行、遇大風即止。讖風穴和尚也。
iii 師侍立德山次、山云、今日困。師云、這老漢寐語作什麼。山便打。師掀
倒繩床。山便休。
iv 師普請鋤地次、見黃檗來、拄钁而立。黃檗云、這漢困那。師云、钁也未
擧、困箇什麼。黃檗便打。師接住棒、一送送倒。黃檗喚維那、維那扶起
我。維那近前扶云、和尚爭容得這風顛漢無禮。黃檗纔起、便打維那。師
钁地云、諸方火葬、我這裏一時活埋。後潙山問仰山、黃檗打維那、意作
麼生。仰山云、正賊走卻、邏蹤人喫棒。
v 師一日、在僧堂前坐。見黃檗來、便閉卻目。黃檗乃作怖勢、便歸方丈。
師隨至方丈禮謝。首座在黃檗處侍立。黃檗云、此僧雖是後生、卻知有此
事。首座云、老和尚腳跟不點地、卻證據箇後生。黃檗自於口上打一摑。
vi 首座云、知即得。師在堂中睡。黃檗下來見、以拄杖打板頭一下。師擧
頭、見是黃檗、卻睡。黃檗又打板頭一下、卻往上間、見首座坐禪、乃
云、下間後生卻坐禪、汝這裏妄想作什麼。首座云、這老漢作什麼。黃檗
打板頭一下、便出去。後、潙山問仰山、黃檗入僧堂、意作麼生。仰山
云、兩彩一賽。
vii

一日普請次、師在後行。黃檗回頭、見師空手、乃問、钁頭在什麼處。師
云、有一人將去了也。黃檗云、近前來、共汝商量箇事。師便近前。黃檗
豎起钁頭云、祇這箇、天下人拈掇不起。師就手掣得、豎起云、爲什麼卻
在某甲手裏。黃檗云、今日大有人普請。便歸院。後潙山問仰山、钁頭在
黃檗手裏、爲什麼卻被臨濟奪卻。仰山云、賊是小人、智過君子。

viii 師爲黃檗馳書去潙山。時仰山作知客。接得書、便問、這箇是黃檗底、那
箇是專使底。師便掌。仰山約住云、老兄知是般事、便休。同去見潙山。
潙山便問、黃檗師兄多少衆。師云、七百衆。潙山云、什麼人爲導首。師
云、適來已達書了也。師卻問潙山、和尚此間多少衆。潙山云、一千五百
衆。師云、太多生。潙山云、黃檗師兄亦不少。師辭潙山。仰山送出云、
汝向後北去、有箇住處。師云、豈有與麼事。仰山云、但去、已後有一人
佐輔老兄在。此人祇是有頭無尾、有始無終。師後到鎮州、普化已在彼
中。師出世、普化佐賛於師。師住未久、普化全身脫去。
ix 師因半夏上黃檗、見和尚看經。師云、我將謂是箇人、元來是揞黑豆老和
尚。住數日、乃辭去。黃檗云、汝破夏來、不終夏去。師云、某甲暫來禮
拜和尚。黃檗遂打、趁令去。師行數里、疑此事、卻回終夏。師一日、辭
黃檗。檗問、什麼處去。師云、不是河南、便歸河北。黃檗便打。師約住
與一掌。黃檗大笑、乃喚侍者、將百丈先師禪板机案來。師云、侍者、將
火來。黃檗云、雖然如是、汝但將去。已後坐卻天下人舌頭去在。後潙山
問仰山、臨濟莫辜負他黃檗也無。仰山云、不然。潙山云、子又作麼生。
仰山云、知恩方解報恩。潙山云、從上古人、還有相似底也無。仰山云、
有。祇是年代深遠、不欲擧似和尚。潙山云、雖然如是、吾亦要知。子但

c h i n e s e t e x t | 363
擧看。仰山云、祇如楞嚴會上、阿難讃佛云、將此深心奉塵刹、是則名爲
報佛恩。豈不是報恩之事。潙山云、如是如是。見與師齊、減師半德。見
過於師、方堪傳授。
x 師到達磨塔頭。塔主云、長老、先禮佛、先禮祖。師云、佛祖倶不禮。塔
主云、佛祖與長老是什麼寃家。師便拂袖而出。
xi 師行腳時、到龍光。光上堂。師出問云、不展鋒鋩、如何得勝。光據坐。
師云、大善知識、豈無方便。光瞪目云、嗄。師以手指云、這老漢、今日
敗闕也。
xii 到三峯。平和尚問曰、什麼處來。師云、黃檗來。平云、黃檗有何言句。
師云、金牛昨夜遭塗炭、直至如今不見蹤。平云、金風吹玉管、那箇是知
音。師云、直透萬重關、不住淸霄內。平云、子這一問太高生。師云、龍
生金鳳子、衝破碧琉璃。平云、且坐喫茶。又問、近離甚處。師云、龍
光。平云、龍光近日如何。師便出去。
xiii 到大慈。慈在方丈內坐。師問、端居丈室時如何。慈云、寒松一色千年
別、野老拈花萬國春。師云、今古永超圓智體、三山鎖斷萬重關。慈便
喝。師亦喝。慈云、作麼。師拂袖便出。
xiv 到襄州華嚴。嚴倚拄杖、作睡勢。師云、老和尚瞌睡作麼。嚴云、作家禪
客、宛爾不同。師云、侍者、點茶來、與和尚喫。嚴乃喚維那、第三位安
排這上座。
xv 到翠峯。峯問、甚處來。師云、黃檗來。峯云、黃檗有何言句、指示於
人。師云、黃檗無言句。峯云、爲什麼無。師云、設有、亦無擧處。峯
云、但擧看。師云、一箭過西天。
xvi 到象田。師問、不凡不聖、請師速道。田云、老僧祇與麼。師便喝云、許
多禿子、在這裏覓什麼椀。
xvii 到明化。化問、來來去去作什麼。師云、祇徒踏破草鞋。化云、畢竟作麼
生。師云、老漢話頭也不識。
xviii 往鳳林。路逢一婆。婆問、甚處去。師云、鳳林去。婆云、恰値鳳林不
在。師云、甚處去。婆便行。師乃喚婆。婆回頭。師便打。
xix 到鳳林。林問、有事相借問、得麼。師云、何得剜肉作瘡。林云、海月
澄無影、遊魚獨自迷。師云、海月既無影、遊魚何得迷。鳳林云、觀風知
浪起、翫水野帆飄。師云、孤輪獨照江山靜、自笑一聲天地驚。林云、任
將三寸輝天地、一句臨機試道看。師云、路逢劍客須呈劍、不是詩人莫獻
詩。鳳林便休。師乃有頌、大道絶同、任向西東、石火莫及、電光罔通。
潙山問仰山、石火莫及、電光罔通。從上諸聖、將什麼爲人。仰山云、和
尚意作麼生。潙山云、但有言說、都無寔義。仰山云、不然。潙山云、子
又作麼生。仰山云、官不容針、私通車馬。
xx 到金牛。牛見師來、橫按拄杖、當門踞坐。師以手敲拄杖三下、卻歸堂中
第一位坐。牛下來見、乃問、夫賓主相見、各具威儀。上座從何而來、太

364 | t h e r e c o r d o f l i n j i
無禮生。師云、老和尚道什麼。牛擬開口。師便打。牛作倒勢。師又打。
牛云、今日不著便。潙山問仰山、此二尊宿、還有勝負也無。仰山云、勝
即總勝、負即總負。
xxi 師臨遷化時、據坐云、吾滅後、不得滅卻吾正法眼藏。三聖出云、爭敢滅
卻和尚正法眼藏。師云、已後有人問爾、向他道什麼。三聖便喝。師云、
誰知吾正法眼藏、向這瞎驢邊滅卻。言訖、端然示寂。
xxii 師諱義玄、曹州南華人也。俗姓邢氏。幼而頴異、長以孝聞。及落髮受
具、居於講肆、精究毘尼、博賾經論。俄而歎曰、此濟世之醫方也、非敎
外別傳之旨。即更衣游方、首參黃檗、次謁大愚。其機緣語句、載于行
錄。既受黃檗印可、尋抵河北。鎮州城東南隅、臨滹沱河側、小院住持。
其臨濟因地得名。時普化先在彼、佯狂混衆、聖凡莫測。師至即佐之。師
正旺化、普化全身脫去。乃符仰山小釋迦之懸記也。適丁兵革、師即棄
去。太尉默君和、於城中捨宅爲寺、亦以臨濟爲額、迎師居焉。後拂衣南
邁、至河府。府主王常侍、延以師禮。住未幾、即來大名府興化寺、居于
東堂。師無疾、忽一日攝衣據坐、與三聖問答畢、寂然而逝。時唐咸通八
年丁亥、孟陬月十日也。門人以師全身、建塔于大名府西北隅。勅謚慧照
禪師、塔號澄靈。合掌稽首、記師大略。住鎮州保壽嗣法小師延沼謹書。
鎮州臨濟慧照禪師語錄終。 住大名府興化嗣法小師存獎校勘。永享九年八
月十五日板在法性寺東經所。

Preface 鎮州臨濟慧照禪師語録序
延康殿學士金紫光祿大夫眞定府路安撫使兼馬歩軍都總管兼知成德軍府事
馬防、撰。黃檗山頭、曾遭痛棒。大愚肋下、方解築拳。饒舌老婆、尿床
鬼子。這風顛漢、再捋虎鬚。巖谷栽松、後人標榜。钁頭斸地、幾被活
埋。肯箇後生、驀口自摑。辭焚机案、坐斷舌頭。不是河南、便歸河北。
院臨古渡、運濟往來。把定要津、壁立萬仭。奪人奪境、陶鑄仙陀。三要
三玄、鈐鎚衲子。常在家舍、不離途中。無位眞人、面門出入。兩堂齊
喝、賓主歷然。照用同時、本無前後。菱花對像、虛谷傳聲。妙應無方、
不留朕跡。拂衣南邁、戾止大名。興化師承、東堂迎侍。銅瓶鐵鉢、掩室
杜詞。松老雲閑、曠然自適。面壁未幾、密付將終。正法誰傳、瞎驢邊
滅。圓覺老演、今爲流通。點撿將來、故無差舛。唯餘一喝、尚要商量。
具眼禪流、冀無賺擧。宣和庚子中秋日謹序。

Bibliography

principal sources
Ahan jing 阿含經 (Āgama sutras). “Āgama” means “sutras that have been handed
down.” The Āgamas are traditionally regarded to be Śākyamuni’s actual sermons as memorized and recited by his disciples, then recorded about one
hundred years after his death. The important Āgamas were translated into
Chinese as the Chang ahan jing 長阿含經, a translation of the Dīrgha Āgama
(t 1: #1); the Zhong ahan jing 中阿含經 , a translation of the Madhyama
Āgama (t 1: #26); the Za ahan jing 雜阿含經, a translation of the Saṃyukta
Āgama) (t 2: #99); and the Zengyi ahan jing 增一阿含經 (增壹阿含經), a
translation of the Ekottara Āgama (t 2: #125).
Anxin famen 安心法門 (Dharma gate for pacifying the mind), 1 chapter (t
48: #2009, 370a–c). One of the works in the Xiaoshi liumen 小室六門
(Bodhidharma’s six gates), a collection of six short works attributed to
Bodhidharma (C., Putidamo 菩提達磨, d. 530?) the First Chan Patriarch
of China. The Anxin famen is written in question-and-answer form and
discusses the nature of true “peace of mind” 安心 as understood in the
Chan school.
Editor’s note: As noted in the Editor’s Prologue, Ruth Sasaki had planned an extensive
descriptive bibliography for this project, in line with her vision of providing as full a context
as possible for the teachings of the Linji lu. Only a small amount of work on this portion of
the project had been completed at the time of her death. The present abbreviated version of
the bibliography contains basic information on the texts mentioned in The Record of Linji,
assembled from the material that Ruth had completed, considerably augmented by information from standard reference works, both published and digital. I would like to gratefully
acknowledge the considerable aid provided by works such as the Oxford Dictionary of Buddhism, by Damien Keown; The Soka Gakkai Dictionary of Buddhism, by the English Buddhist
Dictionary Committee of Soka Gakkai; the Sōgō Bukkyō daijiten 総合佛教大辞典, by Yokochō
Enichi 横超慧日 et al.; the Daizōkyō zenkaisetsu daijiten 大蔵経全解説大事典 , by Kamata
Shigeo 鎌田茂雄 et al.; the Bussho kaisetsu daijiten 佛書解説大辭典, by Ono Genmyō 小野玄
妙 et al.; the Digital Dictionary of Buddhism, maintained by Charles Muller; and the WWW
Database of Chinese Buddhist Texts, maintained by Christian Wittern.

365

366 | b i b l i o g r a p h y

Avataṃsaka Sutra. See Huayan jing 華嚴經.
Baifa lun 百法論 (Clear introduction to the one hundred dharmas), 1 fascicle (t
31: #1614). Full title Dasheng baifa mingmen lun 大乘百法明門論; sometimes
abbreviated to Luechen mingshu lun 略陳名數論. A translation by Xuanzang
玄奘 (600?–664) of the Mahāyāna śatadharmā-prakāśamukha śāstra, a
brief Yogācāra (Weishi 唯識) text attributed to Vasubandhu (C., Shiqin 世
親 or Tianqin 天親; 4th or 5th c.), although the true author is unknown—in
addition to Vasubandhu, the text has been ascribed to Nāgārjuna’s disciple
Óryadeva (C., Tipo 提婆, 3rd c.) and to the Yogācāra thinker Dharmapāla
(C., Hufa 護法, 530?–560?). The treatise describes the Yogācāra doctrine of
the “one hundred dharmas in ﬁve categories” 五位百法, as described in the
Yogācārabhūmi śāstra (Yuqie shidi lun 瑜伽師地論, Treatise on the stages of
yoga practice). According to this all phenomena can be divided into the ﬁve
categories of mind 心法 (8), mental factors 心所有法 (51), form 色法 (11),
phenomena that are associated with neither mind nor matter 心不相應行法
(24), and the unconditioned 無爲法 (6).
Baishi wenji 白氏文集 (Anthology of Bai Juyi). An anthology of the poems of the
great Tang poet Bai Juyi 白居易(772–846), compiled by the poet at the age
of seventy-four. Bai Juyi, a member of the Hanlin Academy and, later, the
prefect of Hangzhou and Suzhou, is famous as a poet for the elegance and
simplicity of his work, and for his strong social conscience.
Baizhang guanglu 百丈廣錄 (Extensive record of Baizhang), 3 fascicles (x 68: #1315
[gy 2] and x 69: #1323 [sy 3]). The ﬁrst two fascicles of the Guanglu comprise
the two fascicles of the Dazhi Chanshi yuyao 大智禪師語要, found in the gy,
plus the single fascicle of the Baizhang Huaihai Chanshi yulu 百丈懐海禪師
語録, found in the sy. In addition, one of the two gy fascicles is itself known
as the Baizhang guanglu. The text presents the biography, sermons, and
dialogues of Baizhang Huaihai 百丈懐海 (720–814), traditionally regarded
as the founder of the Chan monastic system. Baizhang’s tomb inscription 塔
銘 relates that after the master’s death his disciples Shenxing 神行 (n.d.) and
Fanyun 梵雲 (n.d.) edited and published the materials associated with their
teacher. This ﬁrst edition is now lost; the present text is found in gy 2 and sy 3.
Baizhang Huaihai Chanshi yuyao 百丈懐海禪師語要; Baizhang Huaihai Chanshi
yulu 百丈懐海禪師語録. See entry above.
Baizhang qinggui 百丈清規 (Baizhang’s rules for purity), 8 fascicles (t 48: #2025).
The title Baizhang qinggui refers to two works. The ﬁrst, full title Baizhang
conglin qinggui 百丈叢林清規 or Baizhang gu qinggui 百丈古清規, is attributed to Baizhang Huaihai 百丈懐海 (720–814) and is regarded as the earliest
written monastic rule in Chan monasticism, setting forth Baizhang’s rules
for Chan life and practice at his monastery on Baizhang 百丈 Peak. The
second, full title Chixiu Baizhang qinggui 敇修百丈清規 is a work compiled
upon imperial command by Dongyang Dehui 東陽徳輝 (n.d.), revised by

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 367

Xiaoyin Daxin 笑隠大訢 (1284–1344), and published in 1336. A much longer
work than the Baizhang gu qinggui, the Chixiu Baizhang qinggui includes
instructions for ritual practice, regulations for entering and leaving the
clergy and many other aspects of monastic life, descriptions of monastic
oﬃces and duties, etc. This is the version of the Baizhang qinggui included
in the Taishō daizōkyō.
Baizhangshan heshang yaojue 百丈山和尙要訣 (Essential secrets of the priest of
Mount Baizhang), 1 fascicle. One of the works reported in the Jikaku Daishi
shōrai mokuroku 慈覺大師將來目錄 to have been brought back to Japan from
Tang China by the Japanese Tendai monks Ennin and Enchin.
Bannan shō 萬安鈔 (Bannan’s commentary on the Rinzai roku), 4 fascicles. Full
title Rinzai Eshō Zenji goroku shō 臨濟慧照禪師語錄鈔; also known as the
Rinzai roku Bannan shō 臨濟錄萬安鈔. A commentary on the ll by the Japanese Sōtō monk Bannan Eishu 萬安英種 (1591–1654), published in 1632.
Baoji jing 寶積經. See Da baoji jing 大寶積經.
Baolin zhuan 寶林傳 (Biographies of the Precious Forest Temple), 10 fascicles.
Full title Datang shaozhou shuangfengshan caohouxi baolin zhuan 大唐韶州
雙峯山曹候溪寶林傳. Compiled in 801 by Huiju 慧炬 (n.d.), also known as
Zhiju 智炬. At present only the ﬁrst seven fascicles of the work are extant.
The Baolin zhuan—which took its name from Huineng’s monastery Baolin
si 寶林寺 in the mountains at Caoxi 曹溪—is one of the earliest and most
important of the Chan biographical works, setting forth for the ﬁrst time
what became the accepted lineage of the Chan school, from Śākyamuni
through the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs and the six Chinese patriarchs
to Huineng, then continuing until Mazu Daoyi 馬祖道一 (709–788). It is also
the ﬁrst work in which the ancestral transmission verses are found.
Baozang lun 寶藏論 (Treatise on the treasure storehouse), 1 fascicle (t 45: #1857).
A work attributed to Sengzhao 僧肇 (374/78–414), an eminent Chinese
disciple of Kumārajīva (C., Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什, 344–ca. 409), and said to
have been written in the week of grace allowed Sengzhao by the king of the
Latter Qin 後秦 (386–417), Yao Xing 姚興 (r. 394–416), who had ordered the
monk to commit suicide. The story appears to be apocryphal, however, as
the inﬂuence on the text of Huayan tathāgatagarbha thought suggests that
it most probably was composed in the Chan school near the beginning of
the Tang. The work was highly regarded in Chan circles, and was frequently
quoted in Chan works.
Baozhi heshang shisike song 寶誌和尚十四科頌. See Shisike song 十四科頌.
Biexing yishu 別行義疏. See Guanyin yishu 觀音義疏.
Biyan lu 碧巖錄 (The blue cliﬀ record), 10 fascicles (t 48: #2003). Full title Foguo
Yuanwu Keqin Chanshi biyan lu 佛果圜悟克勤禪師碧巖錄. The work, one
of the most important koan collections in the Linji school of Chan, was
compiled by Puzhao 普照 (n.d.), edited by Guan Wudang 關無黨 (n. d.),

368 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
and published in 1128. The work is based on a series of lectures delivered
between 1111 and 1117 at the temple Lingquan yuan 靈泉院 on Mount Jia
夾 by the Chan master Yuanwu Keqin 圜悟克勤 (1063–1135). The subject of
the lectures was the Xuedou baize songgu 雪竇百則頌古, a collection of one
hundred koans selected and commented upon by Xuedou Chongxian 雪竇
重顯 (980–1052). Each of the one hundred cases in the Biyan lu consists of
a chuishi 垂示 (a short introduction by Yuanwu), benze 本則 (the original
koan text interspersed with Yuanwu’s terse remarks), pingchang 評唱 (a full
commentary on the koan by Yuanwu), song 頌 (Xuedou’s verse comments
interspersed with Yuanwu’s terse remarks), and another pingchang 評唱 (a
full commentary by Yuanwu on Xuedou’s verse comments). After Yuanwu’s
death his disciple Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲 (1089–1163), believing that the
text constituted a hindrance to true Chan practice, ordered it burned, and it
was not reissued until 1317.
Bore jing 般若經. The general name for the Chinese translations of the prajñāpāramitā (perfection of wisdom) sutras, a corpus of over forty texts that
expound the teaching of prajñā-pāramitā, the perfect understanding that
the true nature of existence is śūnyatā. Among the most important of these
translations are the Mohe bore boluomi jing 摩訶般若波羅蜜經 or Dapin bore
jing 大品般若經 (Pañcaviṃ-śatisāhasrikā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra; Larger
perfection of wisdom sutra) (t 8: #223); the Xiaopin bore jing 小品般若
經 (Aṣṭasāhasrikā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra; Smaller perfection of wisdom
sutra) (t 8: #227); the Renwang bore jing 仁王般若經 (no Sanskrit title as
this is a Chinese apocryph; Benevolent kings perfection of wisdom sutra)
(t 8: #245); the Jingang bore boluomi jing 金剛般若波羅蜜經 (Vajracchedikaprajñā-pāramitā Sutra; Diamond sutra) (t 8: #235, etc.); Bore boluomiduo
xin jing 般若波羅蜜多心經 (Prajñā-pāramitā-hṛdaya Sutra; Heart sutra) (t
8: #251); and the Da bore boluomiduo jing 大般若波羅蜜多經 (Mahā-prajñāpāramitā Sutra; Great perfection of wisdom sutra) (t 5–t 7: #220). The
prajñā-pāramitā sutras are among the earliest of the Mahayana sutras, with
the earliest, the Aṣṭasāhasrikā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra (Perfection of wisdom
in eight-thousand lines; translated as the Xiaopin bore jing 小品般若經 )
being written about 100 bce. The corpus grew over the following centuries,
until about 500 ce. The teaching of the prajñā-pāramitā literature centers
on the ideal of the bodhisattva, who practices in accordance with the six
pāramitās and who, while continuing to strive toward ultimate enlightenment, remains in the world of samsara out of compassion in order to work
for the liberation of all sentient beings. This is accomplished only through
prajñā insight into the nature of śūnyatā, the essential emptiness of all that
exists. Prajñā functions in the world through upāya, “skillful means,” by
which the bodhisattva uses various devices to help free sentient beings from
delusion.
Buzhenkong lun 不眞空論 (Treatise on śūnyatā), 1 fascicle (t 45: #1858, 152a–153a).

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 369

This short work is the second thesis in the Zhao lun 肇論, by Sengzhao 僧肇
(374/78–414), in which the author discusses the meaning of emptiness, and
explains that the true nature of things cannot be understood through words.
See also Zhao lun.
Cantong qi 參同契 (Harmony of diﬀerence and sameness) (t 51: #2076, 459b).
A short Chan poem by Shitou Xiqian 石頭希遷 (700–790) in jc 30. Full title
Nanyue Shitou heshang cantong qi 南嶽石頭和尚參同契. The text, drawing
from the Zhao lun 肇論 of Sengzhao and the doctrine of the Four Dharma
Realms 四法界 of the Huayan school, sets forth what might be called the
cosmology of Chan, teaching the mutual interpenetration of the phenomenal world of distinction and the absolute world of tathatā (essential suchness), and explaining the relationship of the suchness 体, the characteristics
相, and the function 用 of the universe. The text is especially esteemed in the
Japanese Sōtō school, but it is important for the Rinzai (Linji) tradition too
in that it contains the basis for the doctrine of the Five Ranks.
Caoan ge 草庵歌 (Song of the grass hut) (t 51: #2076, 461c). One of the short
Chan poems in jc 30, by Shitou Xiqian. Full title Shitou heshang caoan ge 石
頭和尚草庵歌. A 32-line, 217-character poem written by Shitou while he was
dwelling in a hut he built on top of a large rock near the temple Nanyue si
南嶽寺. In the poem the hut represents the profound meaning of the Way of
enlightenment.
Chang ahan jing 長阿含經 (Long discourses of the Buddha), 22 fascicles (t 1:
#1). A translation of the Dīrgha Āgama, one of the Āgama sutras, by the
Kashmirian monk Buddhayaśas (C., Fotuoyeshe 佛陀耶舍, n.d.) and the
Chinese monk Zhu Fonian (竺佛念, n.d.) during the Latter Qin dynasty 後
秦 (386–417). The collection, consisting of thirty longer sermons attributed
to Śākyamuni, basically corresponds to the Dīgha Nikāya of the Pali canon,
which contains thirty-four sutras.
Changshan zhenshi zhi 常山貞石志 (Record of Changshan stele inscriptions), 24
fascicles. A collection of stele inscriptions, compiled by Shen Tao 沈濤 (18th
c.) and published in 1842.
Chanlin leiju 禪林類聚 (Classiﬁed anthology of the Chan forest), 20 fascicles (x
67: #1299). Compiled by the monks Shanjun 善俊, Zhijing 智境, Daotai 道泰,
and others at the temple Tianning Wanshou si 天寧萬壽寺, and published
with a preface dated 1307. The Chanlin leiju, an anthology of old koans and
verses classiﬁed into over one hundred categories and with comments by
later masters, is one of the largest and most comprehensive of the koan collections.
Chanlin sengbao zhuan 禪林僧寶傳 (Biographies of monks of the Chan school),
30 fascicles (x 79: #1560). Commonly abbreviated to Sengbao zhuan 僧寶傳.
Compiled by Juefan Huihong 覺範慧洪 (1071–1128), who biographed one
hundred monks active from the late Tang to his own time and entitled the

370 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
work Chanlin baishi zhuan 禪林百師傳 (Biographies of one hundred Chan
masters). Later, however, Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲 (1089–1163) and others
eliminated nineteen biographies for a total of eighty-one monks, and the
collection was published in 1331 as the Chanlin sengbao zhuan. Later editions
of the work have a supplementary section added by Qinglao 慶老 (n.d.), a
disciple of Dahui, giving biographies of Wuzu Fayan 五祖法演 (1024?–1104)
and two other masters.
Chanmen guishi 禪門規式 (Regulations of the Chan school), 1 fascicle (t 51:
#2076, 250c–251b). A short work that is traditionally regarded as the core
chapter of the Baizhang qinggui 百丈清規 (Baizhang’s rules for purity) of
Baizhang Huaihai 百丈懐海 (720–814), reputed to have been the ﬁrst monastic rule for the Chan school.
Chanmen zhang 禪門章 (Essay on the meditation gate), 1 fascicle (x 55: #907). A
short meditation text by Zhiyi 智顗 (538–597), founder of the Tiantai school;
date of publication unknown.
Chanmen zhuzushi jiesong 禪門諸祖師偈頌 (Poems of the Chan patriarchs), 4
fascicles (x 66: #1298). A collection of gathas, inscriptions, poems, and short
works by Buddhist and Chan masters, from the Seven Buddhas of the Past
through Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷讓 (677–744) and Mazu Daoyi 馬祖道一
(709–788). The collection, edited by the Southern Song monks Zi Sheng 子
昇 (n.d.) and Ruyou 如祐 (n.d.) of Wulaofeng 五老峰 at Lushan 廬山, includes
works like the Xinxin ming 信心銘 by the Third Patriarch, Sengcan 僧粲 (d.
606?); the Yuanzhong ming 玄中銘 (Verses on the mystery) by Dongshan
Liangjie 洞山良价 (807–869); and the Linji zhenzong ji 臨濟正宗記 (Record
of the true school of Linji) by Yuanwu Keqin 圜悟克勤 (1063–1135).
Chanyuan zhuquanji duxu 禪源諸詮集都序 (Preface to the Anthology of essential
writings on the origins of Chan), 4 fascicles (t 48: #2015). Compiled by the
Chan and Huayan master Guifeng Zongmi 圭峰宗密 (780–841). This work
constitutes Zongmi’s general introduction to his Chanyuan zhuquanji 禪
源諸詮集, a 100- (or, according to some accounts, 160-) fascicle collection,
no longer extant, of important materials relating to early Chan thought
and history. The Chanyuan zhuquanji duxu elucidates the correspondence
between, on the one hand, Chan praxis and realization, and, on the other,
the teachings and doctrine of the scholastic schools. Zongmi classiﬁes the
two sides into three traditions each, the Chan traditions being 1) the Northern school 北宗 (“cultivation of mind through elimination of delusion”), 2)
the Oxhead 牛頭 and Shitou 石頭 schools (“complete destruction, no support”), and 3) the Heze 荷澤 and Hongzhou 洪州 schools (“direct revelation
of mind-nature”); and the doctrinal traditions being 1) the Hinayana 小乘
and Yogācāra 唯識 doctrines (“explain appearances on the basis of dependency”), 2) the Madhyamaka 般若空觀 doctrine (“negate appearances to
reveal nature”), and 3) the Tathāgatagarbha 如來藏 and Huayan 華嚴 doc-

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 371

trines (“revelation that true mind is essential nature”). Zongmi regarded
1) the Northern school as correspondent to the Yogācāra doctrines; 2) the
Oxhead and Shitou schools as correspondent to the Madhyamaka doctrine;
3) the Heze and Hongzhou schools (which he saw as the truest practical
expression of the Buddha’s intent) as correspondent to the Tathāgatagarbha
and Huayan doctrines (which he saw as the truest doctrinal expression of
the Buddha’s intent).
Chanzong wumen guan 禪宗無門關. See Wumen guan 無門關.
Chanzong Yongjia ji 禪宗永嘉集 (Anthology of Yongjia of the Chan School),
1 fascicle (t 48: #2013). Compiled by Yongjia Xuanjue 永嘉玄覺 (663–713);
published with a preface by Wei Jing 魏靜, the governor of Qingzhou 慶州.
The ten-chapter work explains the meaning and process of Chan training.
Cheng weishi lun 成唯識論 (Discourse on the establishment of consciousnessonly), 10 fascicles (t 31: #1585). Usually abbreviated to Weishi lun 唯識論. A
translation by Xuanzang 玄奘 (600?–664) of the Vijñaptimātratā siddhi, a
commentary by Dharmapāla (C., Hufa 護法, 530?–560?) and nine other commentators on Vasubandhu’s Vidyāmātrasiddhi-tridasa śāstra (Weishi sanshi
lun song 唯識三十論頌; Thirty-stanza treatise on the consciousness-only
doctrine). Xuanzang’s translation, published in 659, was an edited version
based primarily on the commentary of Dharmapāla, with ideas from the
other commentators (particularly Sīlabhadra 尸羅抜陀提 [529–645]) incorporated as necessary. A central text of the Faxiang 法相 (Chinese Yogācāra)
school, the Cheng weishi lun discusses in detail the central Yogācāra doctrine
of the eight consciousnesses.
Chengye lun 成業論. See Dasheng chengye lun 大乘成業論.
Chizhou Nanquan Puyuan Chanshi yuyao 池州南泉普願禪師語要 (Essential
words of Chan Master Nanquan Puyuan of Chizhou), 1 fascicle (x 68:
#1315). Also known as Chizhou Nanquan Puyuan heshang yuyao 池州南泉
普願和尚語要. The collected sermons and instructions of the Chan master
Nanquan Puyuan 南泉普願 (748–835), an eminent heir of Mazu Daoyi 馬
祖道一 (709–788) and teacher of Zhaozhou Congshen 趙州從諗 (778–897).
Published in the Shaoxing era 紹興 (1131–1162), with a postscript by Yuanwu
Keqin 圜悟克勤 (1063–1135).
Chongke guzunsu yulu 重刻古尊宿語錄. See Guzunsu yulu 古尊宿語錄.
Chuandeng da guangming zang 傳燈大光明藏. See Da guangming zang 大光明
藏.
Chuandeng lu 傳燈錄. See Jingde chuandeng lu 景德傳燈錄.
Chuandeng yuying ji 傳燈玉英集 (Precious ﬂowers of the lamp transmission),
15 fascicles. Compiled by Wang Sui 王隋 (n.d.), a noted prime minister and
a disciple of Shoushan Shengnian 首山省念 (926–995), and completed in
1034. The work comprised a selection of the ﬁfteen fascicles of the Jingde

372 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
chuandeng lu 景德傳燈錄 that Wang Sui regarded as most useful for lay koan
practice. The work never attained any great popularity.
Chuanfa baoji 傳法寶紀 (Record of the transmission of the dharma treasure),
1 fascicle (t 85: #2838). A Dunhuang manuscript of the Northern school
tradition, compiled by the layman Du Fei 杜朏 (n.d.). The text describes the
lives and teachings of early Chan ﬁgures from Bodhidharma to mid-Tang
masters. The preface, based on the Chanjing xu 禪經序 (Preface to the meditation sutra) of Lushan Huiyuan 廬山慧遠 (334–416), describes the Indian
dharma lineage. The main text gives the Northern version of the transmission: Bodhidharma, Huike 慧可 (487–593), Sengcan 僧粲 (d. 606), Daoxin 道
信 (580–651), Hongren 弘忍 (601–674), Faru 法如 (637–689), and Shenxiu 神
秀 (606?–706). The presence of Faru in the lineage between Hongren and
Shenxiu is unique to this text.
Chuanfa zhenzong ji 傳法正宗記 (Record of the transmission of the dharma in
the true school), 9 fascicles (t 51: #2078). Compiled by Fori Qisong 佛日契
崇 (1007–1072), ﬁfth patriarch of the Yunmen school. Completed in 1062
and ﬁrst published in 1064, the oldest extant edition is the second, published
in 1164. The Chuanfa zhenzong ji, a traditional account of the transmission
from Śākyamuni through the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs, the ﬁrst six
Chinese ancestors, and the masters of the Five Schools, was an attempt to
answer Tiantai-school attacks upon the authenticity of the Chan lineage.
Qisong also wrote two other works for the same purpose: the Chuanfa
zhenzong ding zutu 傳法正宗定祖圖 (Deﬁnitive chart of the ancestry for the
transmission of the dharma in the true school), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2079) and
the Chuanfa zhenzong lun 傳法正宗論 (Treatise on the transmission of the
dharma in the true school), 2 fascicles (t 51: #2080).
Chuanxin fayao 傳心法要 (Essentials on the transmission of mind-dharma), 1
fascicle (t 48: #2012). Full title Huangboshan Duanji Chanshi chuanxin fayao
黃蘗山斷際禪師傳心法要. A collection of sermons by Huangbo Xiyun 黃檗
希運 (d. 850?), recorded and edited by Pei Xiu 裴休 (797–870), an eminent
government oﬃcial and lay disciple of Huangbo. The preface, by Pei, is dated
857. The fundamental message of the text is that “nothing excels sudden
awakening to the original dharma. This very dharma is mind; apart from
mind there is no dharma. This very mind is dharma; apart from dharma
there is no mind. Mind in itself is no-mind, also there is no no-mind.” The
title Chuanxin fayao is sometimes used inclusively of this compilation and
another collection of Huangbo’s sermons known as the Wanling lu 宛陵録
(also attributed to Pei but almost certainly compiled by other disciples), but
strictly speaking it applies only to the former text. See also Wanling lu.
Chuogeng lu 輟耕錄 (Notes while resting from farm work), 30 fascicles. Full title
Nancun chuogeng lu 南村輟耕録. A Ming-dynasty collection of tales compiled by Tao Zongyi 陶宗儀 (c. 1320–1402), a writer and scholar of the late

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 373

Yuan and early Ming dynasties. Tao is said to have repeatedly refused invitations to oﬃcial posts, preferring to remain on his farm working, studying,
and writing.
Chusanzang jiji 出三藏記集 (Collection of records concerning the Tripiṭaka),
15 fascicles (t 55: #2145). Compiled by Sengyou 僧祐 during the Liang 梁
dynasty (502–556) and traditionally dated to about 510, the Chusanzang
jiji is the oldest extant catalogue of Tripiṭaka texts translated into Chinese.
The work lists the sutras, treatises, and vinaya text translations produced
from the Later Han dynasty (25–220) to the Liang dynasty, and in addition
provides introductions to the important texts and biographies of the translators. The Chusanzang jiji was based on an earlier catalogue, the nonextant
Zongli zhongjing mulu 綜理衆經目錄 (Organized catalogue of the sutras)
compiled by Daoan 道安 (312–385) and published in 374.
Da anban shouyi jing 大安般守意經 (The great mindfulness of breathing sutra),
2 fascicles (see t 15: #602). Full title Foshuo da anban shouyi jing 佛説大
安般守意經. A translation of a sutra on counting-of-breath meditation by
An Shigao 安世高, who worked in Luoyang from about 147 until 170. The
sutra also explains other basic Buddhist meditation practices, such as the
four objects of contemplation 四念處 and the meditations on the ﬁve sense
organs 五根, the seven aids to enlightenment 七覺支, and the eightfold noble
path 八正道.
Da banniepan jing shu 大般涅槃經疏 (Commentary on the Nirvana Sutra), 33
fascicles (t 38: #1767). Also known as the Nanben niepan jing shu 南本涅槃
經疏. Compiled by Guanding 灌頂 (561–632) and published in 619. The Da
banniepan jing shu intersperses the text of the sutra with Guanding’s comments, based on the lectures of his master Zhiyi 智顗 (538–597), founder of
the Tiantai school.
Da baoji jing 大寶積經 (Sutra of the great treasure collection), 120 fascicles (t
11: #310). Short title Baoji jing 寶積經. A compilation by the Indian monk
Bodhiruci (C., Putiliuzhi 菩提流志; d. 727) of forty-nine unrelated short
sutras on various subjects. Of the forty-nine sutras, twenty-six were translated by Bodhiruci himself (ten of previously untranslated texts, and sixteen
of previously translated texts), and the remainder were older translations by
Kumārajīva (C., Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什, 344–ca. 409) and others. The translation and compilation were carried out 705–713.
Da foding rulai miyin xiuzheng liaoyi zhupusa wanxing shouleng’yan jing 大佛頂
如來密因修證了義諸菩薩萬行首楞嚴經 or Da foding shouleng’yan jing 大佛頂
首楞嚴經. See Shouleng’yan jing 首楞嚴經.
Da guangming zang 大光明藏 (Treasury of great light), 3 fascicles (x 79: #1563).
Full title Chuandeng da guangming zang 傳燈大光明藏. Compiled by the
monk Baotan 寶曇 (1129–1197) and published with a preface dated 1265. The
text presents biographical material relating to the Chan lineage from the

374 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Seven Buddhas of the Past to the generation of Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲
(1089–1163), Baotan’s teacher.
Da Huayan jing shu 大華嚴經疏 (Commentary on the Avataṃsaka Sutra), 30
fascicles. A treatise, no longer extant, attributed to Shenxiu 神秀 (606?–
706), the patriarch of the Northern school.
Da piluzhe’na chengfo jing shu 大毘盧遮那成佛經疏 (Commentary on the
Mahāvairocana Sutra), 20 fascicles (t 39: #1796). Also known as the Dari
jing shu 大日經疏. Compiled by Yixing 一行 (683–727) from lectures on the
Mahāvairocana Sutra by Śubhākarasiṃha (C., Shanwuwei 善無畏; 637–735),
an Indian monk who arrived in China in 716 and was instrumental in introducing the esoteric Buddhist teachings and translating esoteric texts (notably the Mahāvairocana Sutra). The Da piluzhe’na chengfo jing shu, published
in 725, deals in its ﬁrst section with the doctrinal aspects of the esoteric
teachings, while the second section concerns ritual practice.
Dafangdeng daji jing 大方等大集經 (Great collection sutra), 60 fascicles (t 13:
#397). Short title Daji jing 大集經. A collection of short sutras translated
into Chinese by Dharmakṣema (Dharmakṣa, Dharmākṣara; C., Tanwuchen
曇無讖 , 385–433?) and Narendrayaśas (C., Nalianyeshe 那連耶舍 , 6th c.),
and compiled into a single text by Sengjiu 僧就 (6th c.) in 586. The sutra
is presented as a sermon delivered by the Buddha sixteen years after his
enlightenment to a great assembly of buddhas and bodhisattvas from
buddha-realms throughout the universe. The teachings are varied, showing
among other inﬂuences those of prajñā-pāramitā and tantric thought, and
many topics are covered, including the dharma categories 法數, the dharma
characteristics 法相, and the rise and decline of the buddhadharma over the
course of ﬁve ﬁve-hundred-year periods after Śākyamuni’s parinirvāṇa.
Dafangguang fo huayan jing 大方廣佛華嚴經 (Comprehensive sutra on the
adornments of buddha), 80 fascicles (t 10: #279). The so-called “New Translation” of the Avataṃsaka Sutra, by Śikṣānanda (C., Shicha’nantuo 實叉難陀,
652–710) and others. See Huayan jing 華嚴經.
Dafangguang fo huayan jing suishu yanyi chao 大方廣佛華嚴經隨疏演義鈔 (An
exegesis of the commentary on the Comprehensive sutra on the adornments
of Buddha), 90 fascicles (t 36: #1736). Also known as the Huayan dashu
chao 華嚴大疏鈔 or the Yanyi chao 演義鈔. Compiled by Cheng Guan 澄觀
(738–839), the fourth patriarch of the Huayan school. The work is a more
detailed explanation of the teachings Cheng Guan presented in his Huayan
jing shu 華嚴經疏 (Commentary on the Avataṃsaka Sutra) delivered for the
sake of his disciples. The relatively informal style of the commentary makes
it particularly accessible among the Avataṃsaka Sutra commentaries.
Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi jing 大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經. See Yuanjue jing 圓覺經.
Dahui Pujue Chanshi nianpu 大慧普覺禪師年譜 (The chronology of Chan

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 375

Master Dahui Pujue), 1 fascicle. Also known as the Dahui Chanshi nianpu
大慧禪師年譜 and the Dahui nianpu 大慧年譜. A chronological history of
Dahui Zonggao, compiled soon after Dahui’s death by a disciple, Zuyong
祖詠 (n.d.), and published in 1183. A revised and expanded edition was
subsequently issued by Huazang Zongyan 華藏宗演 (n.d.), another of the
master’s disciples. The Dahui Pujue Chanshi nianpu was incorporated into
the Tripiṭaka in the Ming dynasty, but is not presently included in either t
or x.
Dahui Pujue Chanshi yulu 大慧普覺禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan
Master Dahui Pujue), 30 fascicles (t 47: #1998a). Also known as the Dahui
Chanshi yulu 大慧禪師語録 or simply the Dahui yulu 大慧語録, the text is a
collection of the work of Dahui Zonggao. Edited by the priest Yunwen 蘊
聞 (n.d.), it was completed in 1171 and presented to Emperor Xiaozong 孝
宗 (r. 1163–1189). The work includes Dahui’s formal sermons 上堂 and 秉拂,
sermons for lay believers 普説, informal talks 法語, verse commentaries on
koans 頌古, poems, and letters.
Dahui pushuo 大慧普說 (The discourses of Chan Master Dahui Pujue), 4 fascicles. Full title Dahui Pujue Chanshi pushuo 大慧普覺禪師普說; also called
the Dahui Chanshi pushu 大慧禪師普説. A work, compiled by Zuqing 祖慶
(n.d.), comprising various talks given by Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲 (1089–
1163) to his lay believers. The same discourses as compiled by Yunwen 蘊聞
(n.d.) constitute fascicles 13–18 of the Dahui Pujue Chanshi yulu 大慧普覺禪
師語錄 (see entry above).
Dahui wuku 大慧武庫 (The Chan arsenal of Chan Master Dahui Pujue), 1 fascicle (t 47: #1998b). Full title Dahui Pujue Chanshi zongmen wuku 大慧普覺禪
師宗門武庫. Edited by Daoqian 道謙 (n.d.), a disciple of Dahui Zonggao. The
Dahui wuku contains comments and anecdotes, taken from Dahui’s talks
to his disciples, regarding various Chan masters both of the past and of the
same period as Dahui. There is a preface by Li Yong 李泳 (n.d.) dated 1186.
Dai-Nippon kōtei daizōkyō 大日本校訂大藏經 (Japanese revised Buddhist
canon), printed in 418 volumes. This collection, based on the second edition
of the Korean canon, was the ﬁrst Japanese Buddhist canon printed with
moveable type. Edited by Fukuda Gyōkai 福田行誡, Shimada Bankon 島田
蕃根, and Shikikawa Seiichi 色川誠一, and published in 1880–1885 by the
Kōkyō Shoin 弘教書院.
Dai-Nippon kōtei zōkyō 大日本校訂藏經 (Kyoto edition of the revised Buddhist
canon), printed in 347 volumes. Commonly known as the Dainihon kōtei
manjiban zōkyō 大日本校訂卍版藏經 or Manji ban 卍版. A Japanese edition
of the Buddhist canon with kundoku readings, edited by Maeda Eun 前田慧
雲 and Nakano Tatsue 中野達慧, and published in 1902–1905 by the Zōkyō
Shoin 藏經書院.
Daji jing 大集經. See Dafangdeng daji jing 大方等大集經.

376 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Danxia heshang wanzhuyin 丹霞和尚翫珠吟. See Wanzhuyin 翫珠吟.
Daode jing 道德經 (Classic of the Way and its virtue), 2 fascicles, 81 chapters. The
Daode jing, the fundamental text of the Taoist tradition, is attributed to Laozi
老子, a Taoist sage said to have lived in about the sixth century bce. The oldest extant copy of the text itself dates from about 200 bce. The two central
concepts of the Daode jing are that of the Way 道 (the unnamable source of
all existence) and virtue or power 德 (the active functioning, or cultivation,
of Tao in the world). Other central concepts are “nondoing” or “the action of
nonaction,” simplicity (“the uncarved block”), emptiness, and harmony with
the universe. The Daode jing is also deeply concerned with the nature of true
virtue in government.
Dapin bore jing 大品般若經 (Larger perfection of wisdom sutra). See Mohe bore
boluomi jing 摩訶般若波羅蜜經.
Dapin jing 大品經. See Mohe bore boluomi jing 摩訶般若波羅蜜經.
Dari jing shu 大日經疏. See Da piluzhe’na chengfo jing shu 大毘盧遮那成佛經疏.
Dasazhe Niqianzi suoshuo jing 大薩遮尼乾子所說經 (Sutra expounded to
Mahasatya Nirgrantha), 10 fascicles (t 9: #272). A late Mahayana work
translated into Chinese by Bodhiruci (C. Putiliuzhi 菩提留支, 6th c.). In
answer to a request by the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī, the Buddha preaches the
twelve excellent means of arousing bodhicitta, the twelve practices of giving,
etc., and teaches that the Three Vehicles—śrāvaka, pratyekabuddha, and
bodhisattva—are simply expedient means for bringing beings to the One
Buddha Vehicle. He then answers a request by Mahasatya Nirgrantha for
guidance on the practice of the ten good acts.
Dasheng baifa mingmen lun 大乘百法明門論 (Lucid introduction to the one
hundred dharmas), 1 fascicle (t 31: #1614). See Baifa lun 百法論.
Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing 大乘本生心地觀經 (Mahayana sutra on contemplation of the mind-ground of essential nature), 8 fascicles (t 3: #159).
Believed by some scholars to be spurious, but by many others to be a late
Indian Mahayana work. The Chinese translation is attributed to Prajñā (C.,
Bore 般若), a Kashmirian monk who worked in Chang’an c. 785–810. The
sutra stresses the merits of becoming a Mahayana world-renouncer, on the
basis of the concept of the four duties or gratitudes 四恩 (gratitude to parents, to all sentient beings, to the ruler, and to the three treasures). The sutra
expounds the doctrines of the triple body 三身, the four wisdoms 四智, etc.,
and has strong elements of Yogācāra thought. It also teaches a number of
meditation practices.
Dasheng chengye lun 大乘成業論 (Mahayana treatise on karma), 1 fascicle (t 31:
#1609). Also known as the Chengye lun 成業論. The Mahāyāna-karmasiddha
śāstra (or Karmasiddhi-prakaraṇa), by Vasubandhu (C., Shiqin 世親 or
Tianqin 天親 ), translated into Chinese by Xuanzang 玄奘 (600?–664)
and published in 651. An earlier Chinese translation of the same text by

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 377

Vimoksaprajñāṛṣi (C., Pimuzhixian 毘目智仙) was entitled the Yechengjiu
lun 業成就論 and published in 541 (t 31: #1608). The text explains the function of karma, both expressed and unexpressed.
Dasheng dunjiao song 大乘頓教頌 (Poem on the sudden enlightenment of the
Mahayana). A short poem by Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會 (684–758) on the
teaching of sudden enlightenment, found at the conclusion of the Heze
Shenhui Chanshi yulu 荷澤神會禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master
Heze Shenhui).
Dasheng fayuan yilin zhang 大乘法苑義林章 (Essays on the forest of meanings
in the Mahayana garden of the dharma), 7 fascicles (t 45: #1861). Often
abbreviated as the Fayuan yilin 法苑義林 or the Yilin zhang 義林章. A treatise explaining under twenty-nine headings the central doctrines of the
Chinese Yogācāra (Weishi 唯識) school. Compiled by Kuiji 窺基 (632–682),
an eminent disciple of the great scholar-monk and translator Xuanzang 玄
奘 (600?–664), and himself the ﬁrst patriarch of the Faxiang 法相 (Chinese
Yogācāra) school of Chinese Buddhism. The text was supplemented after
Kuiji’s death by two of his disciples, Yiji 義寂 and Huizhao 慧沼. The dates of
compilation and publication are unknown.
Dasheng qixin lun 大乘起信論 (Treatise on the awakening of faith in Mahayana), 1 fascicle (t 32: #1666). Usually known as the Qixin lun 起信論. This
important text is traditionally regarded as a Chinese translation of a nonextant work attributed to the great Buddhist thinker Aśvaghoṣa (Maming
Pusa 馬鳴菩薩). However, much evidence (such as the lack of a Sanskrit
original or a Tibetan translation) suggests that the work is of ﬁfth- or sixthcentury Chinese origin. Two translations exist. The ﬁrst, and more popular,
is by Paramārtha (C., Zhendi 眞諦, 499–569), published in 550 or 553; the
second is by the Khotanese monk Śikṣānanda (C., Shicha’nantuo 實叉難陀,
652–710), published in 700 (t 32: #1667). The text had a profound inﬂuence
on the doctrinal development of most major schools of Mahayana, and is
widely cited in Chan. Often used as an introductory text, the work presents
essential Mahayana teachings, commentaries on their meaning, and explanations of the nature and beneﬁts of Mahayana practice.
Dasheng wusheng fangbian men 大乘無生方便門 (Expedient means for attaining
birthlessness in the Mahayana), 1 fascicle (t 85: #2834). Also known as the
Dasheng wu fangbian beizong 大乘五方便北宗, this is one of the early Chan
works found at Dunhuang; the compiler is unknown. The text records the
teachings of the Northern-school master Shenxiu 神秀 (606?–706) or his
disciples, explaining the etiquette to be observed when receiving the precepts and describing the basics of Chan practice in terms of ﬁve gates.
Dasheng yizhang 大乘義章 (Essay on the meaning of the Mahayana), 26 fascicles
(t 44: #1851). Compiled by Lushan Huiyuan 廬山慧遠 (334–416), perhaps
the most famous Chinese Buddhist master of his time, this text constitutes

378 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
a comprehensive study of and commentary on Buddhist doctrine. Among
the topics considered are the meanings of the twelve divisions of teachings
and of doctrines like the buddha-nature, the dual nature of truth, śūnyatā,
delusion, enlightenment, and bodhicitta. A wide variety of doctrinal and
textual standpoints, including Hinayana, Mahayana, exoteric, and esoteric
are explained.
Dasheng zan 大乘讚 (In praise of the Mahayana), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076,
449a–450a). Full title Liang Baozhi heshang dasheng zan shishou 梁寶誌和尚
大乘讚十首. A series of ten short poems that explain the fundamental position of Chan in plain language. The poems, which originally were said to
have numbered twenty-four, are attributed to Zhigong 誌公 (also known as
Liang Baozhi 梁寶志 [保誌]; 418–514), but were probably produced several
centuries later in the mid-Tang period.
Dasong sengshi lue 大宋僧史略 (Song-dynasty compendium of monastic history), 3 fascicles (t 54: #2126). Often abbreviated to Sengshi lue 僧史略. Compiled by Zanning 贊寧 (919–1001), the great scholar-monk who compiled
the sg; completed in 978 and revised in 999. The text describes in ﬁfty-nine
sections the history, institutional structure, ceremonies, regulations, etc. of
Chinese Buddhism, with commentaries by the compiler. The Dasong sengshi
lue may have been an ancillary work to the sg.
Datang shaozhou shuangfengshan caohouxi baolin zhuan 大唐韶州雙峯山曹候溪
寶林傳. See Baolin zhuan 寶林傳.
Dazhi Chanshi yuyao 大智禪師語要. See Baizhang guanglu 百丈廣錄.
Dazhidu lun 大智度論 (Treatise on the great perfection of wisdom), 100 fascicles
(t 25: #1509). Also called the Zhidu lun 智度論. The Dazhidu lun is the Mahāprajñā-pāramitā śāstra (Treatise on the Great perfection of wisdom sutra) by
Nāgārjuna (C., Longshu 龍樹 , c. 150–250), as translated into Chinese by
Kumārajīva (C., Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什, 350–409) in the years 401–405. The
true provenance of the work is in question, however, as there are no extant
Sanskrit or Tibetan versions. The text is a comprehensive commentary on
the Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra (Mohe bore boluomi jing 摩訶般若波羅蜜
經; Great perfection of wisdom sutra), with explanations of many important
Mahayana concepts, including prajñā, śūnyatā, the bodhisattva ideal, and
the six pāramitās. The treatise had a great inﬂuence on the development of
East Asian Buddhist thought, and in China was one of the central texts of
the Four Treatise school 四論宗, along with Nāgārjuna’s Mūlamadhyamaka
śāstra (Zhonglun 中論; Treatise on the Middle Way) and Dvādaśanikāya
śāstra (Shiermen lun 十二門論; Treatise on the twelve gates), plus the Śata
śāstra (Bai lun 百論; One hundred verse treatise) of Nāgārjuna’s disciple
Óryadeva (Tipo 提婆, 3rd c.).
Diamond Sutra. See Jingang jing 金剛經

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 379

Ding shifei cui xiexian zheng pohuai yiqiexin chuan 定是非摧邪顯正破壞一切心
傳. See Lidai fabao ji 歷代法寶記.
Dīrgha Āgama. See Chang ahan jing 長阿含經.
Dongshan Xuefeng Kong heshang yulu 東山雪峰空和尚語録. See Xuefeng Huikong
Chanshi yulu 雪峰慧空禪師語錄.
Dunhuang bianwen ji 敦煌變文集 (A collection of popularizations from Dunhuang), 2 fascicles. A deﬁnitive collection of the Dunhuang bianwen 變文
literature, annotated and collated against similar texts. Compiled by Wang
Chongmin 王重民 and published in 1957 by the Renmin Wenxue Chubanshe
人民文学出版社 in Beijing.
Dunhuang duosuo 敦煌掇瑣 (Miscellany from Dunhuang), 6 vols., 3 parts. A
selection of important materials from the Pelliot collection of Dunhuang
manuscripts in the Bibliothèque Nationale de Paris, compiled by the Chinese linguist and poet Liu Bannong 劉半農 (1891–1934; also known as Liu
Fu 劉復) during his years of study in France and published in 1925 by the
Zhongguo kexueyuan kaogu yanjiusuo 中國科學院考古研究所 in Beijing.
The collection contains 104 wood-block prints of materials important
for literary, social, political, and linguistic studies of Tang-dynasty China.
Reprinted in 1957.
Dunwu rudao yaomen lun 頓悟入道要門論 (Treatise on the essentials for entering the Way through sudden awakening), 2 fascicles (x 63: #1223). Also
known as the Dunwu yaomen 頓悟要門. A treatise by Dazhu Huihai 大珠
慧海 (n.d.), a disciple of Mazu Daoyi 馬祖道一 (709–788). Huihai’s name
Dazhu 大珠, which means “great pearl,” derives from Mazu’s praise, upon
reading the treatise, of Huihai as a Great Pearl illuminating everything
without hindrance. The Dunwu rudao yaomen lun, written after Huihai’s
retirement, was edited and ﬁrst published in 1374 by a monk named Miaoxie
妙叶 (n.d.), from a manuscript he claimed to have found in an old case. The
text expounds the doctrine of sudden awakening as taught by the Southern
school of Chan. The ﬁrst fascicle is in question-and-answer form; the second
fascicle (entitled Zhufang menren canwen yulu 諸方門人參問語錄) presents
Huihai’s sermons as well as further questions and answers.
Dunwu wusheng bore song 頓悟無生般若頌 (Verses on sudden awakening to the
wisdom of no-birth), 1 fascicle. See Xianzong ji 顯宗記.
Dunwu yaomen 頓悟要門. See Dunwu rudao yaomen lun 頓悟入道要門論.
Dushi fangyu jiyao 讀史方輿紀要 (Essentials of historical geography of China), 6
vols. Compiled by Gu Zuyu 顧祖禹 (1631–1692). A comprehensive geography
of China written from a historical and political standpoint, with an emphasis on topography as it relates to military strategy.
Eihei kōroku 永平廣錄 (Comprehensive records of Eihei), 10 fascicles. A collection of the formal sermons, koans with verse comments, and poetry of
Dōgen Kigen 道元希玄 (1200–1253), edited by his disciple Senne 詮慧 (n.d.)

380 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
and others, and published in 1253. The material covers the period from 1236
(when Dōgen was at Kōshō-ji 興聖寺, south of Kyoto) to 1252 (when Dōgen
was at Eihei-ji 永平寺 in Fukui).
Eihei shingi 永平淸規 (Monastic regulations of Eihei), 2 fascicles, 6 chapters. Full
title Nichi’iki Sōdō shoso Dōgen Zenji shingi 日域曹洞初祖道元禪師淸規. The
major writings of Dōgen Kigen 道元希玄 (1200–1253) on the regulations and
ideals of monastic life and practice, ﬁrst published as a single work in 1667
by Kōshō Chidō 光紹智堂 (d. 1670), thirtieth abbot of Eihei-ji. The six chapters are: “Tenzō kyōkun” 典座教訓 (Instructions for the cook); “Bendōhō”
辧道法 (Procedures for pursuing the Way); “Fu shukuhanpō” 赴粥飯法
(Procedures for taking food); “Shuryō shingi” 衆寮淸規 (Regulations for the
common quarters); “Tai daiko goge jari hō” 対大己五夏闍梨法 (Regulations
for treating one’s seniors); “Chiji shingi” 知事淸規 (Rules of purity for stewards). Over twelve years were required to complete the work, from “Tenzō
kyōkun” to “Chiji shingi.”
Enmyō Kokushi gyōjitsu nenpu 圓明國師行實年譜 (Chronology of the life of
National Teacher Enmyō), 1 fascicle. Full title Juhō kaisan Hattō Enmyō
Kokushi gyōjitsu nenpu 鷲峰開山法燈圓明國師行實年譜 . A biographical
work setting forth in chronological order the important events in the life
of the early Japanese Zen master Shinchi Kakushin 心地覺心 (1207–1298).
Kakushin transmitted to Japan the lineage of Wumen Huikai 無門慧開
(1183–1260), a distinguished master of the late Southern Song dynasty. The
compilation of the Nenpu is attributed to Shōkun 聖薫 (n.d.), a third-generation disciple of Shinchi.
Erru sixing lun 二入四行論 (Discourse on the two entrances and the four practices). Another miscellany of texts that, like the Xiaoshi liumen 小室六門
(Bodhidharma’s six gates), is attributed to Bodhidharma, although there
is no evidence that he was the actual author. The “two entrances” are the
entrance of principle (“abandoning the false and returning to the true”) and
the entrance of practice; the “four practices” are the practice of 1) accepting
apparent injustices; 2) accepting circumstances; 3) detachment or nonseeking; 4) being in accord with the dharma (Dunhuang mss, s 2715).
Fahua jing 法華經. The general name for the various Chinese translations of
the Sanskrit Saddharma-puṇḍarīka Sutra (The Lotus of the True Dharma
or simply Lotus Sutra). Probably composed in North India early in the ﬁrst
century ce, the Lotus Sutra is one of the ﬁrst Mahayana sutras and one of the
most popular, with Sanskrit manuscripts found widely throughout Nepal,
Gilgit, Afghanistan, and Central Asia. The extant Sanskrit text consists of
twenty-seven chapters, with prose sections interspersed with verse recapitulations. The sutra teaches that the ultimate goal of the Buddhist Way is
the attainment of buddhahood via the “buddha vehicle” (buddhayāna), also
known as the “one true vehicle” (ekayāna). The Three Vehicles—the śrāvaka,

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 381

pratyekabuddha, and bodhisattva—are simply expedient means for bringing sentient beings to the ekayāna. Furthermore, buddhahood is universally
accessible to all sentient beings, even the icchantika, people traditionally
believed to have no possibility of reaching enlightenment. The sutra also
describes the Buddha as an eternal being, who manifests from time to time
to continue his work toward the “one great cause” of liberating all sentient
beings before passing away again into nirvana.
The earliest Chinese translation of the sutra was a partial one, now lost,
made about 235 ce. There have been ﬁve other translations, of which the
following three are extant: 1) Zhengfahua jing 正法華經, 10 fascicles (t 9:
#263), translated in 286 by the Scythian monk Dharmarakṣa (C., Zhu Fahu
竺法護, ﬂ. 265–313); 2) Miaofa lianhua jing 妙法蓮華經, 7 fascicles (t 9: #262),
also known as the Fahua jing 法華經, translated in 406 by Kumārajīva (C.,
Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什, 344–ca. 409); 3) Tianpin miaofa lianhua jing 添品
妙法蓮華經 , 7 fascicles (t 9: #264), translated in 601 by Jñānagupta (C.,
She’najueduo 闍那崛多, 523–600) and Dharmagupta (C., Damojiduo 達磨
笈多, d. 619). Of these, Kumārajīva’s Miaofa lianhua jing has always been
the most popular. Kumārajīva’s original translation was supplemented a
little less than a century after its publication by the monks Faxian 法献 and
Dharmamati (C., Fayi 法意 ), who added the important “Devadatta” and
“Samantamukha” chapters. The Lotus Sutra is the basic text for the Tiantai
天臺 school and the Japanese Nichiren 日蓮 school, and it has been inﬂuential in most other traditions of Mahayana Buddhism as well. It is much read
in the Zen school, with the Guanyin jing 觀音經 (Lotus Sutra chapter 25, the
“Guanshiyin pusa pumen pin” 觀世音菩薩普門品 [Chapter on the universal
gate of Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara]) utilized as a separate sutra for daily
chanting in morning services. Several modern English translations of the
Lotus Sutra exist; see Soothill 1930; Murano 1974; Watson 1993.
Fahua xuanzan 法華玄贊 (Praising the profundity of the Lotus Sutra), 10 fascicles (t 34: #1723). Full title Miaofa lianhua jing xuanzan 妙法蓮華經玄贊;
date of publication unknown. A commentary on the meaning of the Lotus
Sutra from the perspective of Yogācāra thought, compiled by Kuiji 窺基
(632–682), the ﬁrst patriarch of the Faxiang 法相 (Chinese Yogācāra) school.
Kuiji interpreted the sutra in a way quite diﬀerent from other commentators, and quite diﬀerent from the actual words of the sutra, asserting that
the Three Vehicles (triyāna) represent the truth, with the one true vehicle
(ekayāna) being an expedient.
Fahua yishu 法華義疏 (Commentary on the meaning of the Lotus Sutra), 12
fascicles (t 34: #1721). Date of publication unknown. This is one of several
commentaries on the Lotus Sutra by the great Sanlun 三論 scholar Jizang 吉
藏 (549–623), with many valuable citations from sutras and the theses and
commentaries of other scholars.

382 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Fangguang bore jing 放光般若經 (The light-emitting perfection of wisdom sutra),
20 fascicles (t 8: #221). Also known as the Fangguang bore boluomi jing 放
光般若波羅蜜經. This is the Pañcaviṃśati-sāhasrikā-prajñāpāramitā Sutra
(Larger wisdom sutra) as translated around 291 by Mokṣala (C., Wuluocha
無羅叉 or Zhu Luocha 竺羅叉; 3c) and Zhu Shulan 竺叔蘭 (dates and Indian
name unknown). See Bore jing 般若經 and Mohe bore boluomi jing 摩訶般若
波羅蜜經.

Fanwang jing 梵網經 (Brahma-net sutra), 2 fascicles (t 24: #1484). Also known
as the Fanwang jing lushe’nafo shuo pusa xindi jie pin 梵網經盧舍那佛說菩薩
心地戒品, the Fanwang pusa jie jing 梵網菩薩戒經 and the Pusa jie jing 菩薩戒
經. The translation is attributed to Kumārajīva, although most contemporary
scholars regard it as a fourth-century Chinese composition. Its inﬂuence
on the formation of East Asian Buddhism was nevertheless immense, as
it comprises the fundamental text setting forth the Mahayana bodhisattva
precepts. These precepts, consisting of ten grave precepts and forty-eight
lesser precepts and emphasizing compassion toward all sentient beings,
were highly valued in China, Korea, Vietnam, and Japan (where they became
the sole precepts taken by many clerics).
Fayan Chanshi yulu 法演禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master Fayan), 3
fascicles (t 47: #1995). Full title Wuzu Fayan Chanshi yulu 五祖法演禪師語
錄. The sermons, verses, and inscriptions of the Chan master Wuzu Fayan 五
祖法演 (1024?–1104), with prefaces dated 1095. It was ﬁrst published in 1098,
while Fayan was still alive. Fascicle 1 consists of three series of sermons:
those delivered while the master was at Mount Simian 四面 (compiled by
his disciple Cailiang 才良), those delivered while he was at Mount Taiping
太平 (compiled by Qingyuan 清遠), and those delivered while he was at the
temple Haihui si 海會寺 (compiled by Jingchun 景淳); fascicle 2 consists of
sermons delivered at Mount Baiyun 白雲 Haihui si 海會寺; and fascicle 3
consists of sermons delivered at Mount Huangmei 黄梅, plus poems and
postscripts.
Fayuan yilin 法苑義林. See Dasheng fayuan yilin zhang 大乘法苑義林章.
Fayuan zhulin 法苑珠林 (Precious grove of the dharma garden), 100 fascicles
(t 53: #2122). Completed in 668, the Fayuan zhulin is an encyclopedic compilation of scriptural passages and Buddhist miracle stories by Daoshi 道
世 (591–683), a disciple of the great Chinese scholar-monk Xuanzang 玄
奘 (600?–664) and one of the founders of the Chinese Vinaya school. The
text, a history of Chinese Buddhism up until that time, contains detailed
information on Buddhist cosmology, Buddhist biography, and innumerable
other topics including folklore and legend. Lengthy quotations from Buddhist sutras and treatises, historical works, literature, and a wide range of
other sources provide knowledge of texts that are now lost or very diﬃcult
to obtain.

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 383

Fazhu jing 法住經. See Fo lin niepan ji fazhu jing 佛臨涅槃記法住經.
Fenyang Wude Chanshi yulu 汾陽無徳禪師語録 (Recorded sayings of Chan
Master Fenyang Wude), 3 fascicles (t 47: #1992). Also called the Fenyang
Zhao Chanshi yulu 汾陽昭禪師語録, and often abbreviated as the Fenyang
lu 汾陽録, this work records the sermons, talks, verses, and various writings
of Chan master Fenyang Shanzhao 汾陽善昭 (947–1024). Compiled by the
master’s chief dharma heir, Shishuang Chuyuan 石霜楚圓 (986–1039), with
a preface by the government oﬃcial Yang Yi 楊億 (968–1024). The work is
notable in that, in addition to Fenyang’s sermons 上堂, informal discourses
小参, and exchanges 問答, it records his verse commentaries on the Five
Ranks 五位 of Dongshan Liangjie 洞山良价 (807–869)—the ﬁrst such commentary by a Linji master. It is also notable for the three collections of koans
in fascicle 2 that became models for the subsequent koan collections Xuedou
baize songgu 雪竇百則頌古 (the original version of the Biyan lu 碧巖録) and
the Xuedou baize niangu 雪竇百則拈古 (the original version of the Jijie lu 撃
節録).
Fo lin niepan ji fazhu jing 佛臨涅槃記法住經 (Sutra of the abiding dharma,
recorded as the Buddha was about to enter nirvana), 1 fascicle (t 12: #390).
Abbreviated as the Fazhu jing 法住經, and also known as the Wuliangshou
gongyang yigui 無量壽供養儀軌. A translation by Xuanzang 玄奘 (600?–664)
in 652 of the Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra, in which the Buddha, just before
entering nirvana, foretells at the request of Ānanda the decline of the true
Dharma during the thousand-year period following his death, and prophesyes the coming of a dharma-protecting bodhisattva.
Fochui banniepan lueshuo jiaojie jing 佛垂般涅槃略説教誡經. See Foyijiao jing 佛
遺教經.
Fodi jing lun 佛地經論 (Treatise on the Buddhabhūmi Sutra [Fodi jing 佛地經;
Buddha-stage sutra]), 7 fascicles (t 26: #1530). Also known as the Fodi lun 佛
地論. A treatise by Bandhuprabha (C., Qinguang 親光) on the buddha-stages
as understood from the standpoint of Yogācāra thought. The text explains
the Buddhabhūmi Sutra in terms of the qualities of pure dharmadhātu 清淨
法界 and the four wisdoms (great perfect mirror wisdom 大圓鏡智, universal nature wisdom 平等性智, marvelous observing wisdom 妙觀察智, and
perfecting-of-action wisdom 成所作智). Bandhuprabha’s text was translated
by Xuanzang 玄奘 (600?–664) in 650.
Foding zunsheng tuoluoni jing 佛頂尊勝陀羅尼經 (Sutra of the victorious
Buddha-crown dhāraṇī), 1 fascicle (t 19: #967). Also known as Zunsheng
tuoluoni 尊勝陀羅尼. Translated in 682 by the Kashmirian monk Buddhapāli
(C., Fotuoboli 佛陀波利 , 637–735). According to Buddhapāli’s biography
in the sg (t 50: 717c), he traveled from his home in North India to Mount
Wutai 五臺 hoping to meet Mañjuśrī. When he arrived on the mountain in
676 the bodhisattva appeared to him as an old man, and instructed him to

384 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
return to India and bring back to China the Foding zunsheng tuoluoni jing.
Buddhapāli did so, and translated the sutra with the Chinese monk Shunzhen 順貞 (n.d.) and others. This has remained the most popular of several
translations, which include the Foding zunsheng tuoluoni jing 佛頂尊勝陀羅
尼經, by Du Xingyi 杜行顗 (7c) (t 19: #968); the Foding zuisheng tuoluoni
jing 佛頂最勝陀羅尼經, by Divākara (C., Dipoheluo 地婆訶羅, 613–688) (t 19:
#969); and the Foshuo foding zunsheng tuoluoni jing 佛説佛頂尊勝陀羅尼經,
by Yijing 義淨 (635–713) (t 19: #971). According to legend, the versions by Du
Xingyi and Divākara were the ﬁrst to be made, but, since the emperor did
not wish the translations to leave the palace, the sutra was retranslated by
Buddhapāli and Shunzhen.
Foguo Keqin Chanshi xinyao 佛果克勤禪師心要 (Essentials of Chan Master
Foguo Keqin), 2 fascicles (x 69: #1357). Also known as Foguo Yuanwu Zhenjue Chanshi xinyao 佛果圜悟眞覺禪師心要 and Yuanwu Chanshi xinyao 圜
悟禪師心要. A collection of 140 short writings by the Chan master Yuanwu
Keqin 圜悟克勤 (1063–1135) on the essentials of Chan, addressed to the master’s lay and ordained disciples.
Foguo Yuanwu Chanshi yulu 佛果圜悟禪師語録. See Yuanwu Foguo Chanshi
yulu 圜悟佛果禪師語録.
Foguo Yuanwu Keqin Chanshi biyan lu 佛果圜悟克勤禪師碧巖錄. See Biyan lu 碧
巖錄.
Foshuo da anban shouyi jing 佛説大安般守意經. See Da anban shouyi jing 大安
般守意經.
Foshuo guanfo sanmeihai jing 佛説觀佛三昧海經. See Guanfo sanmeihai jing 觀佛
三昧海經.
Foshuo guan wuliangshou fo jing 佛説觀無量壽佛經. See Guan wuliang shou jing 觀
無量壽經.
Foshuo Mile dachengfo jing 佛説彌勒大成佛經. See Mile dachengfo jing 彌勒大成
佛經.
Foshuo Shiyimian Guanyin shenzhou jing 佛説十一面觀世音神呪經. See Shiyimian Guanyin shenzhou jing 十一面觀音神呪經.
Foshuo wuliangshou jing 佛説無量壽經. See Wuliangshou jing 無量壽經.
Foshuo Yangjueji jing 佛說鴦崛髻經 (Aṅgulimāla Sutra preached by Buddha), 1
fascicle (t 2: #119). Translated by Faju 法炬 (4c). The text relates the story of
the bandit Aṅgulimāla, who kills travelers and villagers until converted to
the spiritual path by Śākyamuni. Aṅgulimāla joined the Buddhist sangha
and eventually attained arhathood.
Foshuo Yangjuemo jing 佛說鴦崛摩經 (Aṅgulimāla Sutra preached by Buddha),
1 fascicle (t 2: #118). Translated by the Scythian monk Dharmarakṣa (Zhu
Fahu 竺法護, ﬂ. 265–313). For a description of the basic contents, see entry
above.
Foxing lun 佛性論 (Thesis on buddha-nature), 4 fascicles (t 31: #1610). Author-

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 385

ship is attributed to Vasubandhu (C., Shiqin 世親 or Tianqin 天親); translated by Paramārtha (C., Zhendi 眞諦, 499–569). The Foxing lun explains in
detail the concept of buddha-nature from a Mahayana perspective, citing
passages from the Lotus Sutra, the Shengman jing 勝鬘經 (The lion’s roar of
Queen Śrīmālā sutra), and other texts. It proclaims the universality of the
buddha-nature, and argues against the positions of the Hinayana and nonBuddhist schools.
Foyijiao jing 佛遺教經 (Sutra of bequeathed teachings), 1 fascicle (t 12: #389).
Full title Fochui banniepan lueshuo jiaojie jing 佛垂般涅槃略説教誡經. Translated by Kumārajīva (C., Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什, 344–ca. 409). This sutra is
traditionally regarded as the Buddha’s ﬁnal teaching delivered just prior
to his entering nirvana, in which he explains the most important points
of his teachings and otherwise instructs his students on how to follow the
Way following his departure. However, discovery of the Sanskrit text of the
Buddhacarita (an epic biography of the Buddha by the great Mahayana poet
Aśvaghoṣa [100–c. 160]) revealed that the sutra was a Chinese rendering of
the section of the Buddhacarita dealing with the end of the Buddha’s life.
Fu Dashi lu 傅大士錄 (Record of Fu Dashi). See Shanhui Dashi lu 善慧大士錄.
Fu Dashi xinwang ming 傅大士心王銘. See Xinwang ming 心王銘.
Fuzhou Xuansha Zongyi Dashi guanglu 福州玄沙宗一大師廣録. See Xuansha
Zongyi Dashi guanglu 玄沙宗一大師廣錄.
Gaoseng zhuan 高僧傳 (Biographies of eminent monks), 14 fascicles (t 50:
#2059). Sometimes called the Liang gaoseng zhuan 梁高僧傳, as it was written during the Liang dynasty (502–557); this title also serves to distinguish
it from subsequent works in the “Eminent Monk” genre, written in later
dynasties. Compiled by Huijiao 慧皎 (497–554), the Gaoseng zhuan contains
the biographies of ﬁve hundred monks who were active between the years
67 (the traditional date of Buddhism’s transmission to China) and 519 (the
year of the Gaoseng zhuan’s completion). The collection divides the monks
into ten categories, depending upon their area of eminence: translation,
doctrinal exegesis, miracle working, meditation, vinaya, asceticism or martyrdom, sutra expertise, benefaction, defending the dharma, and chanting.
Subsequent “Eminent Monk” collections were: 1) the Xu gaoseng zhuan 續
高僧傳 (Supplementary “Biographies of eminent monks”; also known as
the Tang gaoseng zhuan 唐高僧傳, Tang-dynasty “Biographies of eminent
monks”), 30 fascicles (t 50: #2060); 2) the Song gaoseng zhuan 宋高僧傳
(Song-dynasty “Biographies of eminent monks”), 30 fascicles (t 50: #2061);
and 3) the Da Ming gaoseng zhuan 大明高僧傳 (Ming-dynasty “Biographies
of eminent monks”), 8 fascicles (t 50: #2062).
Genben shuo yiqie you bu nituona 根本說一切有部尼陀那 (Vinaya of the
Mūlasarvāstivādin school), 10 fascicles (t 24: #1452). Translated in 703 by
Chinese monk Yijing 義淨 (635–713), who brought back to China from his

386 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
long pilgrimage in India the vinaya (precepts) of the Mūlasarvāstivādin
school, one of the later subdivisions of the Sarvāstivādin school.
Gu qingliang zhuan 古清凉傳 (Old Tales of [Mount] Qingliang), 2 fascicles (t
51: #2098). Compiled during the Gaozong 高宗 era (649–689) by the Tang
monk Huixiang 慧祥 (n.d.), the book contains information about Mount
Wutai 五臺, the famous holy mountain located in Shanxi Province that is
sacred to the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī. The book explains the origin of the
mountain’s name, describes its physical features and Buddhist sites, relates
tales of famous pilgrims, etc. It was known as the Qingliangshan zhuan 清凉
山傳 (Tales of Mount Qingliang) until the publication of later, similar works
on the mountain such as the Guang qingliang zhuan 廣清凉傳 (Comprehensive Tales of [Mount] Qingliang; t 51: #2099), written in 1060 by the Song
monk Yanyi 延一 (n.d.); and the Xu qingliang zhuan 續清凉傳 (Supplementary Tales of [Mount] Qingliang; t 51: #2100), by the Chinese oﬃcial (and
later prime minister) Zhang Shangying 張商英 (1043–1121).
Guan jing 觀經. See Guan wuliang shou jing 觀無量壽經.
Guan wuliang shou jing 觀無量壽經 (Sutra on the contemplation of eternal life),
1 fascicle (t 12: #365). Full title Foshuo guan wuliang shou fo jing 佛説觀無
量壽佛經; usually abbreviated as Guan jing 觀經. The Chinese translation
of the Amitāyur-dhyāna Sutra (reconstructed Sanskrit title), produced in
424 by Kālayaśas (C., Jiangliangyeshe 畺良耶舍, 383–442). It is probable that
the text originated in Central Asia or China, as there is no extant Sanskrit
text or Tibetan translation. This is one of the three principal sutras of the
Pure Land school of Buddhism, along with the Wuliangshou jing 無量壽經
(Sutra on eternal life) and the Amituo jing 阿彌陀經 (Sutra of Amitābha).
The term “eternal life” of the title is a synonym for the name Amitābha (C.,
Amituo 阿彌陀), the central buddha of the Pure Land tradition. In the sutra
Śākyamuni preaches to Vaidehī, the queen of Magadha, whose husband,
King Bimbisāra, has been imprisoned by their evil son. The Buddha, using
supernatural powers, shows her various buddhas’ pure lands, including
Amitābha’s Pure Land of Bliss, as places where the queen could realize her
wish to live in a place where true happiness is possible. Vaidehī chooses
Amitābha’s Pure Land, whereupon Śākyamuni describes to her sixteen contemplations to enable her to attain rebirth there. The sutra attracted much
attention in China, inspiring the Guan wuliangshou fo jing shu 觀無量壽佛經
疏, the important c0mmentary by Shandao 善導 (613–681) that greatly inﬂuenced the development of the Chinese and Japanese Pure Land traditions.
Guanchang xianxing ji 官場現形記 (Officialdom unmasked), by the Qingdynasty writer Li Baojia 李寶嘉 (1867–1906). The novel, published in serialized form during 1903–1905 in Li’s magazine Xiuxiang Xiaoshuo 繡像小説
(Illustrated ﬁction), was a sharp satire of the Chinese bureaucracy.
Guanfo sanmeihai jing 觀佛三昧海經 (Sutra on the samādhi-ocean of contem-

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 387

plating buddha), 10 fascicles (t 16: #643). Full title Foshuo guanfo sanmeihai
jing 佛説觀佛三昧海經, often abbreviated to Guanfo sanmei jing 觀佛三昧經.
A Chinese translation of the Buddhadhyāna-samādhisāgara Sutra by the
Indian monk Buddhabhadra (C., Fotuobatuoluo 佛陀跋陀羅, 359–429). In
the sutra Śākyamuni preaches the Samādhi-ocean of Contemplating Buddha in answer to a question from his father. Śākyamuni explains the various
ways of contemplating a buddha and his spiritual and physical qualities,
and the emancipating beneﬁts of doing so. The sutra is also notable for its
description of a buddha’s thirty-two primary physical characteristics and
eighty secondary marks.
Guang qingliang zhuan 廣清涼傳 (Comprehensive Tales of [Mount] Qingliang),
3 fascicles (t 51: #2099). A continuation of the Gu qingliang zhuan 古清凉傳
(see entry for this text).
Guangdeng lu 廣燈錄. See Tiansheng guangdeng lu 天聖廣燈錄.
Guangdong tongzhi 廣東通誌 (Comprehensive gazetteer of Guangdong), 334
fascicles. By Chen Changqi 陳昌齊 (1743–1820); Jiang Fan 江藩 (1761–1831);
Ruan Yuan 阮元 (1764–1849); et al. Compiled in 1818.
Guangzan jing 光讃經 (Sutra in praise of the light). See Mohe bore boluomi jing
摩訶般若波羅蜜經.
Guanxin lun 觀心論 (Treatise on contemplating mind), 1 fascicle. The same text
as the Po xiang lun 破相論 (Treatise on the cessation of thoughts), a work
attributed to Bodhidharma but now known to have been written by Shenxiu
神秀 (606?–706), the patriarch of the Northern school. The Guanxin lun
presents Shenxiu’s teachings on the central importance of meditation:
“Question: If a person wanted to seek the enlightenment of buddhahood,
what would be the most quintessential dharma he could cultivate? Answer:
Only the single dharma of contemplating the mind, which completely
encompasses all practices, [may be called] the most quintessential…. All the
various dharmas are simply the product of the mind. If one can comprehend
the mind, then the myriad practices will all be accomplished” (McRae 1986,
p. 207).
Guanxin lun 觀心論 (Treatise on contemplating mind), 1 fascicle (t 46: #1920).
Full title Guanxin lun yi ming jianru lun 觀心論亦名煎乳論 . Based on a
discourse given by the Tiantai master Zhiyi 智顗 (538–597) just prior to his
death, and described by him as his last testament. The discourse focuses
on such central Tiantai doctrines and practices as the Four Teachings
(the Tripiṭaka 三藏教, shared 通教, distinct 別教, and complete 圓教 teachings), the Four Methods of Instruction (direct or sudden 頓教, gradual 漸
教, esoteric 祕密教, and indeterminate 不定教), the Four Types of Samādhi
(constant sitting 常坐三昧 , constant walking 常行三昧 , half-walking and
half-sitting 半行半坐三昧, and unspeciﬁed 非行非坐三昧), and the Ten Methods of Contemplation 十乘觀法.

388 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Guanxin lun yi ming jianru lun 觀心論亦名煎乳論. See previous entry, Guanxin
lun 觀心論.
Guanyin jing shu 觀音經疏. See Guanyin yishu 觀音義疏.
Guanyin yishu 觀音義疏 (Commentary on the meaning of “The universal gate
of Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara”), 2 fascicles (t 34: 1728). Also known as the
Pumen pin shu 普門品疏, the Biexing yishu 別行義疏 and the Guanyin jing
shu 觀音經疏, this work is a commentary by the Tiantai master Zhiyi 智顗
(538–597) on the “Guanshiyin pusa pumen pin” 觀世音菩薩普門品 (Chapter
on the universal gate of Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara) of the Lotus Sutra.
The commentary, compiled by Zhiyi’s disciple Guanding 灌頂 (561–632)
from discourses delivered by the master, reﬂects the great popularity of the
Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara in China. The Guanyin yishu, utilizing many
passages from earlier commentaries on the “Guanshiyin pusa pumen pin,”
presents a detailed discussion of the meaning of Avalokiteśvara and the
Universal Gate.
Guishan Dayuan Chanshi jingce 潙山大圓禪師警策. See Guishan jingce 潙山警策.
Guishan jingce 潙山警策 (Guishan’s admonitions), 1 fascicle. Full title Guishan
Dayuan Chanshi jingce 潙山大圓禪師警策. An early Chinese Zen text by
Guishan Dayuan 潙山大圓 (771–853), an eminent master more commonly
referred to as Guishan Lingyou 潙山靈祐 . The Guishan jingce, together
with the Foyijiao jing 佛遺教經 (Sutra of bequeathed teachings) and the
Sishi’er zhang jing 四十二章經 (Sutra in forty-two chapters), is one of the
“Three Sutras of the Buddhas and Ancestors” 佛祖三經, a collection of three
short writings dealing with the attitude and behavior appropriate for Chan
monastics. The short text comprised Guishan’s appeal for deepened reﬂection and self-discipline on the part of the individual monks and nuns. The
Admonitions soon became an important introductory text for Zen monastics in China, and won early appreciation in Japan as well. A copy was presented by the Chinese master Fozhao Deguang 佛照徳光 (1122–1203) to the
Japanese meditation master Dainichi Nōnin 大日能忍 (d. 1195?), who had it
reprinted and distributed in Japan. This is thought to have been the ﬁrst Zen
text ever published in that country. The text is composed of two parts, the
ﬁrst in prose and the second in verse.
Guisi leigao 癸巳類稿 (Classiﬁed documents of the Guisi era), 15 fascicles. A
compilation by the Qing-dynasty scholar Yu Zhengxie 兪正燮 (1775–1840) of
a wide variety of documents relating to the classics 經, history 史, geography
輿地, medicine 醫, local dialects 方言, etc.
Gujiyin 孤寂吟 (Song of solitude), 1 fascicle. A long poem by the eccentric Chan
master Danxia Tianran 丹霞天然 (738–823).
Guzunsu yulu 古尊宿語錄 (Recorded sayings of the ancient worthies), 48 fascicles (x 68: #1315). Also known as the Chongke guzunsu yulu 重刻古尊宿
語錄. A revision of the earlier Guzunsu yuyao 古尊宿語要 and Xu guzunsu

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 389

yuyao 續古尊宿語要 (Supplementary recorded sayings of the ancient worthies), with material from several other masters. The collection, compiled
by the laywoman Juexin 覺心 (n.d.) in 1267, includes the records of thirty-six
masters, starting with Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷讓 (677–744) and concluding
with Fozhao Deguang 佛照德光 (1122–1203); the complete text of the ll is
included in fascicle 4.
Guzunsu yuyao 古尊宿語要 (Essential sayings of the ancient worthies), 4 fascicles (x 68: #1316 [table of contents only]). A collection of the records of
twenty eminent Chan masters, compiled by Sengting Shouze 僧挺守賾 (n.d.;
also referred to as Ze Zangzhu 賾藏主) of Mount Gu 鼓 and published in
1144. The records started with those of Nanquan Puyuan 南泉普願 (748–835)
and concluded with those of Zhimen Guangzuo 智門光祚 (d. 1031). The text
is no longer extant, but most of the records that were included also appear
in the Guzunsu yulu 古尊宿語錄.
Hanshan shi 寒山詩 (Poems of Hanshan), 2 fascicles. Full title Hanshan shi ji 寒
山詩集; also known as the Sanyin ji 三隠集 (Collection of the three recluses).
A collection of the poems of the three semi-legendary hermits Hanshan 寒
山, Shide 拾得, and Fenggan 豊干, who are said to have lived at or around the
temple Guoqing si 國清寺 on Mount Tiantai 天台. It is not known exactly
when Hanshan lived; estimates of his dates range from the seventh to the
ninth centuries. He is said to have written his poems on rocks and walls
around Mount Tiantai; these were later written down by Lü Qiuyin 閭丘胤
(n.d.), the traditional editor of the collection. Fascicle 1 of the text contains
Hanshan’s poetry; fascicle 2 contains poems by Shide and Fenggan. There
are several editions of the work, all having a preface by Lü Qiuyin and a
postscript dated 1189 by Zhinan 志南 (n.d.) The earliest extant edition dates
from the Song. The collection is one of the most widely read works in all of
Chan literature.
Heze Dashi xianzong ji 荷澤大師顯宗記. See Xianzong ji 顯宗記.
Heze Shenhui Chanshi yulu 荷澤神會禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master
Heze Shenhui), 1 fascicle. Also entitled Luojing Heze Shenhui Dashi yu 洛京
荷澤神會大師語. A short collection of the recorded sayings of Heze Shenhui
荷澤神會 (684–758), the chief early proponent of the Southern school of
Chan. The present text is based on three Dunhuang manuscripts: 1) Nanyang
heshang wenda zazheng yi 南陽和尙問答雜徵義; 2) Hu Shi text 胡適本; 3) Ishii
text 石井本.
Hou Han shu 後漢書 (Chronicles of the Later Han), 120 fascicles. One of the
four early Chinese oﬃcial histories, together with the Shiji 史記 (Records
of the grand historian), 130 fascicles, compiled 109–91 bce by Sima Qian 司
馬遷 (145–90 bce); the Han shu 漢書 (Chronicles of the Han), 100 volumes,
compiled by Ban Biao 班彪 (3–54), Ban Gu 班固 (32–92), and Ban Zhao 班
昭 (1st c.); and the Sanguo zhi 三國志 (Records of the Three Kingdoms), 65

390 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
fascicles, compiled by Chen Shou 陳壽 (233–297). The Hou Han shu, covering the history of the Later Han dynasty (25–220), was compiled by Fan Ye
范曄 (398–446), who drew on the earlier historical compilations, particularly
the Sanguo zhi, and also numerous other works now lost. Fan left the Hou
Han shu unﬁnished at his death; Liu Zhao 劉昭 (ﬂ. 502–520) of the Liang 梁
dynasty appended the eight records (30 fascicles) of the Xu Han shu 続漢書
(Supplement to the Chronicles of the Han), by Sima Biao 司馬彪 (240–306),
to complete the compilation in the form we now have it.
Huangbo Duanji Chanshi chuanxin fayao 黄檗斷際禪師傳心法要. See Chuanxin
fayao 傳心法要.
Huangbo Duanji Chanshi wanling lu 黄蘗斷際禪師宛陵録. See Wanling lu 宛陵
録.
Huangbo Duanji yulu 黃檗斷際語錄. See Huangbo Xiyun Chanshi yulu 黃檗希運
禪師語錄.
Huangbo Xiyun Chanshi yulu 黃檗希運禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan
Master Huangbo Xiyun), 1 fascicle (x 68: #1315, 14a–16b). Also known as the
Huangbo Duanji yulu 黃檗斷際語錄. A short work, the only existing text for
which is in gy 2, consists of the formal and informal sermons delivered by
Huangbo. The contents correspond to the latter half of the Wanling lu 宛陵
録 (see also entry for this text).
Huayan dashu chao 華嚴大疏鈔. See Dafangguang fo Huayan jing suishu yanyi
chao 大方廣佛華嚴經隨疏演義鈔.
Huayan fajie xuanjing 華嚴法界玄鏡 (Profound mirror on the Avataṃsaka
dharma-world), 2 fascicles (t 45: 1883). A commentary, dated 807, by the
fourth Huayan patriarch Qingliang Chengguan 清凉澄觀 (737–838) on
the Huayan fajie guanmen 華嚴法界觀門 (Gates of contemplation on the
Avataṃsaka dharma-world). The latter work, by Du Shun 杜順 (557–640),
the ﬁrst patriarch of the Huayan school, expounds the three types of Huayan
dharma-realm meditation: 1) meditation on the view that śūnyatā comprises
the true nature of all phenomena 眞空觀; 2) meditation on the nonobstruction of principle and phenomena 理事無礙觀; and 3) meditation on universal
inclusion, the view that each and every phenomenon interrelates with and
interpenetrates all other phenomena 周遍含容觀 or 事事無礙觀. The Huayan
fajie xuanjing comments on these meditations, and explains the relationship
between the ten gates of meditation on universal inclusion 周遍含容觀十門
and the Huayan ten mystic gates 十玄門.
Huayan jing 華嚴經 . Full title Dafangguang fo huayan jing 大方廣佛華嚴經 .
The general name for the various translations of the Avataṃsaka Sutra
(Garland [or Wreath] Sutra). The original Sanskrit text, no longer extant
in full, is believed to have been compiled in South India during the fourth
century ce. One of the class of “mahāvaipulya” sutras (大方廣經, “broad”
or “comprehensive” sutras, composed of several shorter, often originally

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 391

independent texts), the sutra formed the doctrinal basis of the inﬂuential
Huayan 華嚴 school of Chinese Buddhism. It is traditionally regarded as
being the Buddha’s sermon on the ultimate nature of truth, delivered in the
weeks immediately after his enlightenment. It presents the view of the world
as seen through the eyes of a fully awakened being, in which all existence
is a manifestation of the universal reality of the Buddha, arising simultaneously and interdependently out of the dharmadhātu (dharma realm) and
thus fully interrelated and interpenetrating. The Huayan jing comprises two
main portions that were originally distinct sutras: the Daśabhūmika Sutra,
which describes the stages of development of a bodhisattva on the path
to enlightenment; and the Gaṇḍa-vyūha Sutra, which in the Huayan jing
constitutes the “Ru fajie pin” 入法界品 (Chapter on entering the Dharma
Land), describing the youth Sudhana’s search for enlightenment in the form
of a journey to visit ﬁfty-three teachers. Two Chinese translations of the
complete sutra were made: 1) Dafangguang fo huayan jing 大方廣佛華嚴經
(Comprehensive sutra on the adornments of buddha), 60 fascicles. Translated by the Indian monk Buddhabhadra (C., Fotuobatuoluo 佛陀跋陀羅,
359–429) in the years 418–420. Also known as the Huayan jing 華嚴經. This
is the so-called “Old Translation” or “Sixty-Fascicle Edition” (t 9: #278). 2)
Dafangguang fo huayan jing 大方廣佛華嚴經 (Comprehensive sutra on the
adornments of buddha), 80 fascicles. Translated by the Khotanese monk
Śikṣānanda (C., Shicha’nantuo 實叉難陀, 652–710) in the years 695–699 ce.
This is the so-called “New Translation” or “Eighty-Fascicle Edition” (t 10:
#279). In addition, the Gaṇḍa-vyūha Sutra was translated separately by the
Kashmirian monk Prajñā (C., Bore 般若, n.d.) in 796–798.
Huayan jing tanxuanji 華嚴經探玄記 (Investigation of the mysteries of the
Avataṃsaka Sutra), 20 fascicles (t 35: #1733). Short title Tanxuanji 探玄記.
A commentary by Fazang 法藏 (643–712), third patriarch of the Huayan
school, on the Dafangguang fo huayan jing 大方廣佛華嚴經, the so-called
“Old Translation” or “Sixty-Fascicle Edition” of the Avataṃsaka Sutra. The
ﬁrst fascicle of the commentary consists of nine introductory chapters,
discussing the circumstances in which the sutra was preached, its position
among the Buddhist teachings, the Huayan school’s classiﬁcation of the
sutras, the Avataṃsaka Sutra’s central teachings, the meaning of its title,
the history of its transmission to China, etc. Fascicles 2–20 consist of a
detailed commentary on the sutra’s contents, citing numerous other sutras,
treatises, and commentaries in an attempt to elucidate the text’s profoundest meanings.
Huayan jing yihai baimen 華嚴經義海百門 (One hundred issues relating to the
meaning of the Avataṃsaka Sutra), 1 fascicle (t 45: #1875). Often abbreviated as Yihai baimen 義海百門. A commentary on the Avataṃsaka Sutra by
Fazang 法藏 (643–712), third patriarch of the Huayan school; date of publication unknown. The text discusses in one hundred sections the central

392 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Huayan doctrine of the “universal causality of the dharmadhātu” 法界縁起,
and was a central text of the Huayan school.
Huozhuyin 獲珠吟 (Song on obtaining the pearl), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076). A
162-character poem by Venerable Guannan 關南長老 (n.d.).
Jiangxi Mazu Daoyi Chanshi yulu 江西馬祖道一禪師語錄. See Mazu yulu 馬祖
語錄.
Jiashe jie jing 迦葉結經 (Sutra of Kāśyapa), 1 fascicle (t 49: #2027). A translation
by An Shigao 安世高 (2nd c.) of a sutra describing the First Buddhist Council, said to have been convened in Rājagṛha by the senior monk Kāśyapa several months after the Buddha’s death to preserve the teachings in the form
the Buddha taught them. The council, which according to tradition was
attended by ﬁve hundred arhats, codiﬁed the sutras (the Buddha’s sermons)
and vinaya (monastic rules of discipline). The Jiashe jie jing reports Ānanda’s
recitation of the sutras, but not Upāli’s recitation of the vinaya.
Jikaku Daishi shōrai mokuroku 慈覺大師將來目錄 (Catalogue of materials
brought by Jikaku Daishi). This is the full catalogue of all of the various
texts, mandala, images, and other materials that Jikaku Daishi Ennin 慈覺
大師圓仁 (794–864), third patriarch of the Japanese Tendai 天台 school, sent
or brought back with him from his ten-year stay (838–847) in Tang-dynasty
China. The Jikaku Daishi shōrai mokuroku is actually a composite work,
compiled by Ennin’s disciples, of three earlier catalogues: 1) the Nihonkoku
jōwa gonen nittō guhō mokuroku 日本國承和五年入唐求法目錄 (see entry);
2) the Jikaku Daishi zaitō sōshin roku 慈覺大師在唐送進錄 (see entry); 3) the
Nittō shingu shōgyō mokuroku 入唐新求聖敎目錄 (see entry).
Jikaku Daishi zaitō sōshin roku 慈覺大師在唐送進錄; full title Tendai Hokkeshū
Shin’eki Ennin hōshi shogu shosō hōmon mandara narabi ni gesho tō
mokuroku 天台法華宗請益圓仁法師且求所送法門曼荼羅并外書等目錄 (A
catalogue of the mandalas, texts, etc. sought and sent back by Dharma
Master Shin’eki Ennin of the Tendai Lotus School), 1 fascicle (t 55: #2166).
This catalogue lists the various sutras, śāstras, vinaya texts, biographies,
commentaries, mandalas, portraits, Shingon ritual texts, and non-Buddhist
works that Ennin sent back to Japan from Yangzhou 揚州, where he resided
between 838 and 839, prior to his departure for the monastery on Mount
Wutai 五臺. The materials, transported by the Japanese envoy, were delivered to Enryaku-ji 延曆寺 on Mount Hiei 比叡 . Upon arrival they were
examined and catalogued by a certain Wada 和田, secretary to the envoy,
with the aid of the monks Ninzen 仁全 (n.d.), Chitetsu 治哲 (n.d.), and
Eidō 叡道 (n.d.). The compilation, dated 840, is slightly diﬀerent in content
from the catalogue prepared earlier in China by Ennin himself, entitled the
Nihonkoku jōwa gonen nittō guhō mokuroku 日本國承和五年入唐求法目錄
(see entry).
Jin shu 晉書 (Chronicles of the Jin), 130 fascicles. An oﬃcial Chinese history

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 393

that covers the Jin dynasty (265–420) and the Sixteen Kingdoms (304–439);
published in 648. The history was commissioned by the Tang emperor
Taizong 太宗 (599–649) and compiled by a group of scholars headed by
Fang Xuanling 房玄齡 (579–648). The book is numbered among the Twentyfour Histories of China.
Jingang bore boluomi jing 金剛般若波羅蜜經. The Vajracchedika-prajñāpāramitā
Sutra (Diamond-cutter perfection of wisdom sutra) as translated by
Kumārajīva. See Jingang jing 金剛經.
Jingang bore boluomi jing lun 金剛般若波羅蜜經論 (Treatise on the Diamondcutter perfection of wisdom sutra), 3 fascicles (t 25: #1511). Also called the
Jingang bore jing lun 金剛般若經論 and the Jingang bore lun 金剛般若論. A
translation by Bodhiruci of a treatise ascribed to Vasubandhu (C., Shiqin 世
親 or Tianqin 天親). Published in 509. Properly speaking it is not a treatise,
but verses ascribed to the Yogācāra patriarch Maitreya (C., Mile 彌勒; 4th
c.?) on the Diamond Sutra, with a commentary ascribed to Vasubandhu
on these verses. A separate translation of the original treatise was made by
Yijing 義淨 (635-713) under the title Nengduan jingang bore boluomiduo jing
lun shi 能斷金剛般若波羅蜜多經論釋, published in 711 (t 25: #1513).
Jingang jing 金剛經 . The general name for the various translations of the
Sanskrit Vajracchedika-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra (Diamond-cutter perfection of wisdom sutra). This short sutra, part of the Mahayana perfection
of wisdom (prajñā pāramitā) literature, takes the form of a discussion by
the Buddha and his disciple Subhūti, on the nature of prajñā and śūnyatā.
The Diamond Sutra, which has been highly esteemed in the Zen school
since the time of the Sixth Patriarch, stresses the non-abiding mind of the
bodhisattva, in which both act and actor are empty of all attachment. The
Chinese translations are as follows: 1) Jingang bore boluomi jing 金剛般若波
羅蜜經, translated by Kumārajīva (C., Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什, 344–ca. 409)
in 401 (t 8: #235); 2) Jingang bore boluomi jing 金剛般若波羅蜜經, translated
by Bodhiruci (C., Putiliuzhi 菩提流支, 6th c.) in 509 (t 8: #236); 3) Jingang
bore boluomi jing 金剛般若波羅蜜經, translated by Paramārtha (C., Zhendi
眞諦, 500–569) in 558 (t 8: #237); 4) Jingang nengduan bore boluomi jing 金
剛能斷般若波羅蜜經, translated by Dharmagupta (C., Jiduo 笈多 ) in 615 (t
8: #238); 5) Nengduan jingang bore boluomiduo jing 能斷金剛般若波羅蜜多
經, translated by Xuanzang 玄奘 (600?–664) in 648; this version appears as
the Di jiu nengduan jingang fen 第九能斷金剛分, in section 9 of fascicle 577
of the Da bore boluomiduo jing 大般若波羅蜜多經 (t 7: #220, 980a–985c); 6)
Foshuo nengduan jingang bore boluomiduo jing 佛說能斷金剛般若波羅蜜多
經 or Nengduan jingang jing 能斷金剛經, translated by Yijing 義淨 (635–713)
in 703 (t 8: #239).
Jingde chuandeng lu 景德傳燈錄 (Jingde-era Record of the transmission of the
lamp), 30 fascicles (t 51: #2076). Usually abbreviated to Chuandeng lu 傳

394 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
燈錄. Compiled by Daoyuan 道原 (n. d.) of the temple Yong’an yuan 永安
院 and edited by the government oﬃcial Yang Yi 楊億 (974–1024). The ﬁrst

edition, completed in 1004 and published in 1011, is now lost. The second
edition is dated 1132. The Chuandeng lu gives chronologically arranged biographies of important Chan ﬁgures, from the legendary Seven Buddhas of
the Past to masters of the tenth century. The names of 1,701 Chan personages
are listed, with biographies given for 951 of these; also included are many
representative sermons, writings, sayings, and verses. The Chuandeng lu is a
major source for the Chan koans.
Jinghui Fayan Chanshi zongmen shigui lun 淨慧法眼禅師宗門十規論. See Zongmen shigui lun 宗門十規論.
Jingtu lun zhu 淨土論註. See Wangsheng lun zhu 往生論註.
Jinguangming jing 金光明經 (Golden light sutra), 4 fascicles (t 16: #663). A translation by the Indian monk Dharmakṣema (C., Tanwuchen 曇無讖, 385–433?)
of the Suvarṇa-prabhāsa Sutra, a Mahayana sutra of the “comprehensive” 方
廣 genre, composed of several shorter, often originally independent texts.
The sutra deals with a wide variety of topics, including the eternal nature of
the dharmakāya, the ten stages of bodhisattva practice, and the protection
accorded to nations by faith in this sutra. The Jinguangming jing attained
wide popularity throughout Asia, and ﬁve Chinese translations were made,
of which three are extant: 1) Dharmakṣema’s translation; 2) the Hebu jinguangming jing 合部金光明經, translated by Baogui 寶貴 (n.d.) (t 16: #664),
published in 597; and 3) the Jinguangming zuishengwang jing 金光明最勝王
經, translated by Yijing 義淨 (635-713; t 16: #665), published in 703. In addition, there were translations into Tibetan and several other languages.
Jingzhuan shici 經傳釋詞 (Explanation of words in the classics), 10 fascicles. By
Wang Yinzhi 王引之 (1766–1834). A compilation of notes on the meaning
and usage of auxiliary characters in the Chinese canonical texts and records,
such as the Confucian Analects.
Jiu Tang shu 舊唐書 (Older chronicles of the Tang), 200 fascicles. The ﬁrst of two
oﬃcial Chinese histories of the Tang dynasty, and one of the Twenty-four
Histories of China. It was commissioned in 941 by the emperor Shi Jingtang
石敬瑭 (892–942), founder of the Later Jin Dynasty 後晉 (936–947), and
completed in 945. The oﬃcial and scholar Liu Xu 劉昫 (887–946) headed
the committee that compiled the text. The original name, which was simply
Tang shu 唐書, was later altered to Jiu Tang shu in order to distinguish it
from the Xin Tang shu 新唐書 (Newer chronicles of the Tang), compiled by
Ouyang Xiu 歐陽脩 (1007–1072) and Song Qi 宋祁 (998–1061) and published
in 1060.
Jiu Wudai shi 舊五代史 (Older chronicles of the Five Dynasties), 150 fascicles.
Also known as the Liang Tang Jin Han Zhou shu 梁唐晉漢周書 (Chronicles of
the Liang, Tang, Jin, Han, and Zhou dynasties). The Jiu Wudai shi chronicled

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 395

the histories of the Later Liang 後梁 (907–923), Later Tang 後唐 (923–936),
Later Jin 後晉 (936–947), Later Han 後漢 (947–951), and Later Zhou 後周
(951–960), the ﬁve states that controlled most of northern China between
the Tang and the Song dynasties. Commissioned by the Song government
to support that government’s claim to the Mandate of Heaven, the work was
compiled by the scholar-oﬃcial Xue Juzheng 薛居正 (912–981) and published in 974. It was known simply as the Wudai shi 五代史 (Chronicles of
the Five Dynasties) until the publication in 1053 of the Xin Wudai shi 新五代
史 (Newer chronicles of the Five Dynasties) by Ouyang Xiu 歐陽脩 (1007–
1072), after which it came to be called Jiu Wudai shi in order to distinguish it
from the later work. The Xin Wudai shi became the better-known work and
largely eclipsed the Jiu Wudai shi, but in 1775 the latter work was recompiled
and subsequently canonized among the Twenty-four Histories.
Jōwa ruishu soon renpōshū 貞和類聚祖苑聯芳集 (Jōwa-era collection of verse
from the ancestral garden), 10 fascicles. A Japanese gozan bungaku literary
collection consisting of several thousand poems by Song- and Yuan-dynasty
Chan monks; the poems were selected and edited by the renowned Japanese
Zen master and gozan poet Gidō Shūshin 義堂周信 (1325–1388). First published in 1388.
Jueguan lun 絕觀論 (On the cessation of notions), 1 fascicle. A text attributed to
Niutou Farong 牛頭法融 (594–657), founder of the Niutou 牛頭 (Oxhead)
school of Chan. The text is not included in the Taishō canon, although a
short passage identiﬁed as being from this work is found in the zl (t 48;
#2016, 941a–b). However, the Dunhuang manuscripts have yielded several
texts with passages matching those attributed to Niutou Farong in the zl
and zj. Although these manuscripts do not contain the zl passage, scholars
are of the opinion that they represent the original Jueguan lun.
Juhō kaisan Hattō Enmyō Kokushi gyōjitsu nenpu 鷲峰開山法燈圓明國師行實年
譜. See Enmyō Kokushi gyōjitsu nenpu 圓明國師行實年譜.
Jushe lun 俱舍論 (Treasury of the Abhidharma), 30 fascicles (t 29: #1558). Full
title Apidamo jushe lun 阿毘達磨俱舍論 . Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakōśa
śāstra, as translated into Chinese by Xuanzang 玄奘 (600?–664) in 651. An
earlier translation, entitled the Apidamo jushe shilun 阿毘達磨俱舍釋論, was
made in 564 by Paramārtha (C., Zhendi 眞諦; 499–569) (t 29: #1559). The
Abhidharmakōśa śāstra is generally regarded as the deﬁnitive treatise on
the Abhidharma of the Sarvāstivāda school, the most inﬂuential of the early
Buddhist schools. The ﬁrst part of the text sets forth the school’s teachings
in six hundred verses, while the second part constitutes a prose commentary on these verses. The work covers all the main themes of Abhidharma
philosophy: the fundamental nature of existence, of delusion and its causes,
of the path to liberation, and of self. The basic themes covered by the text
are discussed in nine chapterss: 1) sources or elements of existence (dhātu);

396 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
2) sense organs and other human faculties (indriya); 3) worlds or realms
(loka); 4) actions (karma); 5) outﬂows, aversions, desires, etc. (anuśaya);
6) stages of sanctity on the Way (āryapudgala); 7) wisdom or knowledge
(jñāna); 8) meditative states (samādhi); and 9) non-self (anātman). The
Jushe lun is valued not only as a presentation and reexamination of the
Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma, but also for its descriptions and critiques of the
Abhidharma of other schools.
Jushi zhuan 居士傳 (Biographies of lay practicers), 56 fascicles (x 88: #1646).
A biographical collection of notable Chan lay practicers, compiled during
the years 1770–1775 by the layman Peng Jiqing 彭際清 (1740–1796). Short
biographies and records are given for a total of 227 lay practicers, from the
Later Han dynasty (25–220) to the Qing dynasty (1644–1911). Peng searched
not only previous lay-practicer biographical collections but also general
historical records, works of literature, prefaces to sutras, and other materials in drawing up the list of ﬁgures mentioned in the Jushi zhuan. The ﬁnal
biography in the collection, that of Zhiguizi 知歸子, is that of the compiler.
Kaihe ji 開河記 (The opening of the canal), 1 fascicle. A novel by an unknown
author based on the construction of the Grand Canal of China by Emperor
Yang 煬 (569–618) of the Sui 隋 dynasty (581–618).
Kassan shō 夾山鈔 (Kassan’s commentary on the Rinzai roku), 10 fascicles. Full
title Rinzai roku Kassan shō 臨濟錄夾山鈔. Published in 1654; the identity of
the compiler is not known. The text presents a detailed commentary on the
canonical passages cited in the Rinzai roku.
Kattō gosen 葛藤語箋 (Notes on Zen terminology), 10 fascicles. A dictionary of
Zen technical terms by the great Japanese scholar-monk Mujaku Dōchū 無
著道忠 (1653–1744). Compiled in 1739, when Mujaku was eighty-seven years
old, the Kattō gosen examines various terms from the jc and numerous
other records. Mujaku classiﬁes terms ranging in length from one to seven
characters into more than twenty categories (“Names,” “Human relations,”
etc.), deﬁnes them in detail, and provides classical sources and references.
The text exists only in manuscript form.
Kissa yōjōki 喫茶養生記 (Drinking tea to promote life), 2 fascicles. A treatise in
which Myōan Eisai (also pronounced Yōsai) 明庵榮西 (1141–1218) promoted
the use of tea. When Eisai returned from his study of Zen in China in 1191
he brought with him seeds of the tea plant, which he planted in the Uji area
south of Kyoto. In the Kissa yōjōki he described tea cultivation and tea’s
beneﬁts for the health.
Konggu ji 空谷集 (Empty valley anthology), 6 fascicles (x 67: #1303). Full title
Linquan Laoren pingchang Touzi Qing heshang songgu kong gu ji 林泉老人
評唱投子青和尚頌古空谷集. The capping phrases and commentaries of the
Caodong master Linquan Conglun 林泉從倫 (n.d.) on a collection of one
hundred koans with verse comments by the Caodong master Touzi Yiqing

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 397
投子義青 (1032–1083). The work, inspired by collections like the Biyan lu
and the Congrong lu 從容錄 (Record of equanimity), is included in the Sijia
pingchang lu 四家評唱錄 (Commentaries on the Four Houses), a collection
of four koan texts. See also Xutang ji 虛堂集.
Kōtei Rinzai roku 校訂臨濟錄 (Revised edition of the Record of Linji). Edited by
the great Japanese scholar-monk Mujaku Dōchū 無著道忠 (1653–1744) and
published in 1727. Dōchū’s Japanese reading of the original Chinese text has
become the standard traditional version.
Kūge nichiyō kufū ryakushū 空華日用工夫略集 (Short collection of Kūge’s daily
thoughts), 4 fascicles. Abbreviated title, Kūge nikku shū 空華日工集. A selection by the disciples of the noted Zen master and poet Gidō Shūshin 義堂周
信 (1325–1388; Kūge was Gidō’s style) from Gidō’s diaries, supplemented with
biographical material, Gidō’s other writings, and records of his sermons.
The compilation also contains the tomb inscription of Gidō’s master, Musō
Soseki 夢窓疎石 (1275–1351). The name of the compiler and date of compilation are unknown. The text existed in manuscript form until it was included
in the Zoku shiseki shūran 續史籍集覧 in 1929. The present edition is based
principally on an abridged edition of what was originally a forty-eight fascicle text.
Kuyai heshang manlu 枯崖和尚漫錄 (Casual records of Ven. Kuyai), 3 fascicles (x
87: #1613). A collection of Zen anecdotes and sermons by Kuyai Yuanwu 枯
崖圓悟 (13th c.), a ﬁfth-generation descendent of Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲
(1089–1163). The text has a preface dated 1272.
Laṅkāvatāra Sutra. See Lengqie jing 楞伽經.
Ledao ge 樂道歌 (Song of enjoying the Way), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076, 461b–c). A
short poem by Nanyue Mingzan 南嶽明瓚 (n.d.), a third generation descendent of the Northern school master Shenxiu 神秀 (606?–706). The poem
extols Nanyue’s simple life in the mountains, residing and meditating in a
grass hut.
Lengqie abaduoluobao jing 楞伽阿跋多羅寶經. The Laṅkāvatāra Sutra as translated by Guṇabhadra (Qiunabatuoluo 求那跋陀羅, 394–468). See Lengqie
jing 楞伽經.
Lengqie jing 楞伽經. The general name for the various Chinese translations of
the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra, a Sanskrit text thought to have been written in South
India about the year 400. The rather loosely organized text presents a variety of teachings, from a strong condemnation of meat-eating to a synthesis
of the tathāgatagarbha and the ālaya-vijñāna (storehouse-consciousness)
doctrines that form the basis of Yogācāra thought. The tathāgatagarbha and
the ālaya-vijñāna (which harbors the karmic seeds of all past actions and
gives rise to the desires that keep a being in the cycle of samsara) form the
root of human consciousness, and of all existence. With enlightenment this
root consciousness is decisively transformed, and the mind is freed from the

398 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
world of delusion. The sutra also speaks of an ineﬀable “supreme knowledge”
(pariniṣpanna) that is identiﬁed with “self-realization” (svasiddhānta), a way
of expression that closely resembles that of Chan. The Laṅkāvatāra Sutra
was very inﬂuential in Chan from the time of Bodhidharma to that of the
Sixth Patriarch, from which time the Diamond Sutra became central; in the
Northern school it never lost its importance. There were four translations of
this sutra into Chinese. The ﬁrst, now lost, was a four-fascicle version by the
Scythian monk Dharmarakṣa (C., Zhu Fahu 竺法護, ﬂ. 265–313). The second
and still most popular version, the Lengqie abaduoluobao jing 楞伽阿跋多羅
寶經, 4 fascicles, was translated in 443 by the Indian monk Guṇabhadra (C.,
Qiunabatuoluo 求那跋陀羅, 394–468) (t 16: #670). The other two translations are the Ru lengqie jing 入楞伽經, 10 fascicles, translated in 513 by the
northern Indian monk Bodhiruci (C., Putiliuzhi 菩提流支, 6th c.) (t 16:
#671); and the Dasheng ru lengqie jing 大乘入楞伽經, 7 fascicles, translated
in 700–704 by the Khotanese monk Śikṣānanda (C., Shicha’nantuo 實叉難
陀, 652–710) (t 16: #672).
Lengqie shizi ji 楞伽師資記 (Record of the masters and disciples of the
Laṅkā school), 1 fascicle (t 85: #2837). One of the earliest extant works
on Chan history, compiled in 720–730 by Jingjue 淨覺 (683–760?) and
found at Dunhuang. The text presents a Chan lineage centering on the
Northern school, starting from the central Indian monk Guṇabhadra (C.,
Qiunabatuoluo 求那跋陀羅, 394–468), the translator of the Laṅkāvatāra
Sutra, and proceeding through Bodhidharma, Huike 慧可 (487–593), Sengcan 僧璨 (d. 606), Daoxin 道信 (580–651), Hongren 弘忍 (601–674), and
Shenxiu 神秀 (606?–706), with Shenxiu as the Seventh Patriarch. The text
is the earliest to connect Bodhidharma to the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra, a move
that may have been an attempt by the Northern school to secure scriptural
authority.
Liandeng huiyao 聯燈會要. See Zongmen liandeng huiyao 宗門聯燈會要.
Liang Baozhi heshang dasheng zan shishou 梁寶誌和尚大乘讚十首. See Dasheng zan
大乘讚.
Liangchao Fu Dashi song jingang jing 梁朝傅大士頌金剛經 (Verses on the Diamond Sutra, by Fu Dashi of the Liang dynasty), 1 fascicle (t 85: #2732). A
work composed of Kumārajīva’s translation of the Diamond Sutra divided
into thirty-two sections, with each section followed by a ﬁve-character-toa-line verse commentary. The verse comments, which in the text are attributed to the bodhisattva Maitreya, are traditionally believed to be those of the
famous Buddhist layman Fu Dashi 傅大士 (497–569), oﬀered to Emperor
Wu of the Liang dynasty.
Liang gaoseng zhuan 梁高僧傳. See Gaoseng zhuan 高僧傳.
Liang Tang Jin Han Zhou shi 梁唐晉漢周書. See Jiu Wudai shi 舊五代史.
Liaoyuan ge 了元歌 (Song of understanding the source), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076,

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 399

461b). Full title Tengteng heshang Liaoyuan ge 騰騰和尚了元歌. One of the
many short poems in the collections Mingji zhenge 銘記箴歌 (Admonitory
verse inscriptions) (t 51: #2076) and Chanmen zhuzushi jiesong 禪門諸祖師
偈頌 (Poems of the Chan patriarchs) (x 66: #1298). The poem is attributed to
Renjian 仁儉 (n.d.), an eccentric who lived outdoors and was thus referred
to as Ven. Tengteng 騰騰, “Wandering Priest.”
Lidai fabao ji 歷代法寶記 (Chronicles of the dharma treasure), 1 fascicle (t 51:
#2075). Also known as the Shizi xuemai zhuan 師資血脈傳 and the Ding
shifei cui xiexian zheng pohuai yiqiexin zhuan 定是非摧邪顯正破壞一切
心傳. One of the early histories of Chan, compiled about 774, during the
Dali 大歷 era (766–778) of the Tang. The text is closer to the later history
Baolin zhuan 寶林傳 (801) than to the earlier Lengqie shizi ji 楞伽師資記
(720–730), presenting a transmission that includes the twenty-eight Indian
patriarchs and traces the Chinese lineage from Bodhidharma to Huike 慧可
(487–593), Sengcan 僧粲 (d. 606?), Daoxin 道信 (580–651), and Hongren 弘
忍 (601–674), with Huineng 慧能 (638–713) as the Sixth Patriarch. The distinctive characteristic of the Lidai fabao ji is that it contains the biographies
of Zhishen 智詵 (another successor of Hongren; 609–702) and three masters
in his lineage: Chuji 處寂 (665–732), Wuxiang 無相 (689–762), and Wuzhu 無
住 (714–774). The second half of the book contains a detailed presentation
of Wuzhu’s teachings.
Liu Zhiyuan zhugongdiao 劉知遠諸宮調 (Ballad of Liu Zhiyuan). A ballad about
Liu Zhiyuan 劉知遠 (895–948), the future emperor of the short-lived Later
Han dynasty (947–951). The ballad, composed in alternating sections of
prose and verse, appears to have ﬁrst appeared in the eleventh century and
been transcribed in the twelfth.
Liuzu tanjing 六僧壇經 (The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch), 1 fascicle.
Full title Nanzong dunjiao zuishang dasheng mohe bore boluomi jing liuzu
Huineng Dashi yu shaozhou dafan si shifa tanjing 南宗頓教最上大乘摩訶般若
波羅蜜經六祖惠能大師於韶州大梵寺施法壇經. One of the central texts of the
Chan school, and the only text originating in China that is honored with the
title “sutra,” the Liuzu tanjing is traditionally said to consist of the discourses
of the Sixth Patriarch, Huineng (638–713), at the temple Dafan si 大梵寺 in
the city of Shaozhou 韶州, as recorded by a disciple named Fahai 法海 (n.d.).
The actual origins of the text are unclear, however; arguments have been
advanced identifying the text’s teachings either with Huineng or Huineng’s
successor Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會 (684–758). The earliest extant text is a
Dunhuang manuscript dating probably to 830–850; this appears to be a
copy of an earlier text dating to perhaps 780. The Dunhuang text is shorter
and is arranged diﬀerently from the text that has been in common use since
the fourteenth century, the edition compiled by the monk Zongbao 宗寶
(t 48: #2007). The latter text (which more or less parallels the Dunhuang

400 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
text) relates the biography of Huineng, then takes up such topics as sudden
enlightenment, no-mind, and the true meaning of zazen and the precepts.
Lotus Sutra. See Fahua jing 法華經.
Luechen mingshu lun 略陳名數論. See Baifa lun 百法論.
Luojing Heze Shenhui Dashi yu 洛京荷澤神會大師語. See Heze Shenhui Chanshi
yulu 荷澤神會禪師語錄.
Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra. See Niepan jing 涅槃經.
Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā śāstra. See Dazhidu lun 大智度論.
Mahāvyutpatti. A ninth-century glossary of Sanskrit and Tibetan terms
compiled on the command of the Tibetan king Tri Ralpachen in order to
standardize the Tibetan translations of Buddhist texts. The dictionary was
compiled by the king’s chief translators, who drew up a list of Sanskrit terms
and their Tibetan equivalents. Earlier Tibetan translations were revised
according to the new terminology.
Mazu sijia lu 馬祖四家錄. See Sijia yulu 四家語錄.
Mazu yulu 馬祖語錄 (Recorded sayings of Mazu), 1 fascicle (x 69: #1321). Full
title, Jiangxi Mazu Daoyi Chanshi yulu 江西馬祖道一禪師語錄. The Mazu
yulu, which is found in fascicle 1 of the Sijia yulu 四家語錄 (Recorded sayings of the Four Houses), contains the sermons, mondō, and a short biography of Mazu Daoyi 馬祖道一 (709–788), a master in the third generation
from the Sixth Patriarch, Huineng (638–713). Mazu was the teacher of many
eminent Zen monks, among whom the most important for later Zen history was Baizhang Huaihai (720–814), the traditional founder of the Chan
monastic system and a master in lineage that produced Linji. According
to the zj, the Mazu yulu had its origins in a volume called the Yuben 語本
(Book of words), a collection of Mazu’s sermons and sayings compiled by
the master’s disciples following his death.
Miaofa lianhua jing 妙法蓮華經, Kumārajīva’s Chinese translation of the Lotus
Sutra. See Fahua jing 法華經.
Miaofa lianhua jing xuanzan 妙法蓮華經玄贊. See Fahua xuanzan 法華玄贊.
Miaoli yuancheng guan 妙理圓成觀 (Contemplation of the mysterious principle
and the perfectly accomplished), 3 fascicles. A work attributed to Shenxiu 神
秀 (606?–706), but no longer extant.
Mile dachengfo jing 彌勒大成佛經 (Sutra on Maitreya’s great attainment of buddhahood), 1 fascicle (t 14: #456). Full title Foshuo Mile dachengfo jing 佛説
彌勒大成佛經. A Chinese translation made in 402 by Kumārajīva. The Mile
dachengfo jing, perhaps the best developed of the many sutras concerning the bodhisattva Maitreya, takes the form of Śākyamuni’s sermon to
Śāriputra regarding Maitreya and his future appeance on earth to preach
the true dharma. Similar sutras include: Foshuo guan Mile pusa shangsheng doushuaitian jing 佛説觀彌勒菩薩上生兜率天經, 1 fascicle, translated by
Juqujingsheng 沮渠京聲 (t 14: #452); Foshuo Mile xiasheng jing 佛説彌勒下

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 401
生經, 1 fascicle, translated by Dharmarakṣa (Zhu Fahu 竺法護, ﬂ. 265–313) (t
14: #453); Foshuo Mile xiasheng chengfo jing 佛説彌勒下生成佛經, 1 fascicle,

translated by Kumārajīva (t 14: #454); and Foshuo Mile xiasheng chengfo
jing 佛説彌勒下生成佛經, 1 fascicle, translated by Yijing 義淨 (635–713) (t 14:
#455).
Mingjue Chanshi yulu 明覺禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master Mingjue), 6 fascicles (t 47: #1996). Full title Xuedou Mingjue Chanshi yulu 雪竇
明覺禪師語錄. A collection of sermons, comments on koans, critical examinations, verses, and other material relating to Xuedou Chongxian 雪竇重顯
(980–1052), compiled by his disciple Wei Gaizhu 惟蓋竺 (n.d.) and others.
Properly speaking, only the ﬁrst three fascicles are entitled the Mingjue
Chanshi yulu; the title of fascicle 4 is Mingjue Chanshi puquan ji 明覺禪師
瀑泉集, and that of fascicles 5 and 6 is Mingjue Chanshi zuying ji 明覺禪師祖
英集. Appended is the stele inscription written in 1065 by Lü Xiaqing 呂夏
卿 (n.d.), the prime minister and a student of Xuedou. Part of the text was
compiled during the years 1030–1032, while the master was still alive, but
following his death the entire work was revised. The Xuedou baize songgu
雪竇百則頌古 (Xuedou’s verse comments on one hundred old koans), which
subsequently became the basis for the famous koan collection Biyan lu 碧巖
錄 (The blue cliﬀ record), was once a part of the Mingjue Chanshi yulu, but
is not included in the work as we now have it.
Misha saibu hexi Wufen lü 彌沙塞部和醯五分律. See Wufen lü 五分律.
Mochizuki Bukkyō daijiten 望月佛教大辭典 (Mochizuki’s encyclopedia of Buddhism). A ten-volume encyclopedia with over 20,000 entries on all aspects
of Buddhism. Published by the Sekai Seiten Kankō Kyōkai, 1955–1963.
Mohe bore boluomi jing 摩訶般若波羅蜜經 (Great perfection of wisdom sutra),
27 fascicles (t 8: #223). Also known as the Dapin jing 大品經, Dapin bore jing
大品般若經, and Dapin bore boluomi jing 大品般若波羅蜜經. Kumārajīva’s
translation of the Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā-prajñā-pāramitā, one of the
prajñā-pāramitā sutras. The same text was translated in 286 as the Guangzan
jing 光讃經 (Sutra in praise of the light) by Dharmarakṣa (C., Zhu Fahu 竺
法護, ﬂ. 265–313) (t 8: #222); and around 291 as the Fangguang bore jing 放
光般若經 (The light-emitting perfection of wisdom sutra) by Mokṣala (C.,
Wuluocha 無羅叉 or Zhu Luocha 竺羅叉; 3rd c.) and Zhu Shulan 竺叔蘭
(n.d.) (t 8: #221). See also entries for Bore jing 般若蜜, Dazhidu lun 大智度論,
and Fangguang bore jing 放光般若經.
Mohe zhiguan 摩訶止觀 (Great calming and contemplation), 20 fascicles (t
46: #1911). The text is based on lectures given by Zhiyi 智顗 (538–597),
founder of the Tiantai school, on the theory and practice of the “Complete
and Immediate Meditation of the Mahayana” 大乘圓頓止觀. The lectures,
delivered at the temple Yuquan si 玉泉寺 on Mount Dangyang 當陽 in
Jingzhou 荊州, were compiled and edited by Zhiyi’s disciple Guanding 灌頂

402 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
(561–632) and published in 594. The term zhiguan comprises zhi 止 (calming, Skr., “śamatha”), which refers to the attainment of stillness and focus of
mind, and guan 觀 (contemplation, Skr., “vipaśyanā”), which refers to the
perception of the true nature of mind. The text explains the central Tiantai
doctrine of “one thought-moment, three thousand realms” 一念三千 (the
teaching that the three thousand realms constituting the entire universe are
immanent in each instant of thought), and details the meditation practices
through which the truth of this teaching can be experienced. The Mohe
zhiguan is one of the central texts of the Tiantai school.
Muhu ge 牧護歌 (Song of the herdsman), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076, 462c–463a). Full
title, Suxi heshang muhu ge 蘇溪和尚牧護歌. A work praising the freedom
of the Zen life, by Suxi 蘇溪 (n.d.), a disciple of Wuxie Lingmo 五洩靈默
(747–818) in the third generation from Mazu Daoyi 馬祖道一 (709–788). The
Muhu ge is written in the style of a poem of the same name that was originally a work of Mazdaism (Zoroastrianism), a teaching that achieved much
popularity in early Tang China; the word muhu 牧護 signiﬁes a Zoroastrian
monk. The original poem’s religious quality was later lost, however, and it
became simply a popular folk song 樂府.
Muzhou yulu 睦州語錄 (Recorded sayings of Muzhou), 1 fascicle (x 68: #1315, 35).
Full title Muzhou heshang yulu 睦州和尚語録. This work, found in fascicle 1
of the Guzunsu yuyao 古尊宿語要 and fascicle 6 of the gy, records the sayings of Muzhou Daozong 睦州道蹤, also known as Muzhou Daoming 睦州
道明 (n.d.), a dharma heir of Huangbo Xiyun 黄檗希運 (d. 850?). It is divided
into three sections: 1) “Shangtang duiji” 上堂對機 (Discussions in the lecture
hall); 2) “Kankan jingseng” 勘看經僧 (Criticism of sutra-chanting monks);
3) “Kanjiang jinglun zuozhu Dashi” 勘講經論座主大師 (Criticism of lecture
masters). There is a short epilogue at the end of the book, as well as a brief
biography of Muzhou.
Nan shi 南史 (History of the southern dynasties), 80 fascicles. One of the twentyfour oﬃcial historical records of China, the Nan shi covers the history of the
short southern dynasties known as the Song 宋 (420–479), Qi 齊 (479–502),
Liang 梁 (502–557), and Chen 陳 (557–589). This work and its companion,
the Bei shi 北史 (History of the northern dynasties), were conceived by the
oﬃcial and historian Li Dashi 李大師 (570–628), but largely compiled by his
son Li Yanshou 李延壽 (612?–678?).
Nanben niepan jing shu 南本涅槃經疏. See Da banniepan jing shu 大般涅槃經疏.
Nancun chuogeng lu 南村輟耕録. See Chuogeng lu 輟耕錄.
Nanquan Puyuan Chanshi yuyao 南泉普願禪師語要 (Essential sayings of Chan
Master Nanquan Puyuan), 1 fascicle (x 68: #1317). Also known as Nanquan
yuyao 南泉語要. This work is a compilation of the formal and informal sermons of Nanquan Puyuan 南泉普願 (748–835), a successor of Mazu Daoyi
馬祖道一 (709–788).

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 403

Nanquan yuyao 南泉語要. See Nanquan Puyuan Chanshi yuyao 南泉普願禪師
語要.
Nanyang heshang dunjiao jietuo chanmen zhiliaoxing tanyu 南陽和上頓教解脱禪
門直了性壇語 (The priest of Nanyang’s platform sermon on direct realization
of innate nature according to the Chan doctrine of emancipation through
the teaching of sudden awakening), 1 fascicle. Often abbreviated to Shenhui
tanyu 神會壇語. This work, one of the Shenhui materials discovered at the
Dunhuang caves, contains a collection of sermons by Heze Shenhui 荷澤
神會 (684–758), one of the Sixth Patriarch’s most important students and
the principal advocate of the Southern school of Chan. The sermons were
delivered at the temple Longxing si 龍興寺 in Nanyang 南陽 (hence the
“Nanyang” of the title). The term tanyu 壇語 (“words from the platform”)
in the title derives from the fact that the sermons were delivered at formal
gatherings for receiving the precepts 授戒會, a ritual performed on the precept platform. The text is important in that it represents one of the earliest
examples of Chan “recorded sayings” (yulu 語録) literature.
Nanyang heshang wenda zazheng yi 南陽和尙問答雜徵義 (The priest of Nanyang’s question-and-answer examination of various points of doctrine), 1
fascicle. Also known as the Nanzong Heze Chanshi wenda zacheng 南宗荷沢
禪師問答雜徴 (the title used in lists of books brought back to Japan by contemporary Japanese Tendai monks), and generally abbreviated to Shenhui
yulu 神會語録. For the signiﬁcance of “Nanyang” 南陽 see the entry above.
This text is one of the Shenhui records discovered among the Dunhuang
manuscripts, recording sermons by Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會 (684–758) given
in answer to questions from disciples.
Nanyang Zhong heshang yanjiao 南陽忠和尙言敎 (Oral teachings of Ven. Nanyang Zhong). One of the works on the lists of books reported to have been
brought back to Japan from Tang China by the Japanese monks Ennin and
Enchin.
Nanyuan Chanshi yuyao 南院禪師語要 (Essential sayings of Chan master
Nanyuan), 1 fascicle (x 68: #1315, 41c–43c). A collection of the sermons and
critical examinations 勘辨 of the Chan master Nanyuan Huiyong 南院慧顒
(860–930).
Nanyue Shitou heshang cantong qi 南嶽石頭和尚參同契. See Cantong qi 參同契.
Nichi’iki Sōdō shoso Dōgen Zenji shingi 日域曹洞初祖道元禪師淸規. See Eihei
shingi 永平淸規.
Niepan jing 涅槃經. The general name for the various translations of the Sanskrit Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra (Nirvana Sutra). The original Sanskrit text
no longer exists in full, though fragments have been discovered in Central
Asia and Japan. The Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra is a Mahayana sutra, diﬀerent in character from the Pali Mahāparinibbāna-sutta in that the former
claims to present the ﬁnal and complete teachings of the Buddha delivered

404 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
in a sermon just prior to his parinirvāṇa, while the latter describes more
factually the ﬁnal years of the Buddha’s life, his entry into nirvana, and the
distribution of his remains. The main doctrines of the Mahāparinirvāṇa
Sutra are that the dharmakāya is characterized by permanence 常 , joy
樂, self 我, and purity 淨, and that all sentient beings, even the icchantika
(beings regarded in traditional Buddhism as incapable of enlightenment),
possess the buddha-nature and are thus destined for eventual liberation.
There are three extant Chinese translations, and one Tibetan translation.
The three Chinese versions are: 1) The Foshuo daban niyuan jing 佛説大般
泥洹經, 6 fascicles; the “Six-Fascicle Nirvana Sutra”, translated by Faxian 法
顯 (n.d.) and the Kashmirian monk Buddhabhadra (C., Fotuobatuoluo 佛
陀跋陀羅, 359–429) between 416 and 418 (t 12: #376). 2) The Da banniepan
jing 大般涅槃經, 40 fascicles; the “Northern Text,” translated in Guzang 姑
藏, the capital of Northern Liang, by the Indian monk Dharmakṣema (C.,
Tanwuchen 曇無讖, 385–433?) between 414 and 421; the ﬁrst complete translation of the Nirvana Sutra (t 12: #374). 3) The Da banniepan jing 大般涅槃
經, 36 fascicles; the “Southern Text,” a revision of Dharmakṣema’s translation, carried out by Huiyan 慧嚴 (363–443), Huiguan 慧観 (n.d.), and others in approximately 453 (t 12: #375). The Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra strongly
inﬂuenced the development of later Chinese Buddhist thought, giving rise
to several scholastic traditions, among them the Niepan zong 涅槃宗, the
Nirvana school.
Nihonkoku jōwa gonen nittō guhō mokuroku 日本國承和五年入唐求法目錄
(Catalogue of a pilgrimage to Tang in search of the dharma in year 5 of the
Japanese Jōwa era), 1 fascicle (t 55: #2165). This catalogue, dated 839, lists the
various materials—sutras, commentaries, biographies, mandalas, portraits,
ritual texts, etc.—that the Japanese Tendai monk Ennin assembled during
his stay in Yangzhou 揚州 between 838 and 839, prior to his departure for
Mount Wutai 五臺. Ennin prepared the catalogue prior to sending the materials back to Japan with the returning Japanese envoy. See also the entry for
the Jikaku Daishi zaitō sōshin roku 慈覺大師在唐送進錄.
Nirvana Sutra. See Niepan jing 涅槃經.
Nittō guhō junrei kōki 入唐求法巡禮行記 (Record of a pilgrimage to the Tang
in search of the dharma), 4 fascicles. A record by the Japanese Tendai
monk Ennin 圓仁 (794–864), third patriarch of the Japanese Tendai 天台
school, of his experiences in Yangzhou 揚州, Mount Wutai 五臺, Chang’an
長安, and other places during his ten-year stay in China between 838 and
847. The book—the ﬁrst written account of China by a foreigner—records
many details of secular and religious life under the Tang dynasty. The work
is valuable as a historical source, and is regarded as a classic of travel literature.
Nittō shingu shōgyō mokuroku 入唐新求聖敎目錄 (Catalogue of sacred teachings

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 405

newly sought in the Tang), 1 fascicle (t 55: #2167). A catalogue compiled in
847 by the Japanese Tendai monk Ennin 圓仁 (794–864) upon his return
from his ten-year journey to Tang-dynasty China between 838 and 847.
Ennin reexamined the many hundreds of objects he had sent or brought
back from the continent and drew up a new catalogue that completed
the earlier lists (see the entries for the Nihonkoku jōwa gonen nittō guhō
mokuroku 日本國承和五年入唐求法目錄 and the Jikaku Daishi zaitō sōshin
roku 慈覺大師在唐送進錄). The word shingu 新求 (newly sought) in the title
relates to the fact that Ennin regarded the objects as additions to the material that Saichō 最澄 (767–822), founder of the Japanese Tendai school, had
earlier brought to Japan.
Niutoushan chuzu Farong Chanshi xin ming 牛頭山初祖法融禪師心銘. See Xin
ming 心銘 (Mind verse), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076, 457b–458a).
Nongzhuyin 弄珠吟 (Playing with the pearl). See Wanzhuyin 翫珠吟.
Pang Jushi yulu 龐居士語錄 (Record of Layman Pang), 3 fascicles (x 69: #1336).
A collection of material relating to Pang Yun 龐蘊 (d. 808), a famous Chan
layman who, although remaining a householder with a wife and daughter,
lived a simple life of Chan practice and became a dharma successor of Mazu
Daoyi 馬祖道一 (709–788). The ﬁrst fascicle of the Pang Jushi yulu contains
anecdotes and dialogues, while the second and third fascicles contain verses.
The original edition is said to have been compiled by Pang’s friend the
prefect Yu Di 于頔 (d. 818), but the earliest extant edition is a Ming-dynasty
wood-block printing dated 1637.
Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. See Liuzu tanjing 六僧壇經.
Po xiang lun 破相論. See Guanxin lun 觀心論.
Pumen pin shu 普門品疏. See Guanyin yishu 觀音義疏.
Putidamo nanzong ding shifei lun 菩提達磨南宗定是非論 (Treatise establishing
the true and false according to the Southern school of Bodhidharma), 1 fascicle. This text, now lost in its complete form, is one of the Shenhui records
discovered among the Dunhuang manuscripts. It records several sermons
by Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會 (684–758), the chief proponent of the Southern
school of Chan. The sermons were delivered sometime around 732 at Dayun
si 大雲寺 in Huatai 滑台, and edited by Shenhui’s lay disciple Dugu Pei 獨孤
沛 (n.d.). The sermons, given in answer to questions by the Northern-school
master Chongyuan 崇遠 (n.d.), defend the Southern school and severely
criticize the teachings of the Northern school.
Qingliangshan zhuan 清凉山傳. See Gu qingliang zhuan 古清凉傳.
Qin shi 琴史 (History of zither music), 6 fascicles. An account of the history, theory, and practice of the qin (zither), by Zhu Changwen 朱長文 (1041–1100).
The ﬁrst ﬁve fascicles present over 140 biographical sketches with legendary
and historical material on notable qin players; the sixth fascicle contains

406 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
theoretical and practical essays. Much of the material consists of quotes
from earlier sources, which Zhu seldom identiﬁes.
Qixin lun 起信論. See Dasheng qixin lun 大乘起信論.
Quanfa putixin wen 勸發菩提心文 (On giving rise to bodhicitta), 1 fascicle (x
58: #1010). A treatise by Pei Xiu 裴休 (797–870), with a preface by Guifeng
Zongmi 圭峰宗密 (780–841).
Quantangwen 全唐文 (Complete prose literature of the Tang), 1000 fascicles. A
full collection of Tang-dynasty prose works, compiled under imperial order
by Dong Gao 董誥 (1740–1818) and published in 1814. The authors represented are divided into three categories: emperors, government oﬃcials, and
Buddhist and Taoist monks. The authors are placed in chronological order,
and a brief biography is given of each one.
Rentian yanmu 人天眼目 (The eye of humans and gods), 6 fascicles (t 48: #2006).
Compiled in 1188 by Huiyan Zhizhao 晦巖智昭 (n.d.), three generations after
Dahui in the same line. The Rentian yanmu summarizes the teachings of the
ﬁve Chan “Houses” (the Linji 臨濟, Yunmen 雲門, Caodong 曹洞, Guiyang 潙
仰, and Fayan 法眼), presenting biographies of the founders and citing representative sermons, koans, doctrines, and verses. The ﬁnal section, Zongmen
za lu 宗門雜錄 (Chan school miscellany), records information on important
events and various other matters relating to the study of Chan.
Rinzai Eshō Zenji goroku shō 臨濟慧照禪師語錄鈔. See Bannan shō 萬安鈔.
Rinzai Eshō Zenji goroku soyaku 臨濟慧照禪師語錄疏瀹 (Commentary on the
Record of Zen master Rinzai Eshō). An unpublished manuscript dated 1726
by Mujaku Dōchū.
Rinzai roku Bannan shō 臨濟錄萬安鈔. See Bannan shō 萬安鈔.
Ru Lengqie jing 入楞伽經, Bodhiruci’s translation of the Laṅkāvatāra Sutra, 10
fascicles (t 16: #671). See Lengqie jing 楞伽經.
Rulai zhuangyan zhihui guangming ru yiqie fojingjie jing 如來莊嚴智慧光明入
一切佛境界經 (Sutra on the tathāgata-adorning prajñā-light that enters all
buddha-realms), 2 fascicles (t 12: #357). Alternative title Zhihui zhuangyan
jing 智慧莊嚴經. A Chinese translation of the Sarvabuddha-viṣayāvatārajñānā-lokālaṃkāra Sutra by Dharmaruci (C., Tanmoliuzhi 曇摩流支). This
is the ﬁrst of three translations made of this sutra, the other two of which
are: Duyiqie zhufo jingjie zhiyan jing 度一切諸佛境界智嚴經, 1 fascicle, translated by Sanghavarman (C., Sengqiepoluo 僧伽婆羅, d. 520) (t 12: #358);
and Foshuo dasheng ruzhufo jingjiezhi guangming zhuangyan jing 佛説
大乘入諸佛境界智光明莊嚴經 , 5 fascicles, translated by Dharmarakṣa (C.,
Fahu 法護 963–1058) (t 12: #359). The sutra describes the eternal nature of
the dharmakāya, explains the use of upaya to liberate beings according to
their capacities, and elucidates the true meaning of bodhi and bodhisattva
practice.

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 407

Saṃyutta Nikāya. Pali equivalent of the Za ahan jing 雜阿含經 (Miscellaneous
discourses of the Buddha) (t 2: #99). See Za ahan jing.
San sheng yuanrong guanmen 三聖圓融觀門 (Contemplation of the perfect
identity of the three holy ones), 1 fascicle (t 45: #1882). A contemplation text
by Qingliang Chengguan 清凉澄觀 (737–838), the fourth Huayan patriarch,
who advocates two contemplation practices: Yogācāra contemplation (contemplation of cognition-only), and “contemplation of the perfect identity
of the three holy ones,” a form of contemplation distinctive to the Huayan
school involving the buddha Vairocana and the bodhisattvas Mañjuśrī
and Samantabhadra. The essence-body of Samantabhadra, merged with
the wisdom-function of Mañjuśrī, forms the buddha-virtue of Vairocana.
Simultaneously, the buddhahood of Vairocana forms the cause 因 of the
bodhisattvas Mañjuśrī and Samantabhadra. Thus cause and eﬀect are not
separate, and the three holy ones form a perfect unity.
Sanyin ji 三隠集. See Hanshan shi 寒山詩.
Sanzang fashu 三藏法數 (Dharma lists from the canon of the Ming dynasty),
50 fascicles. Full title Daming sanzang fashu 大明三藏法數. A numerically
ordered list of terms from the Tripiṭaka, compiled by Yiru 一如 (n.d.), a
scholar-monk active during the early ﬁfteenth century, and published 1419.
The list, beginning with terms related to the number one (such as “one
mind” 一心 and “one vehicle” 一乗) and continuing to the number 84,000,
contains a total of about 1,600 entries, all with short deﬁnitions. The index
constitutes the ﬁrst three fascicles.
Sengbao zhuan 僧寶傳. See Chanlin sengbao zhuan 禪林僧寶傳.
Sengshi lue 僧史略. See Dasong sengshi lue 大宋僧史略.
Shangcai yulu 上蔡語錄 (Recorded sayings of Shangcai), 3 fascicles. The recorded
sayings of the Neo-Confucianist thinker Xie Liangzuo 謝良佐 (1050–1103), a
disciple of two of the principal early architects of the Neo-Confucian movement, Cheng Hao 程顥 (1032-1085) and Cheng Yi 程頤 (1033-1108).
Shanhui Dashi lu 善慧大士錄 (Record of Bodhisattva Shanhui), 4 fascicles (x 69:
#1335). Also known as the Fu Dashi lu 傅大士錄. A record of the teachings,
hymns, and religious poems ascribed to the famous early Chinese layman
Fu Dashi 傅大士 (Fu Xi 傅翕; 497–569), plus biographical materials relating
to four monk contemporaries of Fu. Compiled by the scholar-oﬃcial Lou
Ying 樓頴 (n.d.) in what was originally an eight-fascicle edition, but which
was later revised by Lou Zhao 樓炤 (1072–1144), governor of Shaoxingjun 紹
興軍, into the present four-fascicle version. Zhao’s version, with a colophon
dated 1143, devotes fascicle 1 to Fu’s chronological biography; fascicle 2 to
his sermons and conversations with students; fascicle 3 to his poems and
to memorial inscriptions dedicated to him; and fascicle 4 to biographies of
four ﬁgures connected with Fu: Zhizhe 智者 (442–535), Song Toutuo 嵩頭陀
(n.d.), Huiji 慧集 (492–538), and Huihe 慧和 (477–536).

408 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
She dasheng lun shi 攝大乘論釋 (Commentary on the Summary of the Mahayana),
15 fascicles (t 31: #1595). Paramārtha’s (C., Zhendi 眞諦; 499–569) translation
of the Mahāyāna-saṃgraha-byāṣya by Vasubandhu (C., Shiqin 世親 or Tianqin 天親; 4th or 5th c.). The Mahāyāna-saṃgraha-byāṣya is Vasubandhu’s
commentary on the Mahāyāna-saṃgraha (Summary of the Mahayana),
a treatise by his brother Asaṅga (C., Wuzhuo 無著; 4th or 5th c.) on the
Yogācāra consciousness-only doctrine. Other translations of the Mahāyānasaṃgraha-byāṣya are: the She dasheng lun shi lun 攝大乘論釋論, 10 fascicles,
by Dharmagupta (C., Damojiduo 達磨笈多; d. 619) and Xingju 行矩 (t 31:
#1596); and the She dasheng lun shi 攝大乘論釋, 10 fascicles, by Xuanzang 玄
奘 (600?–664) (t 31: #1597).
Shengman jing 勝鬘經 (The lion’s roar of Queen Śrīmālā sutra), 1 fascicle (t 12:
#353). Full title Shengman shizihou yisheng dafangbian fang guang jing 勝鬘
師子吼一乘大方便方廣經. A translation by Guṇabhadra (C., Qiunabatuoluo
求那跋陀羅; 394–468) of the Śrīmālādevĩ-simhanāda Sutra. The sutra, centered on the person of Queen Śrīmālā, expounds the teachings of the One
Vehicle and the tathāgatagarbha, and proclaims the universality of buddhanature. The sutra was a favorite among the Chinese lay followers of Buddhism, along with the Vimalakīrti Sutra.
Shenhui tanyu 神會壇語. See Nanyang heshang dunjiao jietuo chanmen zhiliaoxing tanyu 南陽和上頓教解脱禪門直了性壇語.
Shenhui yulu 神會語録. See Nanyang heshang wenda zazheng yi 南陽和尙問答雜
徵義.
Shenli Chanshi yulu 神力禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master Shenli), 48
fascicles (x 68: #1316). The records of the Chan master Shenli 神力, another
name for Zihu Lizong 子湖利蹤 (800–880). He was a disciple of Nanquan
Puyuan.
Shiji 史記 (Records of the grand historian), 130 fascicles. The ﬁrst comprehensive
history of China, compiled in 109–91 bce by Sima Qian 司馬遷 (145–90 bce).
It is one of the four early Chinese oﬃcial histories, together with the Han
shu 漢書 (Chronicles of the Han), 100 volumes, compiled by Ban Biao 班彪
(3–54), Ban Gu 班固 (32–92), and Ban Zhao 班昭 (1st c.); the Sanguo zhi 三國
志 (Records of the Three Kingdoms), 65 fascicles, compiled by Chen Shou 陳
壽 (233–297); and the Hou Han shu 後漢書 (Chronicles of the Later Han), 120
fascicles, compiled by Fan Ye 范曄 (398–446). The Shiji, covering the period
from the Yellow Emperor (traditionally dated c. 2,600 bce) to Emperor Han
Wudi 漢武帝 (156–87 bce), presents China’s history in the form of biographies of eminent rulers, bureaucrats, and cultural ﬁgures, augmented with
chronologies and descriptions of government, economics, etc. The Shiji
became a model for subsequent Chinese historical works, and is honored for
its exceptional literary merit.
Shijian qigu lue 釋鑑稽古略. See Shishi qigu lue 釋氏稽古略.

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 409

Shimen bianhuo lun 十門辯惑論 (Clarifying ten questions regarding Buddhist
doctrine), 3 fascicles (t 52: #2111). The text, dated 681, consists of the answers
of Fuli 復禮 (ﬂ. 681–703), to the emperor Gaozong 高宗 (628–683) regarding
ten questions on Buddhist concepts such as buddhahood, the supernatural
powers of the bodhisattva, the three bodies, and the pure land.
Shimen wenzi chan 石門文字禪 (Stone Gate literary Chan), 30 fascicles. A collection of the poetry of the important Chan scholar-monk Juefan Huihong 覺
範慧洪 (1071–1128; “Stone Gate” was an appellation for Huihong). Edited by
his disciple Jueci 覺慈 and published in a Ming-dynasty collection of supplementary canonical materials (續藏經) in 1597.
Shishi qigu lue 釋氏稽古略 (An outline of research on the lineage of Śākya), 4
fascicles (t 49: #2037). Also known as the Shijian qigu lue 釋鑑稽古略. Compiled by the Linji-school Chan master Jue’an Baozhou 覺岸寶洲 (14th c.),
this work, completed in 1354, outlines the political history of China from the
earliest times to the end of the Song dynasty, setting forth in chronological
order the development of China’s “three teachings” of Taoism, Confucianism, and Buddhism, with a particular emphasis on the Chan tradition. Jue’an
was a fellow student of Meiwu Nianchang 梅屋念常 (1282–1341?), compiler
of the Fozu lidai tongzai 佛祖歴代通載 (t 49: #2036), a work published in
1344 that is conceptually similar to the Shishi qigu lue. The Shishi qigu lue
was reprinted in 1554, and in 1638 a monk named Huanlun 幻輪 compiled
a supplement, the Shijian qigu lue xuji 釋鑑稽古略續集, covering the years
between the end of the Yuan dynasty and 1638 (t 49: #2038).
Shishuo xinyu 世說新語 (A new account of tales of the world), 3 fascicles. A collection of anecdotes, conversations, and comments by emperors, oﬃcials, sages,
and monks, compiled by the scholar Liu Yiqing 劉義慶 (403–444). The book
is noted for the elegance of its literary style, and has provided material for
numerous subsequent works.
Shisike song 十四科頌 (Verses on fourteen themes), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076,
450c–451c). Full title Baozhi heshang shisike song 寶誌和尚十四科頌. Fourteen
short verses attributed to Baozhi 寶誌 (418–514) on the nonduality of enlightenment and delusion, buddhas and ordinary beings, principle and phenomenon, good and evil, form and emptiness, etc.
Shisong lü 十誦律 (The ten-section vinaya), 61 fascicles (t 23: #1435). A translation by the Kashmirian monk Puṇyatara (C., Furuoduoluo 弗若多羅 )
and Kumārajīva (C., Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什 , 344–ca. 409) of the Indian
Sarvāstivāda school’s system of vinaya, the rules governing monastic discipline, ordinations, punishments, etc. The translation was produced in
Chang’an 長安 between 404 and 409.
Shitou heshang caoan ge 石頭和尚草庵歌. See Caoan ge 草庵歌.
Shiyimian Guanyin shenzhou jing 十一面觀音神呪經 (Sutra on the Eleven-faced
Guanyin dhāraṇī), 1 fascicle (t 20: #1070). Full title Foshuo Shiyimian

410 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Guanyin shenzhou jing 佛説十一面觀音神呪經; also known as the Shiyimian
shenzhou jing 十一面神呪經. Translated into Chinese by the sixth-century
monk Yasogupta (C., Yeshe Jueduo 耶舎崛多) during the Northern Zhou
dynasty. The Shiyimian Guanyin shenzhou jing, according to its colophon,
comprises one chapter from the much longer Jingang dadaochang shenzhou
jing 金剛大道場神呪經. It extols the powers that accrue from reciting, writing, and transmitting the Eleven-faced Guanyin dhāraṇī, and explains how
to use this and other dhāraṇīs that are mentioned in the text.
Shizi xuemai chuan 師資血脈傳. See Lidai fabao ji 歷代法寶記.
Shōbōgenzō 正法眼藏 (Treasury of the true dharma eye), 95 fascicles (shorter
versions of 12, 28, 60, and 75 fascicles also exist). The Shōbōgenzō is a series
of discourses by the Japanese Sōtō monk Dōgen Kigen 道元希玄 (1200–1253)
on a wide variety of subjects related to Zen practice and thought. Dōgen
apparently intended to write a total of one hundred fascicles, but was able to
fully complete only twelve by the time of his death. The work is notable as
the ﬁrst Japanese Zen text written not in Chinese, but in the Japanese language. It is considered one of the most philosophically profound texts in all
of Zen literature, and is much studied by both meditators and scholars. The
text remained in manuscript form and was little known until 1811, when the
ﬁrst edition was published. See also Zhengfayan zang 正法眼藏.
Shouleng’yan jing 首楞嚴經 (Śūraṅgama Sutra), 10 fascicles (t 19: #945). Full
title Da foding rulai miyin xiuzheng liaoyi zhupusa wanxing shouleng’yan
jing 大佛頂如來密因修證了義諸菩薩萬行首楞嚴經; also known as the Da foding shouleng’yan jing 大佛頂首楞嚴經. This sutra—said to have been translated in 705 by the Indian bhikku Pāramiti (C., Bancimidi 般刺蜜帝; n.d.),
though it is regarded by most scholars as a Chinese apocryph—discusses
the true nature of the mind and sense perception, and of the essential
unity of the two. Regarding the life of practice, the sutra stresses that not
only doctrinal knowledge but also meditation and an ethical lifestyle in
accordance with the precepts are essential for full liberation. It explains the
methods of meditation of the various bodhisattvas, discusses the stages of
bodhisattva practice, and emphasizes the power of the Śūraṅgama dhāraṇī
and Śūraṅgama samādhi. The sutra shows both tantric inﬂuences, with its
teachings on the dhāraṇī, and Yogācāric inﬂuences, with its teachings on
the tathāgatagarbha and the ālaya-vijñāna (storehouse-consciousness). The
sutra is highly regarded in the Chan school, especially in China.
There is in addition another sutra commonly called the Shouleng’yan jing
首楞嚴經 (t 15: #642), but properly entitled the Foshuo shouleng’yan sanmei
jing 佛說首楞嚴三昧經 or Shouleng’yan sanmei jing 首楞嚴三昧經. This is a
two-fascicle translation by Kumārajīva of the Śūraṅgama-samādhi Sutra,
which teaches the unsurpassed eﬀectiveness of Śūraṅgama-samādhi meditation for the attainment of liberation.

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 411

Shoushan Nian heshang yulu 首山念和尚語錄. See next entry.
Shoushan Shengnian yulu 首山省念語錄 (Recorded sayings of Shoushan
Shengnian), 1 fascicle (x 68: #1315, 45a–52a). Also known as Shoushan Nian
heshang yulu 首山念和尚語錄 or Shoushan yulu 首山語錄 (Recorded sayings
of Shoushan). The record of Shoushan Shengnian 首山省念 (926–995), the
ﬁfth patriarch of the Linji school. The text comprises the sermons given by
the master at Mount Shou 首 and the temples Guangjiao chanyuan 廣敎禪
院 and Baoying chanyuan 寶應禪院; questions and answers 代語三転; critical
examinations 勘辨; and verses. The date of compilation is unknown, but it
was included in the Guzunsu yuyao 古尊宿語要 (1144) and the Guzunsu yulu
古尊宿語錄 (1267).
Shuihu zhuan 水滸傳 (Outlaws of the marsh), a Ming-dynasty novel said to
have been written by Shi Nai’an 施耐庵 (1296?–1370?) or Luo Guanzhong 羅
貫中 (c. 1330–1400), based on the life of the historical bandit Song Jiang 宋
江 (12c). It is considered one of the four great classical novels of China. Song
Jiang is portrayed as a minor oﬃcial who is wrongly accused of a crime and
eventually ends up leading a band of 108 outlaws living on Mount Liang
梁, surrounded by the vast Mount Liang marshes. The outlaws ﬁght against
the injustices of the corrupt Song government, and defeat the armies sent
to subdue them. Finally they are granted amnesty, only to be sent to battle
the army of Fang La 方腊 in the south, in the hope that the ﬁghting will
weaken them. The novel was immensely popular in China and other Asian
countries, and was particularly popular as a theme for Yuan-dynasty drama.
Translated by Pearl Buck as All Men Are Brothers.
Si jiao yi 四教義 (The meaning of the Four Teachings), 12 fascicles (t 49: #1929).
Compiled by Zhiyi 智顗 (538–597), founder of the Tiantai school. The Si
jiao yi oﬀers a detailed exposition of the central Tiantai doctrine of the
Four Teachings 四教, a classiﬁcatory system derived from Zhiyi’s study of
the Vimalakīrti-nirdeśa Sutra. The Four Teachings consist of the Tripiṭaka
teachings 三藏教 (the teachings of the Āgama sutras, vinaya, and Abhidharma, emphasizing the suﬀering of samsara, the path to liberation, and
the doctrine of impermanence); the shared teachings 通教 (the teachings
common to the Three Vehicles of śrāvaka, pratyekabuddha, and bodhisattva, emphasizing emptiness); the distinct teachings 別教 (the teachings of
the bodhisattvas, recognizing the three truths of emptiness, consensual
existence, and the Middle Way); and the complete teachings 圓教 (the interpenetration of absolute and relative truth and the uniﬁcation of the three
truths, and the attainment of buddhahood). Zhiyi elucidates various aspects
of the Four Teachings through a comparison with various scriptures, doctrines (e.g., the Three Truths 三諦), and practices (e.g., the Ten Methods of
Contemplation 十乘觀法).
Si nianchu 四念處 (Four foundations of mindfulness), 4 fascicles (t 46: #1918).

412 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
A Tiantai treatise on the four foundations of mindfulness: 1) contemplation on the body as impure, 2) contemplation on sensation as suﬀering,
3) contemplation on the mind as impermanent, and 4) contemplation of
dharmas (phenomena) as nonsubstantial. The text is traditionally regarded
as an edited compilation by Guanding 灌頂 (561–632) of the lectures of his
teacher Zhiyi 智顗 (538–597), although many scholars now consider it to be
the work of Guanding himself, modeled on the Si jiao yi 四教義 and drawing
material from the Mohe zhiguan 摩訶止觀. The Si nianchu comments on the
four foundations of mindfulness and the ﬁve meditations 五停 (impurity,
compassion, causality, discrimination, and breathing) from the perspective
of each of the Tiantai Four Teachings 四教 (see entry for the Si jiao yi 四教
義), and relates them to various other Buddhist doctrines and practices.
Sijia yulu 四家語錄 (Recorded sayings of the Four Houses), 6 fascicles (a portion of the work is found in x 69: #1320). Also known as the Mazu sijia lu 馬
祖四家錄. The text presents the recorded sayings of the four masters in the
lineage of Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷讓 (677–744) who formed the ancestry of
the Linji-school lineage, namely Mazu Daoyi 馬祖道一 (709–788), Baizhang
Huaihai 百丈懷海 (720–814), Huangbo Xiyun 黃檗希運 (d. ca. 850), and Linji
Yixuan. The compiler and date of publication of the original version of this
text are unknown; the title is mentioned in a twelfth-century catalogue
named the Suichutang shumu 遂初堂書目, and thus predates this. The work
as we presently have it is based on a reedited reprint produced in 1607 by Xie
Ning 解寧 (n.d.); this appears to include much material from sources other
than the original Sijia yulu.
Sishi’er zhang jing 四十二章經 (Sutra in forty-two chapters), 1 fascicle (t 17:
#784). A short sutra traditionally said to have been delivered by the Buddha in the period soon after his enlightenment and thus representative of
his earliest teachings, and regarded as the ﬁrst Buddhist sutra to have been
translated into Chinese (67 ce). The translation is attributed to the Indian
monks Kāśyapa Mātanga (C., Jiashe Moteng 迦葉摩騰, n.d.) and Zhu Falan
竺法蘭 (dates and Indian name unknown), although scholars now believe it
to be an apocryphal text produced in China as an introduction to the basic
Buddhist teachings.
Song gaoseng zhuan 宋高僧傳 (Song-dynasty Biographies of eminent monks),
30 fascicles (t 50: #2061). Compiled by the great scholar-monk Zanning
贊寧 (919–1001) during the years 982–988, the text is a continuation of the
“eminent monk biographies” 高僧傳 produced in the Liang and Tang dynasties. The Song gaoseng zhuan presents full biographies of 531 monks and
supplemental biographies of 125 others who lived in the period between the
Zhenguan 貞觀 era (627–649) of the Tang and the reign of Emperor Taizong
太宗 (r. 976–997). The text follows the precedent of the earlier eminent monk
literature by separating the monks into ten categories, depending upon their
area of eminence (translation, doctrine, meditation, etc.).

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 413

Song of Enlightenment. See Zhengdao ge 證道歌.
Soushen ji 搜神記 (Investigations of the supernatural), by Gan Bao 干寶 (ﬂ.
323). A Taoist collection of short anecdotes about “the strange” 怪—various
supernatural beings and events—written, according to the author’s preface,
to “make it clear that the occult is not false.”
Śūraṅgama Sutra. See Shouleng’yan jing 首楞嚴經.
Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment. See Yuanjue jing 圓覺經.
Suxi heshang muhu ge 蘇溪和尚牧護歌. See Muhu ge 牧護歌.
Taigong jiajiao 太公家教. A book of popular proverbs written by an unknown
author during the middle Tang period and found among the manuscripts
unearthed at Dunhuang.
Taiping guangji 太平廣記 (Extensive record of the Taiping era), 500 fascicles.
Compiled under the direction of Li Fang 李昉 (925–996), a scholar and
prime minister during the Song dynasty, and published in 978. Considered
one of the four great books of the Song dynasty, the Taiping guangji is a
collection of about 7,000 stories primarily concerned with “the strange” 怪
(fairies, magicians, charms, and unusual natural events like earthquakes).
The stories were selected from over 300 novels and other literary sources
dating from the Han to the early Song dynasties; many of these sources are
now known only from the passages found in the Taiping guangji.
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō 大正新修大藏經 (Taishō-era revised Buddhist canon),
100 volumes, including charts, illustrations, indices, etc. Commonly referred
to as the Taishō daizōkyō 大正大藏經 . This collection of 2,920 Tripiṭaka
works was edited by the Editorial Committee for the Taishō Canon (Taishō
Issaikyō Kankōkai 大正一切經刊行会 ), headed by Takakusu Junjirō 高楠
順次郎 (1866–1945) and Watanabe Kaigokyu 渡辺海旭 (1872–1933), in the
years 1924–1932. Based on a collation of several earlier Asian canons and
Indic-language texts, the Taishō daizōkyō has won widespread scholarly
acceptance and is at present the most widely used compilation of the Chinese Buddhist Canon. The Taishō daizōkyō diﬀers from earlier canons in
that it does not follow a Hinayana-Mahayana method of classiﬁcation, but
organizes the texts chronologically, according to their likely order of historical appearance.
Tang gaoseng zhuan 唐高僧傳. See Xu gaoseng zhuan 續高僧傳.
Tang shu 唐書. See Jiu Tang shu 舊唐書.
Tanxuanji 探玄記. See Huayan jing tanxuanji 華嚴經探玄記.
Tanzhou Longyashan Dun Chanshi song 潭州龍牙山遁禪師頌 (Poems of Chan
Master Longya Judun), 1 fascicle (x 66: #1298, 726c–729a). A collection of
ninety-ﬁve Chan poems by Longya Judun 龍牙居遁 (835–923), with a preface by Nanyue Qiji 南嶽齊己 (861–933?). The work is found in the Chanmen
zhuzushi jiesong 禪門諸祖師偈頌, an anthology of eighty-four short works by
Tang and Song Chan masters (see also entry for this work).

414 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Tengteng heshang Liaoyuan ge 騰騰和尚了元歌. See Liaoyuan ge 了元歌.
Tenzō kyōkun 典座敎訓 (Instructions to the cook), 1 fascicle. Written in 1237 by
the Japanese Zen master Dōgen Kigen 道元希玄 (1200–1253), while Dōgen
was at Kōshō-ji 興聖寺; later included as the ﬁrst chapter of the Eihei shingi
永平淸規 (Monastic regulations of Eihei). The text explains the duties and
attitude of the monastic cook, and how best to fulﬁll the responsibilities of
the position as a way of practice.
Tiansheng guangdeng lu 天聖廣燈錄 (Tiansheng-era Extensive record of the transmission), 30 fascicles (x 78: #1553). Also known as the Guangdeng lu 廣燈錄.
Compiled by the government oﬃcial Li Zunxu 李遵勗 (d. 1038), completed in
1036, and published in 1148. The text, the successor to the Jingde chuandeng
lu 景德傳燈錄 in the Lamp histories, presents the traditional biographies,
sermons, and sayings of 370 ﬁgures of the traditional Chan lineage, from
Śākyamuni to the masters in the ninth generation from Nanyue Huairang
南嶽懷讓 (677–744) and the twelfth generation from Qingyuan Xingsi 靑原
行思 (660?–740). The compiler, Li, was a disciple of the Linji master Guyin
Yuncong 谷隠蘊聰 (965–1032) and an enthusiastic supporter of the Linji
school, and hence stressed the Linji tradition. The work includes the text of
the Linji lu in a form almost identical to the version in present use.
Tiantai si jiao yi 天台四教儀 (The meaning of the Tiantai four teachings), 1 fascicle (t 46: #1931). A Tiantai text by the Korean Tiantai master Je-gwan 諦觀
(ﬂ. late 10th c.). Based on the Tiantai bajiao dayi 天台八教大意, by Guanding
灌頂 (561–632) (t 46: #1930), the Tiantai si jiao yi constitutes an introduction
to such basic aspects of Tiantai thought and practice as the Five Periods and
Eight Teachings 五時八教, the Twenty-ﬁve Expedient Means of Contemplation 二十五方便, and the Ten Methods of Contemplation 十乘觀法. Je-gwan
was invited to China by Qian Hongshu 錢弘俶 (r. 948–978), the king of
Wuyue 吳越 and a great patron of Buddhism, who desired to reintroduce the
teachings of Tiantai to China at a time when they had died out there owing
to the warfare and destruction that followed the fall of the Tang dynasty. Jegwan was one of the Korean and Japanese priests asked by the king to bring
to China the Tiantai texts that still existed in those outlying lands.
Tongjian jishi benmo 通鑑紀事本末 (Events of the Comprehensive mirror to aid
government in their historical context), 42 fascicles. A history of China written by the Southern Song historian Yuan Shu 袁樞 (1132–1205), based on the
Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑑 (Comprehensive mirror to aid government) of Sima
Guang 司馬光 (1019–1086). Whereas the Zizhi tongjian employed a chronological, year-by-year approach, Yuan adopted a new type of historiography
within which historical events were placed in context, with explanations
given of the various factors that led to the event and the event’s eventual
outcomes and eﬀects. This type of historiography, known as jishi benmo 紀

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 415
事本末, subsequently gained great popularity and was employed in numer-

ous works.
Tongmeng zhiguan 童蒙止觀. See Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao 修習止觀坐禪法
要.
Tongsu bian 通俗編 (A lexicon of vernacular expressions), 38 fascicles. A Qingdynasty glossary compiled by Di Hao 翟灝 (1736–1788) that deﬁnes, categorizes, and provides sources for terms in common usage in China at that
time. The thirty-eight categories that the terms are classiﬁed under include,
for example, astronomy, geography, government, literature, military, ritual,
anatomy, theater, food, animals, ﬁsh, and plants.
Toujia zhefumi jing 偸迦遮復彌經. See Xiuxing daodi jing 修行道地經.
Vimalakīrti-nirdeśa Sutra. See Weimo jing 維摩經.
Wang Fanzhi shiji 王梵志詩集 (Poems of Wang Fanzhi), 1 fascicle (t 85: #2863).
Little is known of the poet-monk Wang Fanzhi 王梵志 (590?–660?). He is
remembered for his poems (preserved in a number of Dunhuang manuscripts) that present the Buddhist teachings in vernacular verse, easily
understandable for laypeople. A number of his poems are similar in tone to
those of Hanshan 寒山.
Wangsheng lun zhu 往生論註 (Commentary on the Treatise on the Pure Land),
2 fascicles (t 40: #1819). Full title Wuliangshou jing youbotishe yuansheng
ji zhu 無量壽經優婆提舍願生偈註; also abbreviated as Jingtu lun zhu 淨土
論註. A commentary on the Jingtu lun 淨土論 (Treatise on the Pure Land;
full title Wuliangshou jing youbotishe 無量壽經優波提舍) of Vasubandhu.
The commentary, by the Pure Land patriarch Tanluan 曇鸞 (476–542),
describes how liberation can be achieved through the “easy path” of faith
in the Other Power of Amitābha, and how such liberation is possible even
for evildoers who have committed the ten evil acts. The text describes the
practices by which one demonstrates such faith, primarily the “ﬁve gates
of intention” 五念門, which include physical worship (prostrations, etc.),
invocation of Amitābha’s name, intention to be reborn in Amitābha’s Pure
Land, visualization of Amitābha and the Pure Land, and transference of
merit 回向 . Tanluan discusses the bodhisattva vows taken by Amitābha
prior to his attainment of buddhahood, and identiﬁes three in particular
as the most important for Other Power: vow 18 (all beings desiring rebirth
into Amitābha’s Pure Land who call upon my name even just ten times will
be guaranteed rebirth there), vow 11 (all humans and devas who dwell in my
land will be in the Deﬁnitely Assured State and unfailingly reach Nirvana),
and vow 22 (bodhisattvas in the buddha-lands of other quarters who visit
my land will unfailingly achieve buddhahood after one more birth).
Wanling lu 宛陵錄 (The Wanling record), 1 fascicle (t 48: #2012b). Full title
Huangbo Duanji Chanshi wanling lu 黄蘗斷際禪師宛陵録. The Wanling lu
consists of sermons delivered by Huangbo and his answers to questions

416 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
from disciples while the master lived in the region of Wanling. Compilation is attributed to Huangbo’s eminent lay disciple Pei Xiu 裴休 (797–870),
although it appears to have actually been done by anonymous other disciples.
Wanzhuyin 翫珠吟 (Playing with the pearl), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076, 463b). Full
title, Danxia heshang wanzhuyin 丹霞和尚翫珠吟. Two short poems by the
eccentric Chan master Danxia Tianran 丹霞天然 (738–823).
Weimo jing 維摩經 (Vimalakīrti Sutra), 3 fascicles. The general name for the Chinese translations of the Vimalakīrti-nirdeśa Sutra, one of the most popular
of the Mahayana sutras in East Asia. The Sanskrit original was long thought
to be lost, but in 1999 Japanese researchers from Taishō University found a
complete copy, dating from the eighth century, at the Potala in Lhasa. The
Vimalakīrti Sutra, which builds on the foundation of the prajñā-pāramitā
(perfection of wisdom) sutra tradition, centers on the teaching of nonduality and śūnyatā. Its chief protagonist is the wealthy layman Vimalakīrti, a
legendary contemporary of the Buddha who, although living in the ordinary
world, is said to be more deeply enlightened than any of the Buddha’s great
disciples. In the sutra Śākyamuni urges his disciples to visit the layman, who
has fallen ill because all sentient beings are ill and suﬀering. Śākyamuni’s
disciples excuse themselves, describing times when the great layman has
embarrassed them by showing a deeper understanding of Buddhist doctrine and practice. Finally Mañjuśrī agrees to go, and is accompanied to
Vimalakīrti’s small room by the entire assembly, numbering in the tens
of thousands (all of whom, owing to Vimalakīrti’s miraculous powers, ﬁt
comfortably in the small space). The sutra presents, through the words of
Vimalakīrti, a Mahayana perspective on right mendicancy, teaching, meditation, and many other aspects of Buddhist practice. In the most famous
episode from the sutra Vimalakīrti is asked how to enter the gate of nonduality, and responds by sitting in utter silence. The Vimalakīrti Sutra has
been translated into Chinese more often than any other sutra, with records
remaining of at least seven versions. The earliest extant version is the Foshuo
Weimojie jing 佛說維摩詰經, 2 fascicles, produced by the monk Zhiqian 支謙
(n.d.) between 222 and 228 (t 14: #474). The next, and still the most popular,
version is the Weimojie suoshuo jing 維摩詰所說經, 3 fascicles, by Kumārajīva
(C., Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什, 344–ca. 409), published in about 406 (t 14: #475).
Third is the Shuo wugoucheng jing 說無垢稱經, 6 fascicles, by Xuanzang 玄奘
(600?–664), published in 650 (t 14: #476).
Weimojie suoshuo jing 維摩詰所說經. See entry above.
Weishi lun 唯識論. See Cheng weishi lun 成唯識論.
Wudai shi 五代史. See Jiu Wudai shi 舊五代史.
Wudeng huiyuan 五燈會元 (Compendium of the ﬁve lamps), 22 fascicles (x
80: #1565). Compiled by Dachuan Puji 大川普濟 (1179–1253) and published

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 417

in 1253. The ﬁrst edition contained 20 fascicles; to this the second edition,
published in 1364, added an additional two-fascicle table of contents. As the
word “compendium” in the title suggests, this work is essentially a synthesis, with additional materials, of the information in the ﬁve earlier Lamp
histories—the Jingde chuandeng lu 景德傳燈錄 (Jingde-era “Record of the
transmission of the lamp”) (1004), Tiansheng guangdeng lu 天聖廣燈錄 (Tiansheng-era “Record of the extensive transmission”) (1036), Jianzhong Jingguo
xudeng lu 建中靖國續燈録 (Jianzhong Jingguo-era “Supplementary record of
the lamp”) (1101), Zongmen liandeng huiyao 宗門聯燈會要 (Essential materials from the Zen school’s successive lamp records) (1183), and Jiatai pudeng
lu 嘉泰普燈録 (Jiatai-era “Extensive record of the lamp”) (1204). The result
is perhaps the most comprehensive of all the Lamp materials, with entries
on the Seven Buddhas of the Past, the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs, the
six Chinese patriarchs, and important masters to the beginning of the
thirteenth century. The Wudeng huiyuan was popular in both China and in
Japan, and many koans are taken from it.
Wufen lü 五分律 (The ﬁve-part vinaya), 30 fascicles (t 22: #1421). Full title Misha
saibu hexi Wufen lü 彌沙塞部和醯五分律. The rules of monastic discipline of
the Mahīśāsaka school of Indian Buddhism, translated by Buddhajīva (C.,
Fotuoshi 佛陀什, a Kashmirian monk of the Mahīśāsaka-school who arrived
in China in 423), working with Daosheng 道生 (ca. 360–434) and several
other Chinese disciples of the great translator Kumārajīva. The manuscript
that they translated is said to have been one brought to China from Sri
Lanka by the Chinese Buddhist pilgrim Faxian 法顯 (n.d.) in the early ﬁfth
century. The text is called “ﬁve-part” because it is divided into ﬁve sections,
in contrast to the Sifen lü 四分律 (The four-part vinaya; Dharmaguptavinaya). The Wufen lü is regarded as the Chinese vinaya closest to that of
Theravada Buddhism.
Wujia yulu 五家語錄 (Recorded sayings of the Five Houses), 5 fascicles; sections
are included in t 47: #1986 and #1987, and the three prefaces appear as x 69:
#1326. Also known as the Wuzhong lu 五宗録, this work is a collection of the
recorded sayings of the founders of the Five Houses 五家 of Chan, compiled
by the monk Yufeng Yuanxin 語風圓信 (n. d.) and the layman Guo Ningzhi
郭凝之 (n. d.). It was published about 1632.
Wujia zhengzong zan 五家正宗贊 (In praise of the Five Houses of the true
school), 4 fascicles (x 78: #1554). A biographical collection compiled in 1254
by the Linji-school monk Xisou Shaotan 希叟紹曇 (n.d.). The Wujia zhengzong zan presents biographical sketches and verses for seventy-four masters,
from Bodhidharma to representative monks of the ﬁve Chan “houses” (the
Linji, Caodong, Yunmen, Guiyang, and Fayan), and describes the characteristic qualities of the houses and the masters. The term “true school” is in this
case an appellation applied by the Chan school to itself, although, needless
to say, all other schools of Buddhism regard themselves as the “true school.”

418 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
The Wujia zhengzong zan arrived in Japan during the early period of Zen’s
transmission from China. It was admired from the fourteenth to nineteenth
centuries for its literary beauty and was used as a model for poetic composition.
Wuliangshou gongyang yigui 無量壽供養儀軌. See Fo lin niepan ji fazhu jing 佛
臨涅槃記法住經.
Wuliangshou jing 無量壽經 (Sutra on eternal life), 2 fascicles (t 12: #360). Full
title Foshuo wuliangshou jing 佛説無量壽經. A Chinese translation of the
Sukhāvatī-vyūha Sutra, produced in 252 by the third-century Central Asian
monk Saṃghavarman (C., Kang Sengkai 康僧鎧), although some scholars
argue that the true translators were the Indian monk Buddhabhadra (C.,
Fotuobatuoluo 佛陀跋陀羅, 359–429) and the Chinese monk Baoyun 寶雲
(467–529), and that the text was published in 421. The Wuliangshou jing is
the so-called Larger sutra on Immeasurable Life, with the Amituo jing 阿彌陀
經 (Amida sutra) being the Smaller sutra on Immeasurable Life. These two,
plus the Guan wuliang shou jing 觀無量壽經, are the three main sutras of the
Pure Land tradition. The Wuliangshou jing explains the career of Amitābha
Buddha from the time when he was a king named Dharmākara who
decided to quit his throne and devote himself to the attainment of buddhahood. As part of his practice Dharmākara took forty-eight vows, including,
most importantly, the vow to create a Pure Land of Bliss, ideal for attaining
enlightenment, where all who have faith in him may be reborn. The sutra
also explains the practices of meditation and recitation by which beings may
be reborn in this Pure Land, located “a hundred thousand million buddha
lands to the west.” Twelve translations of the sutra were made, of which ﬁve
are extant. The most popular version is still the Wuliangshou jing; the others
are: 1) the Wuliang qingjing pingdengjue jing 無量清淨平等覺經, translated
between 147 and 186 by Lokaksema (C., Zhiloujiachen 支婁迦讖) (t: #361);
2) the Amituo sanye sanfo saloufotan guodu rendao jing 阿彌陀三耶三佛薩樓
佛檀過度人道經, translated between 223 and 228 by Zhiqian 支謙 (t 12: #362);
3) the Dasheng wuliangshou zhuangyan jing 大乘無量壽莊嚴經, translated in
980 by Faxian 法賢 (t 12: #363); and 4) the Da amituo jing 大阿彌陀經, translated in 1162 by Wang Rixiu 王日休 (d. 1173) (t 12: #364). In addition, there
is the Indian monk Bodhiruci’s (C., Putiliuzhi 菩提流志; 6th c.) translation
Wuliangshou rulai hui 無量壽如來會, which constitutes fascicles 17 and 18 of
the Da baoji jing 大寶積經.
Wuliangshou jing youpotishe yuansheng ji zhu 無量壽經優婆提舍願生偈註. See
Wangsheng lun zhu 往生論註.
Wumen guan 無門關 (J., Mumonkan, The gateless barrier), 1 fascicle (t 48:
#2005). Full title Chanzong wumen guan 禪宗無門關. A collection of koans
compiled by Wumen Huikai 無門慧開 (1183–1260), with Wumen’s commentaries and verses; edited by Zongshao 宗紹. The ﬁrst edition, published in

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 419

1229, contained forty-eight cases; the second edition, published by Wumen’s
lay disciple Meng Gong 孟珙 in 1245, added a forty-ninth case selected by
another disciple of the master, the layman Anwan 安晩 (the oﬃcial Zheng
Qingzhi 鄭清之 [d. 1251]). The text was taken to Japan by Shinchi Kakushin
心地覺心 (1207–1298), a Japanese disciple of Wumen. The ﬁrst Japanese edition of the text is said to have been made at Shinchi’s temple Kōkoku-ji 興
國寺. The Wumen guan has remained a central text in Japanese Rinzai koan
study. It is relatively simple and direct in its presentation of the koans, in
contrast to the more poetic approach of the Biyan lu 碧巖錄.
Wuxing lun 悟性論 (Treatise on awakening to the nature of mind), 1 fascicle (t
48: #2009, 370c–373b). One of the six short treatises in the Xiaoshi liumen
小室六門, traditionally attributed to Bodhidharma. The text discusses Buddhist practice and the fundamental emptiness of the mind.
Wuzu Fayan Chanshi yulu 五祖法演禪師語錄. See Fayan Chanshi yulu 法演禪師
語錄.
Xianyu jing 賢愚經 (Sutra on the wise and foolish), 13 fascicles (t 4: #202).
Alternate title, Xianyu yinyuan jing 賢愚因縁經. The Damamūka-nidāna
Sutra translated into Chinese by Huijue 慧覺 in 445. The “nidāna” (“causality”) texts are a genre consisting of stories or allegories showing the causal
relationship between actions in one existence and those in a subsequent
existence. The Xianyu jing, containing sixty-two (or, in the Korean version,
sixty-nine) such stories, was of great importance for the transmission of
Buddhism in the Khotan and Duhhuang regions.
Xianzong ji 顯宗記 (Record of the essential teachings), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076,
458c–459b). Full title Heze Dashi xianzong ji 荷澤大師顯宗記. This work corresponds to the Dunhuang text Dunwu wusheng bore song 頓悟無生般若頌.
The Xianzong ji, formerly the only known work by Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會
(684–758), the chief proponent of the Southern school of Chan, emphasizes
prajñā, sudden enlightenment, and no-thought as central to the Chan teachings.
Xiao zhiguan 小止觀. See Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao 修習止觀坐禪法要.
Xiaopin bore jing 小品般若經 (Smaller wisdom sutra), 10 fascicles (t 8: #227). Full
title Xiaopin bore boluomi jing 小品般若波羅密經, abbreviated title Xiaopin
jing 小品經. The Chinese translation by Kumārajīva of the Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñā-pāramitā Sutra (Perfection of wisdom in eight thousand lines), the
earliest known of the prajñā-pāramitā (perfection of wisdom) sutras. See
Bore jing 般若經.
Xiaoshi liumen 小室六門 (Bodhidharma’s six gates), 1 fascicle (t 48: #2009).
A compilation of six short treatises attributed to Bodhidharma, although
there is no evidence that he was the actual author. The title is more correctly
written Shaoshi liumen 少室六門, “Shaoshi” 少室 being an alternate name for
Bodhidharma, from the fact that Shaolin si 少林寺, his temple, was located

420 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
on the peak Shaoshi 少室 of Mount Song 嵩. The six treatises that comprise
the Xiaoshi liumen are: 1) Xin jing song 心經頌 (Verse on the mind sutra);
2) Po xiang lun 破相論 (Treatise on the cessation of thoughts); 3) Er zhong
ru 二種入 (The two entrances); 4) Anxin famen 安心法門 (Dharma gate for
pacifying the mind); 5) Wuxing lun 悟性論 (Treatise on awakening to the
nature of mind); 6) Xuemai lun 血脈論 (Treatise on the transmission). The
individual texts date to the Tang; texts for the Anxin famen and the Er zhong
ru have been found at Dunhuang. The Xiaoshi liumen itself appears to date
to the Song; the oldest extant text is the Japanese Five Mountain edition 五
山版, published in the late Kamakura period (1192–1333).
Xin Huayan jing lun 新華嚴經論 (Treatise on the new translation of the
Avataṃsaka Sutra), 40 fascicles (t 36: #1739). By Li Tongxuan 李通玄
(639–734), a famous lay Buddhist scholar; date of publication unknown.
This treatise, a systematic categorization of the various teachings and
other features of the Avataṃsaka Sutra, is the earliest complete commentary on the so-called “New Translation” or “Eighty-Fascicle Edition” of the
Avataṃsaka Sutra. Li saw the “Ru fajie pin” 入法界品 (Chapter on entering
the Dharma Land) as the central teaching of the sutra, and the remaining
thirty-nine chapters as auxiliary.
Xin ming 心銘 (Mind verse), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076, 457b–458a). Full title Niutoushan chuzu Farong Chanshi xin ming 牛頭山初祖法融禪師心銘. A 198-line
poem attributed to Niutou Farong 牛頭法融 (594–657), ﬁrst patriarch of
the Niutou 牛頭 school. Farong argues for what is a very traditional Buddhist meditation practice of balanced śamatha and vipaśyanā, in which one
observes the rising and vanishing of thoughts in a mind that is fundamentally void. “Fix the mind nowhere / Fixing the mind nowhere / Limitless
brightness shows itself ” (Sheng-yen 1987, p. 42).
Xin Tang shu 新唐書 (Newer chronicles of the Tang), 225 fascicles. One of the
so-called Twenty-four Histories of China, this text, compiled by Ouyang Xiu
歐陽脩 (1007–1072) and Song Qi 宋祁 (998–1061), received its title in order
to distinguish it from the earlier Tang shu 唐書 (Chronicles of the Tang),
compiled by Liu Xu 劉昫 (887–946). It was largely a revision of the material
in the Tang shu (subsequently referred to as the Jiu Tang shu 舊唐書) with
additional material added from sources discovered after the publication of
the Tang shu. Many Chinese historians have criticized the work as inferior to
the Jiu Tang shu in historical detail and scholarly objectivity.
Xinjing lu 心鏡錄. See Zongjing lu 宗鏡錄.
Xinwang ming 心王銘 (Verses on the Mind King), 1 fascicle (t 51: #2076,
456c–457a). Full title Fu Dashi xinwang ming 傅大士心王銘. A sixty-eight
line poem attributed to Fu Dashi 傅大士, a famous sixth-century lay Buddhist. The position of the Xinwang ming can be summarized in the verse,

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 421

“When you realize original mind / The mind sees Buddha. This mind is
Buddha / This Buddha is mind” (Sheng-yen 1987, p. 18).
Xinxin ming 信心銘 (On faith in mind), 1 fascicle (t 48: #2010). A 146-line poem
attributed to Sengcan 僧粲 (d. 606?), the Third Chinese Patriarch of Chan.
The poem, one of the earliest in Chan literature, stresses the nonduality of
truth. This standpoint is expressed in the closing lines of the poem (which
also provide the rationale for the title): “Existence is precisely emptiness /
Emptiness is precisely existence.... One is everything / Everything is one....
Faith and mind are not two / Nonduality is faith in mind.” (Sheng-yen 1987,
p. 29–30).
Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao 修習止觀坐禪法要 (Essentials of seated meditation
for practicing calming and contemplation), 1 fascicle (t 46: #1915). Also
known as the Zuochan fayao 坐禪法要, Tongmeng zhiguan 童蒙止觀, and
Xiao zhiguan 小止觀. A ten-chapter treatise by Zhiyi 智顗 (538–597), founder
of the Tiantai school, on the practice of zhiguan 止觀 (śamatha/vipaśyanā),
the fundamental Tiantai meditation practice. The work, written as a summary of the Cidi chanmen 次第禪門 (another meditation text by Zhiyi),
discusses in concrete detail the physical and spiritual preparations necessary
for meditation and various methods for practicing it.
Xiuxing daodi jing 修行道地經 (Sutra on the stages of the path of cultivation),
7 fascicles (t 15: #606). Alternative title, Toujia zhefumi jing 偸迦遮復彌
經. Translated by the Scythian monk Dharmarakṣa (C., Zhu Fahu 竺法護,
ﬂ. 265–313). A sutra emphasizing basic Buddhist meditation methods on
impurity, compassion, causality, and breathing. The practice of śamatha and
vipaśyanā are explained, as well as contemplation on the Four Noble Truths.
Later chapters are devoted to Mahayana bodhisattva practices.
Xiyou ji 西遊記 (Records of a pilgrimage to the West). A Ming novel ascribed
to Wu Cheng’en 吳承恩 (1500?–1582) and originally published in 1590, the
Xiyou ji is a ﬁctionalized account of the great translator-monk Xuanzang’s
玄奘 (600?–664) pilgrimage to India to obtain Buddhist sutras. Xuanzang is
aided in his quest by three companions: Monkey (Sun Wukong 孫悟空), Pig
(Zhu Bajie 豬八戒), and the River Ogre (Sha Wujing 沙悟淨). The novel has
remained one of the most popular works of Chinese literature for centuries
owing to its humor, adventure, and entertainingly presented teachings on
the spiritual path.
Xu chuandeng lu 續傳燈錄 (Further transmission of the lamp), 36 fascicles (t 51:
#2077). A Chan biographical collection, compiled by Yuanji Juding 圓極居
頂 (d. 1404) and published in the late fourteenth century as part of the Ming
Tripiṭaka. Intended as a supplement to the jc, the collection begins in the
tenth generation after the Sixth Patriarch with the early Northern Song master Fenyang Shanzhao 汾陽善昭 (947–1024), and concludes in the twentieth

422 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
generation after the Sixth Patriarch with several late Southern Song disciples
of Lingyin Songyue 靈隱嵩嶽 (1139–1209).
Xu gaoseng zhuan 續高僧傳 (Supplementary Biographies of eminent monks),
30 fascicles (t 50: #2060). Also known as the Tang gaoseng zhuan 唐高僧
傳. Compiled by the monk Daoxuan 道宣 (596–667) and completed in 645,
though revisions adding new material continued until Daoxuan’s death. The
Xu gaoseng zhuan is a sequel to the Gaoseng zhuan 高僧傳 (Biographies of
eminent monks), published in 519. It gives the biographies of 485 priests who
lived in the 144-year period between the beginning of the Liang dynasty
(502-557) and the nineteenth year of the Zhenguan 貞觀 era (645). The biographical entries are categorized into ten sections: 1) translators; 2) exegetes;
3) meditation masters; 4) vinaya specialists; 5) defenders of the dharma; 6)
thaumaturges; 7) ascetics or martyrs; 8) sutra specialists; 9) benefactors; 10)
miscellaneous, chanters.
Xu guzunsu yuyao 續古尊宿語要 (Supplementary recorded sayings of the ancient
worthies), 6 fascicles (x 68: #1318). Also known as the Xukai guzunsu yuyao
續開古尊宿語要 and the Xukan guzunsu yuyao 續刊古尊宿語. This anthology of important Chan records, compiled by Huishi Shiming 晦室師明 (n.d.),
was published in 1238 as a supplement to the earlier Guzunsu yuyao 古尊宿語
要 (1144). The collection presents the records of eighty-three Chan masters,
starting with Linji and concluding with Huo’an Shiti 或庵師體 (1108–1179).
All of the records are presented in abbreviated form, except for that of Linji.
Xu qingliang zhuan 續清凉傳 (Supplementary Tales of [Mount] Qingliang), 2 fascicles (t 51: #2100). A continuation of the Gu qingliang zhuan 古清凉傳 and
the Guang qingliang zhuan 廣清涼傳. See Gu qingliang zhuan.
Xuansha Shibei Chanshi guanglu 玄沙師備禪師廣録. See following entry.
Xuansha Zongyi Dashi guanglu 玄沙宗一大師廣錄 (Extensive record of Great
Teacher Xuansha Zongyi), 3 fascicles (x 73: 1445). Also known as Fuzhou
Xuansha Zongyi Dashi guanglu 福州玄沙宗一大師廣録 or Xuansha Shibei
Chanshi guanglu 玄沙師備禪師廣録; abbreviated as Zongyi Dashi guanglu 宗
一大師廣録 or Xuansha lu 玄沙録. The complete record of the Chan master
Xuansha Shibei 玄沙師備 (835–908), containing his sermons, verses, and
inscriptions. The text was originally compiled in 900 by Xuansha’s disciple
Zhiyan 智嚴 (n.d.), but this version was lost. In 1080 Sun Jue 孫覺 (n.d.), the
governor of Fuzhou 福州, compiled and published the fragments of the earlier text; this is the version upon which all present texts are based.
Xuedou baize songgu 雪竇百則頌古 (Xuedou’s verse comments on one hundred
old koans), 1 fascicle. Full title Xuedou heshang baize songgu 雪竇和尚百則頌
古. A collection of one hundred old koans selected and commented upon by
the Chan master Xuedou Chongxian 雪竇重顯 (980–1052) of the Yunmen
school. The Xuedou baize songgu later became the basis for the famous koan
collection Biyan lu 碧巖錄 (The blue cliﬀ record).

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 423

Xuedou heshang baize songgu 雪竇和尚百則頌古. See Xuedou baize songgu 雪竇
百則頌古.
Xuedou Mingjue Chanshi yulu 雪竇明覺禪師語錄. See Mingjue Chanshi yulu 明覺
禪師語錄.
Xuefeng Huikong Chanshi yulu 雪峰慧空禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan
Master Xuefeng Huikong), 1 fascicle (x 69: #1346). Alternative titles Xuefeng
Dongshan heshang yulu 雪峰東山和尚語録; Dongshan Xuefeng Kong heshang
yulu 東山雪峰空和尚語録. A collection of the formal and informal sermons,
verses, comments on koans, and other materials relating to the Chan master
Xuefeng Huikong 雪峰慧空 (1096–1158), compiled by the master’s disciple
Huibi 慧弼 (n.d.). The ﬁrst edition was published in 1183 with a preface by
Juexing 覺性 (n.d.).
Xuefeng Yicun Chanshi yulu 雪峰義存禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan
Master Xuefeng Yicun), 2 fascicles (x 69: #1333). Also known as the Xuefeng Zhenjue Chanshi yulu 雪峰眞覺禪師語錄; Zhenjue Dashi yulu 眞覺大
師語錄; or simply Xuefeng yulu 雪峰語錄. A compilation containing a short
biography, formal and informal sermons, exchanges, verses, admonitions,
and other material relating to the Chan master Xuefeng Yicun 雪峰義存
(822–908). The ﬁrst edition of the work, now lost, was published in 1032 with
a preface by Wang Sui 王隨 (n.d.), the prime minister at that time. In 1080
Sun Jue 孫覺 (n.d.), the governor of Fuzhou 福州, published a revised edition, also lost. The present text is based on a version edited by Lin Hong’yan
林弘衍 (n.d.) and published in 1639.
Xuefeng yulu 雪峰語錄. See Xuefeng Yicun Chanshi yulu 雪峰義存禪師語錄.
Xuemai lun 血脈論 (Treatise on the transmission), one of the six short treatises
in the Xiaoshi liumen 小室六門 (t 48: #2009), traditionally attributed to
Bodhidharma. A text in question-and-answer format discussing the true
nature of practice and enlightenment. Central concepts are the identity of
buddha and mind and the necessity of “seeing self-nature” 見性. Mention
of the twenty-seven Indian patriarchs suggest that the text is a mid-Tang
work published after the Baolin zhuan 寶林傳, which ﬁrst delineated this
tradition.
Xukai guzunsu yuyao 續開古尊宿語要. See Xu guzunsu yuyao 續古尊宿語要.
Xukan guzunsu yuyao 續刊古尊宿語. See Xu guzunsu yuyao 續古尊宿語要.
Xutang ji 虛堂集 (Empty hall anthology), 6 fascicles (x 67: #1304). Full title
Linquan Laoren pingchang Danxia Chun Chanshi songgu xutang ji 林泉老人
評唱丹霞淳禪師頌古虗堂集. The capping phrases and commentaries of the
Caodong master Linquan Conglun 林泉從倫 (n.d.) on a collection of one
hundred koans with verse comments by the Caodong master Danxia Zichun 丹霞子淳 (1064–1117). The work, inspired by collections like the Biyan lu
and the Congrong lu 從容錄 (Record of equanimity) is included in the Sijia

424 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
pingchang lu 四家評唱錄 (Commentaries on the Four Houses), a collection
of four koan commentaries. See also Konggu ji 空谷集.
Yangjuemoluo jing 央掘魔羅經 (Aṅgulimāla Sutra), 4 fascicles (t 2: #120). Translated by Guṇabhadra (C., Qiunabatuoluo 求那跋陀羅, 394–468). For content
see Foshuo Yangjueji jing 佛說鴦崛髻經.
Yangshan Huiji Chanshi yulu 仰山慧寂禪師語錄 (Recorded sayings of Chan
Master Yangshan Huiji), 1 fascicle (t 47: #1990). Full title Yuanzhou Yangshan Huiji Chanshi yulu 袁州仰山慧寂禪師語錄. The recorded sayings of the
Chan master Yangshan Huiji 仰山慧寂 (807–883), a direct heir of Guishan
Lingyou 潙山靈祐 (771–853) and the cofounder with him of the Guiyang
school of Chan. The text was compiled in 1630 by Yufeng Yuanxin 語風圓信
(n.d.) and the layman Guo Ningzhi 郭凝之 (n.d.) and published in 1665. It is
one of the texts included in the Wujia yulu 五家語錄 (Recorded sayings of
the Five Houses).
Yanyi chao 演義鈔. See Dafangguang fo Huayan jing suishu yanyi chao 大方廣佛
華嚴經隨疏演義鈔.
Yichuan xiansheng yu 伊川先生語 (Sayings of Master Yichuan). A compilation
of the sayings of Yichuan 伊川, another name for Cheng Yi 程頤 (1033–1107),
who, along with his older brother, Cheng Hao 程顥 (1032-1085), was one of
the principal early architects of the Neo-Confucian movement.
Yihai baimen 義海百門. See Huayan jing yihai baimen 華嚴經義海百門.
Yilin zhang 義林章. See Dasheng fayuan yilin zhang 大乘法苑義林章.
Yinhua lu 因話錄 (Notes from conversations), 6 fascicles. A book of essays on
Tang-dynasty matters by Zhao Lin 趙璘 (ﬂ. 836–846). The ﬁrst fascicle deals
with the aﬀairs of the emperor; the second and third fascicles with the aﬀairs
of the aristocracy and oﬃcialdom; the fourth fascicle with the aﬀairs of
those who did not receive oﬃcial positions and the aﬀairs of commoners;
the ﬁfth fascicle with various humorously arranged quotations; and the sixth
with miscellaneous topics.
Youxian ku 遊仙窟 (Realm of the amorous goddesses), a novel by Zhang Zhuo
張鷟 (657–730), also known as Zhang Wencheng 張文成, about the adventures of an oﬃcial who, on a journey near the headwaters of the Huang He
(Yellow River), unexpectedly found himself in the realm of the immortals.
The novel was lost in China, but remained popular in Japan and exerted
great inﬂuence on Heian literature.
Yuanchao mishi 元朝密史 (Secret history of the Mongols). The ﬁrst literary work
in the Mongolian language, by an unknown author. Published about twenty
years after the death of Chinggis Khan (1160?–1227), the Yuanchao mishi
describes the legendary origins of the Mongol nation, the life of Chinggis
Khan, the creation of the Mongolian empire, and the reign of Chinggis’s son
Ögedei (d. 1241). The work also provides a detailed depiction of the nomadic
Mongolian lifestyle.

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 425

Yuanjue jing 圓覺經 (Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment), 1 fascicle (t 17: #842). Full
title Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi jing 大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經. A
Mahayana sutra that, according to tradition, was translated into Chinese by
the Kashmirian monk Bhutatāra (C., Fotuoduoluo 佛陀多羅, n.d.) in 693. It is
now regarded to be a Chinese apocryph produced in the early eighth century
ce. The single fascicle is divided into twelve chapters that deal with the practice
of meditation, taking up such issues as the nature of ignorance, the relation
of sudden and gradual enlightenment, and the various false views that may
hinder a seeker on the way to perfect enlightenment. The sutra begins with a
strict position in support of sudden enlightenment, but as the text progresses
it balances this by introducing teachings on gradual enlightenment as well.
Yuanjue jing dashu shiyi chao 圓覺經大疏釋義鈔 (Subcommentary to the Yuanjue
jing dashu 圓覺經大疏 [Large commentary on the Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment]), 26 fascicles (x 9: #245). By Guifeng Zongmi 圭峰宗密 (780–841), the
ﬁfth patriarch of both the Huayan 華嚴 school and Chan’s Heze 荷澤 school.
This and other commentaries on the Yuanjue jing were in large part responsible for the great popularity of the sutra in China.
Yuanjue jing lüeshu chao 圓覺經略疏鈔 (Subcommentary to the Yuanjue jing
lüeshu 圓覺經略疏 [Abridged commentary on the Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment]), 12 fascicles (x 9: #248). By Guifeng Zongmi 圭峰宗密 (780–841).
Yuanren baizhong qu 元人百種曲 (A hundred Yuan plays), 48 fascicles. Also
known as the Yuanqu xuan 元曲選. By Zang Maoxun 臧懋循 (1550–1620),
also known as Zang Jinshu 臧晉叔 . A collection of one hundred scripts
from the Jin 金 and Yuan 元 dynasties, including six from the early Ming 明
dynasty.
Yuanwu Chanshi xinyao 圜悟禪師心要. See Foguo Keqin Chanshi xinyao 佛果克勤
禪師心要.
Yuanwu Foguo Chanshi yulu 圜悟佛果禪師語録 (Recorded sayings of Chan Master Yuanwu Foguo), 20 fascicles (t 47: #1997). Often referred to as the Foguo
Yuanwu Chanshi yulu 佛果圜悟禪師語録, Yuanwu Chanshi yulu 圜悟禪師語
録, or Yuanwu lu 圜悟録, the work is a compendium of the sermons, informal talks, verse, and prose of Yuanwu Keqin 圜悟克勤 (1063–1135), compiled
by the master’s foremost disciple, Huqiu Shaolong 虎丘紹隆 (1077–1136). It
was ﬁrst published in 1134, with prefaces by the government oﬃcials Geng
Yanxi 耿延禧 (n.d.) and Zhang Jun 張浚 (1086–1154), both lay disciples of
the master. The record contains formal sermons from the high seat 上堂
(fascicles 1–8); informal discourses 小参 (fascicles 8–13); public lectures
for lay believers 普説 (fascicle 13); informal talks on practice 法語 (fascicles
14–16); prose comments on koans 拈古 (fascicles 16–18); verse comments on
koans 頌古 (fascicles 18–19); and miscellaneous verses and prose writings
(fascicle 20).

426 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Yuanzhou Yangshan Huiji Chanshi yulu 袁州仰山慧寂禪師語錄. See Yangshan
Huiji Chanshi yulu 仰山慧寂禪師語錄.
Yuefu shiji 樂府詩集 (Anthology of songs), 100 fascicles. By Guo Maoqian 郭
茂倩 of the Song dynasty. A collection of songs, dating from prehistoric to
Tang-dynasty times, arranged into twelve categories such as state banquet
songs, dance songs, matching songs, songs accompanied by the ﬂute, songs
accompanied by the lute, etc. The work includes detailed notes on the history and contents of the songs.
Yunmen guanglu 雲門廣錄 (Extensive record of Yunmen), 3 fascicles (t 47:
#1988). Full title Yunmen Kuangzhen Chanshi guanglu 雲門匡眞禪師廣錄;
also known as the Yunmen heshang guanglu 雲門和尚廣錄, or simply Yunmen lu 雲門錄. A collection of the sermons, verses, koans, questions and
answers, and other materials relating to the Chan master Yunmen Wenyan
雲門文偃 (864–949), compiled by the master’s disciple Shoujian 守堅 (n.d.)
and published in 1076 with a preface by the government oﬃcial Su Xie 蘇
澥.
Yunmen Kuangzhen Chanshi guanglu 雲門匡眞禪師廣錄. See entry above.
Yuqie lun 瑜伽論 (Treatise on the stages of Yogācāra practice), 100 fascicles (t
30: #1579). Full title Yuqie shidi lun 瑜伽師地論. A translation by Xuanzang
玄奘 (600?–664) of the Yogācārabhūmi śāstra, the fundamental text of the
Yogācāra school, variously attributed to the Yogācāra patriarchs Maitreya
(C., Mile 彌勒; 4th c.?) and Asaṅga (C., Wuzhuo 無著; 4th or 5th c.), who
in turn are traditionally said to have heard it directly from the bodhisattva
Maitreya in Tsuṣita Heaven. The principal part of the treatise explains the
seventeen stages (bhūmi) that, according to Yogācāra thought, a seeker must
advance through on the way to enlightenment. Subsequent sections provide
interpretations of the bhūmi, provide textual support from the sutras for
the Yogācāra bhūmi doctrine, and clarify various terms and topics from
the Tripiṭaka. The treatise devotes particular attention to the role of the
ālaya-vijñāna (storehouse consciousness) in the path to enlightenment. In
addition to the Xuanzang translation, the following earlier translations exist:
Pusa dichi jing 菩薩地持經, 10 fascicles, translated by Dharmakṣema (C.,
Tanwuchen 曇無讖; 385–433?) (t 30: #1581); Pusa shanjie jing 菩薩善戒經, 9
fascicles, translated by Gunavarman (C., Qiunabamo 求那跋摩; 367–431) (t
30: #1582); Pusa shanjie jing 菩薩善戒經, 1 fascicle, translated by Gunavarman
(C., Qiunabamo 求那跋摩; 367–431) (t 30: #1583); and Jueding zang lun 決定
藏論, 3 fascicles, translatedby Paramārtha (C., Zhendi 眞諦; 499–569) (t 30:
#1583).
Yuqie shidi lun lüezuan 瑜伽師地論略纂 (Outline of the Treatise on the stages of
yoga practice), 16 fascicles (t 43: #1829). Also known as the Yuqie lun lüezuan
瑜伽論略纂. A commentary by Ci’en Dashi Kuiji 慈恩大師窺基 (632–682)
on the Yuqie lun 瑜伽論 (see entry above). Kuiji explains his purpose as the

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 427

summarization of the treatise’s more complex sections and the supplementation of its overly abbreviated sections.
Za ahan jing 雜阿含經 (Miscellaneous discourses of the Buddha), 50 fascicles
(t 2: #99). A Chinese translation by Guṇabhadra (C., Qiunabatuoluo 求那
跋陀羅; 394–468) of the Saṃyukta Āgama. This is the equivalent of the Pali
Saṃyutta Nikāya, the “Connected (or Grouped) Discourses,” consisting of
sutras arranged in ﬁve sections (vaggas), each having chapters (samyuttas)
with a group of sutras on a related topic. See also Ahan jing 阿含經.
Zengyi ahan jing 增一阿含經 (Further discourses of the Buddha), 51 fascicles
(t 2: #125). A Chinese translation of the Ekottara Āgama by Gautama
Saṃghadeva (C., Qutan Sengqie Tipo 瞿曇僧伽提婆; ﬂ. 365–397). This is the
equivalent of the Aṅguttara Nikāya, consisting of sutras arranged in eleven
sections according to the number of subjects they deal with. See also Ahan
jing 阿含經.
Zenrin shōkisen 禪林象器箋 (Notes on Zen implements), 20 fascicles. A Zen
reference work by the great Japanese scholar-monk Mujaku Dōchū 無著
道忠 (1653–1744), with a preface dated 1741. The work describes the origin,
development, and meaning of the Zen monastic rules, rituals, institutions,
implements, etc.
Zhao lun 肇論 (The treatises of Zhao), 1 fascicle (t 45: #1858). A collection of
short treatises on prajñā by Sengzhao 僧肇 (374/78–414), an eminent Chinese disciple of Kumārajīva (Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什 ; 344–ca. 409); most
likely written between 404 and 414, when Sengzhao was in Chang’an working under Kumārajīva. Neither the compiler nor the date of compilation
are known. Contents include: “Zongbenyi” 宗本義 (Fundamental principles), “Wubuqian lun” 物不遷論 (Treatise on the immutability of things),
“Buzhenkong lun” 不眞空論 (Treatise on śūnyatā), “Bore wuzhi lun” 般若
無知論 (Prajñā is not of the known), and “Niepan wuming lun” 涅槃無名論
(Nirvana is without form). The Zhao lun was highly regarded in the Sanlun
三論 (Three Treatises), Huayan 華嚴, and Chan schools.
Zhaozhou lu 趙州錄 (Record of Zhaozhou), 2 or 3 fascicles (gy 13; x 68: #1315).
Full title Zhaozhou Zhenji Chanshi yulu 趙州眞際禪師語録 . A collection
of the sermons and exchanges of the eminent Chan master Zhaozhou
Congshen 趙州從諗 (778–897). Original compiler and publication date are
unknown; the oldest extant edition was re-edited by a certain Chengshi 澄諟
(n.d.), a second-generation disciple of Fayan Wenyi 法眼文益 (885–958). The
text proper is preceded by a short biography of the master entitled “Zhaozhou Zhenji Chanshi xingzhuang” 趙州眞際禪師行狀, attributed to Huitong
惠通 of Dongyuan 東院 and dated 953.
Zhaozhou Zhenji Chanshi yulu 趙州眞際禪師語録. See entry above.
Zheng suwen 證俗文 (Explaining vernacular writings), 19 fascicles. A lexicon

428 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
of colloquialisms by the eminent Qing-dynasty scholar Hao Yixing 郝懿行
(1757–1825).
Zhengdao ge 證道歌 (Song of enlightenment), 1 fascicle (t 48: #2014, 395c–397a).
Attributed to Yongjia Xuanjue 永嘉玄覺 (663–713), a disciple of the Sixth
Patriarch Huineng 慧能 (638–713), this poem, along with the Xinxin ming
信心銘 of Sengcan 僧粲 (d. 606?), is one of the earliest examples of Chan
literature. In 1,814 characters it extols the absolute freedom of the awakened
mind. The attribution to Yongjia has been questioned, but the text unquestionably dates back to the earliest period of Chan, with eighth-century
manuscripts having been found at Dunhuang.
Zhengfa nianchu jing 正法念處經 (Sutra on contemplating the true dharma),
70 fascicles (t 17: #721). A Chinese translation of the Saddharma-smṛtyupasthāna Sutra by the Central Indian monk Gautama Prajñāruci (C.,
Qutan Boreliuzhi 瞿曇般若流支), who was active from 538 to 543. The sutra
discusses the workings of karmic causality in the triloka (three realms) and
ﬁve gati (ﬁve paths of rebirth), and explains the religious practices appropriate for Buddhist monks and nuns. The sutra’s graphic descriptions of the
realms of the hell dwellers, the preta, and the animals are especially well
known.
Zhengfayan zang 正法眼藏 (Treasury of the true dharma eye), 6 fascicles (x 67:
#1309). A collection of koans and dialogues compiled between 1147 and 1150
by the Chan master Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲 (1089–1163), with comments
or capping phrases added by Dahui.
Zhenjue Dashi yulu 眞覺大師語錄. See Xuefeng Yicun Chanshi yulu 雪峰義存禪
師語錄.
Zhidu lun 智度論. See Dazhidu lun 大智度論.
Zhihui zhuangyan jing 智慧莊嚴經. See Rulai zhuangyan zhihui guangming ru
yiqie fojingjie jing 如來莊嚴智慧光明入一切佛境界經.
Zhiyue lu 指月錄 (Pointing at the moon record), 32 fascicles (x 83: #1578). A collection of biographical accounts compiled by Qu Ruji 瞿汝稷 (1548-1610),
published with a preface dated 1602. The text presents material relating to
the Seven Buddhas of the Past, Śākyamuni, the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs, the six Chinese ancestors, through to masters up to the year 1164. The
ﬁnal two fascicles contain the essential sayings of Dahui Zonggao.
Zhong ahan jing 中阿含經 (Middle-length discourses), 60 fascicles (t 1: #26).
A Chinese translation by Gautama Saṃghadeva (C., Qutan Sengqie Tipo
瞿曇僧伽提婆; ﬂ. 365–397) of the Madhyama Āgama, the Āgama sutra corresponding to the Pali Majjhima Nikāya. Contains 222 medium-length discourses on a wide variety of topics, including central doctrines like the Four
Noble Truths and the Twelve-linked Chain of Causation. See also Ahan jing
阿含經.
Zhong benqi jing 中本起經 (Middle-length record of the Buddha’s former deeds),

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 429

2 fascicles (t 4: #196). A work of biographical literature on the Buddha, one
of the oldest examples of this genre, translated in 207 by Tanguo 曇果 (n.d.)
and Kang Mengxiang 康孟詳 (n.d.). The sutra relates in ﬁfteen chapters the
Buddha’s life from the time of his enlightenment to the time just prior to his
parinirvāṇa. It is believed to be a companion work to the Xiuxing benqi jing
修行本起經 (t 3: #184), which describes the Buddha’s previous existences and
his life up until the time of his enlightenment.
Zhonghua chuan xindi chanmen shizi chengxi tu 中華傳心地禪門師資承襲圖
(Chart of the master-disciple succession of the Chan school that transmits
the mind ground in China), 1 fascicle (x 63: #1225). By Guifeng Zongmi 圭
峰宗密 (780–841), the ﬁfth patriarch of the Huayan 華嚴 school and Chan’s
Heze 荷澤 school. The work begins with a letter to Zongmi from the government oﬃcial Pei Xiu 裴休 (797–870), in which Pei inquires about the four
schools of Chan (the Beizong 北宗, Niutou 牛頭, Heze 荷澤, and Hongzhou
洪州). Zongmi provides a detailed reply, giving the lineages and teachings of
the respective schools and oﬀering critical analyses.
Zhu Huayan fajie guanmen 註華嚴法界觀門 (Commentary on the Huayan
dharma-realm meditation), 1 fascicle (t 45: #1884). By Guifeng Zongmi 圭
峰宗密 (780–841), the ﬁfth patriarch of the Huayan 華嚴 school and Chan’s
Heze 荷澤 school. A commentary on the Huayan fajie guanmen 華嚴法界觀
門, a treatise by Du Shun 杜順 (557–640), the ﬁrst patriarch of the Huayan
school. Zongmi’s commentary relies considerably on the Huayan fajie xuanjing 華嚴法界玄鏡, by the fourth Huayan patriarch Qingliang Chengguan 清
凉澄觀 (737–838), but particularly emphasizes the meditation on śūnyatā 眞
空觀.
Zhu Weimojie jing 注維摩詰經 (Commentary on the Vimalakīrti Sutra), 10
fascicles (t 38: #1775). A commentary on the Vimalakīrti Sutra attributed
to Sengzhao 僧肇 (374/78–414), an eminent Chinese disciple of Kumārajīva
(Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什; 344–ca. 409), from notes on Kumārajīva’s lectures
given during the translation of the sutra, plus the comments of Sengzhao,
Daosheng 道生 (ca. 360–434), and several other disciples. Sengzhao’s contributions account for over half of the text, including the preface. Kumārajīva’s
careful deﬁnitions of the terminology used in the sutra reveal the translator’s concern with meaning, while his disciple’s comments show the developing Chinese understanding of Buddhism.
Zhu Zi yulei 朱子語類 (Conversations of Zhu Zi), 140 fascicles. Also known as
the Zhu Xi yulu 朱熹語錄 or Zhu Xi yulu 朱子語錄. The recorded sayings of
the great Neo-Confucian thinker Zhu Xi 朱熹 (1130–1200), compiled and
classiﬁed into thirty-ﬁve categories (principle 理, energy 氣, spirits, the
various Confucian classics and philosophers, etc.) by Li Jingde 黎靖徳
(13th c.).
Zhu Zi yulu 朱子語錄 (Recorded sayings of Zhu Zi). See entry above.

430 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Zhuangzi 莊子. A Taoist work attributed to the Taoist sage Zhuangzi 莊子 (4th
c. bce). With the Daode jing, this is one of the greatest of the Taoist classics. It consists of thirty-three chapters, the ﬁrst seven of which, known as
the “Inner Chapters,” are attributed to Zhuangzi himself. The ﬁfteen “Outer
Chapters” and eleven “Mixed Chapters” are said to have been the work of
his disciples. The book deals with such themes as the nature of the Tao; the
freedom of the sage; the relativity of good and evil, life and death; and the
importance of meditation.
Zhufa wuxing jing 諸法無行經 (All dharmas are without activity sutra), 2
fascicles (t 15: #650). A Chinese translation by Kumārajīva of the Sarvadharmapravṛtti-nirdeśa. This sutra, taking the prajñā-pāramitā standpoint
of śūnyatā in which all things lack self-nature, argues that the Buddha law
and secular law are equivalent, as are bodhisattvas and ordinary beings,
enlightenment and delusion, etc. The use of expedient means for the salvation of sentient beings is stressed, and overattachment to the precepts is
condemned. The tathāgatagarbha thought of this sutra had a deep inﬂuence on the development of Chinese and Japanese Buddhism. Other translations of the Sarvadharmapravṛtti-nirdeśa are the Foshuo zhufa benwu jing
佛説諸法本無經 (t 15: #651), translated by Jñānagupta (C., She’najueduo 闍
那崛多; 523–600), and the Foshuo dasheng suizhuan xuanshuo zhufa jing 佛
説大乘隨轉宣説諸法經 (t 15: #652), translated by the Song-dynasty monk
Shaode 紹悳.
Zhufang menren canwen yulu 諸方門人參問語錄 (Record of questions asked
by disciples from everywhere), 1 fascicle (x 63: #1224). Compiled by Dazhu
Huihai 大珠慧海 (n.d.), a disciple of Mazu Daoyi 馬祖道一 (709–788). The
work, which presents Huihai’s lectures and his answers to questions from
students, together with biographical information from jc 28, was compiled
and edited by the Ming-dynasty Tiantai monk Miaoxie 妙叶 (n.d.) and ﬁrst
published in 1374. It forms the second fascicle of the Dunwu rudao yaomen
lun 頓悟入道要門論 (see also entry for this work).
Zhuzi bianlüe 助字辨略 (Compendium of auxiliary characters), 5 fascicles.
Completed in 1711. A text compiled by the Qing-dynasty scholar Liu Qi 劉
淇 (ﬂ. 1711) that explains the use of Chinese auxiliary characters 助字 using a
system that classiﬁes them into thirty categories and presents six examples
of each.
Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑑 (Comprehensive mirror to aid government), 294 fascicles. Regarded as the greatest work of Chinese historiography, the Zizhi
tongjian was compiled by the eminent historian Sima Guang 司馬光 (1019–
1086) on the order of Emperor Yingzong of the Song dynasty. Work began
in 1065 and was completed in 1084. Intended as a universal history of China,
the Zizhi tongjian employed a chronological, year-by-year approach that
covered the period from 403 bce to 959 ce. The purpose of the history (as

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 431

indicated by the word jian 鑑, “mirror,” in the title) was to provide a guide
to help the emperor govern wisely on the basis of a thorough knowledge of
the past. The work was extremely inﬂuential and inspired many sequels. The
commentary by Hu Sanxing 胡三省 (1230–1287) is now regarded as part of
the text itself.
Zongjing lu 宗鏡錄 (Records of the source-mirror), 100 fascicles (t 48: #2016).
Also known as the Zongjian lu 宗鑑錄 and the Xinjing lu 心鏡錄. The work,
apparently commissioned by King Qian Hongshu 錢弘俶 (r. 948–978) of
Wuyue 吳越, was compiled by Yongming Yanshou 永明延壽 (904–976), a
Tiantai monk who stressed an integrated approach to scholarly study and
meditative practice. Completed in 961, the work was presented to the king,
who wrote a preface and preserved the work in the palace. It was ﬁrst published in the Yuanyou 元祐 era (1086–1093), with a preface by the prime
minister, Yang Jie 楊傑 (n.d.). The Zongjing lu places primary importance on
the contemplation of mind, supporting this teaching with an encyclopedic
presentation of passages from Chan, Tiantai, Yogācāra, and other traditions.
It was included in the Song edition of the Tripiṭaka, and exerted a wide
inﬂuence on the various schools of Chinese Buddhism.
Zongmen liandeng huiyao 宗門聯燈會要 (Essential materials from the Chan
school’s successive Lamp Records), 31 fascicles (x 79: #1557). Usually referred
to as the Liandeng huiyao 聯燈會要. Compiled in 1183 by Huiweng Wuming 晦翁悟明 (n.d.), a monk in the lineage of Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲
(1089–1163), this text covers the traditional Chan lineage from the Seven
Buddhas of the Past, Śākyamuni, the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs, the six
Chinese ancestors, through to masters of the compiler’s own time. Entries
for over six hundred ﬁgures present enlightenment experiences, exchanges,
and teachings. The content relates primarily to koan material; historical
information is sparse, although the text itself is counted among the biographical Lamp Records, together with the the Jingde chuandeng lu 景德傳
燈錄 (Jingde-era Record of the transmission of the lamp) (1004), Tiansheng
guangdeng lu 天聖廣燈錄 (Tiansheng-era Record of the extensive transmission) (1036), Jianzhong Jingguo xudeng lu 建中靖國續燈録 (Jianzhong
Jingguo-era Supplementary record of the lamp) (1101), and Jiatai pudeng lu 嘉
泰普燈録 (Jiatai-era Extensive record of the lamp) (1204).
Zongmen shigui lun 宗門十規論 (Treatise on the ten principles of the Chan
school), 1 fascicle (x 63: #1226). Also known as the Jinghui Fayan Chanshi
zongmen shigui lun 淨慧法眼禅師宗門十規論 . By Fayan Wenyi 法眼文益
(885–958), the founder of the Fayan school of Chan; the date of ﬁrst publication is unknown. The text emphasizes the importance of doctrinal study and
an ascetic lifestyle, and argues against the tendency in Chan at that time to
place an unbalanced stress on sudden enlightenment. In ten sections Fayan
sets forth the primary objectives of Patriarch Chan, then clariﬁes the shortcomings of contemporary teachers.

432 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Zongmen tongyao ji 宗門統要集 (Essential collection of the lineage of the Chan
school), 10 fascicles. A collection of 1107 koans compiled by the Chan monk
Zongyong 宗永 (n.d.) of Fujian, and ﬁrst published in 1133. The Zongmen
tongyao ji presents koan material relating to the traditional Chan lineage,
from Śākyamuni, the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs, the six Chinese ancestors, through to the masters of the eleventh generation of the lineage of
Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷讓 (677–744) and the tenth generation of the lineage of Qingyuan Xingsi 靑原行思 (660?–740). The work greatly inﬂuenced
the compilation of the Zongmen liandeng huiyao.
Zongtong biannian 宗統編年 (Chronological history of the Chan lineage), 32 fascicles (x 86: #1600). By the Linji master Xiangyu Jiyin 湘雨紀蔭 (n.d.), published in 1690 with a preface dated 1679. A biographical compilation of Chan
history, with entries for Śākyamuni, the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs, the
six Chinese ancestors, Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷讓 (677–744) and Qingyuan
Xingsi 靑原行思 (660?–740), and their respective descendents until the year
1689. The emphasis in the later entries is on the central ﬁgures of the Linji
and Caodong lines, with the compiler advocating the “true lineage of the
Linji school.”
Zunsheng tuoluoni 尊勝陀羅尼. See Foding zunsheng tuoluoni jing 佛頂尊勝陀羅
尼經.
Zuochan fayao 坐禪法要. See Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao 修習止觀坐禪法要.
Zutang ji 祖堂集 (Annals of the ancestral hall), 20 fascicles. Compiled by Jing 静
and Yun 筠, two Chan monks at Zhaoqing yuan 招慶院 in Quanzhou泉州.
This early Chan biographical compilation, published in 952, contains material from the Chan records on 256 ﬁgures, from the Seven Buddhas of the
Past, Śākyamuni, the twenty-eight Indian patriarchs, the six Chinese ancestors, through to the masters of the representative Chan lineages stemming
from Qingyuan Xingsi 靑原行思 (660?–740) and Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷
讓 (677–744). The biographies are given in chronological order and classiﬁed according to lineage. The Zutang ji built on earlier biographical works
like the Baolin zhuan 寶林傳 (801) in setting forth teachings, verses, and the
encounter dialogue anecdotes that were later used in the Lamp Records,
and which formed the basis of the Chan koan literature. Owing to the oral
nature of the encounter dialogues, the Zutang ji pioneered the transcription
of the Chinese vernacular in standardized written form, an important development in Chan textual history. The Zutang ji appears to have been studied
in China until about the end of the eleventh century, but was subsequently
lost. The text as we now have it was published in Korea in 1245, and rediscovered in that country early in the twentieth century.
Zuting shiyuan 祖庭事苑 (Chrestomathy from the ancestral garden), 8 fascicles
(x 64: #1261). Compiled over the course of twenty years by Muan Shanqing
睦庵善卿 (n.d.) and published in 1108. The Zuting shiyuan is a Chan lexicon

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 433

with approximately 2,400 entries deﬁning a wide variety of proper nouns,
special terms, and historical allusions selected from representative Chan
records like the Yunmen guanglu 雲門廣錄 and the Xuedou baize songgu 雪
竇百則頌古.
secondary sources
Bhikkhu, Ñāṇamoli, and Bodhi Bhikkhu. The Middle Length Discourses of the
Buddha.Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1995.
Blofeld, John. The Zen Teaching of Huang Po on the Transmission of Mind.
London; Rider, 1959a.
———. The Wheel of Life. London: Rider, 1959b.
———. The Jewel in the Lotus: An Outline of Present Day Buddhism in China.
Westport, Conn.: Hyperion Press, 1975.
Chalmers, Lord. Further dialogues of the Buddha, translated from the Pali of the
Majjhima Nikaya. London: Oxford University Press, 1926–1927.
Chen, Kenneth. Buddhism in China: A Historical Survey. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1964.
———. The Chinese Transformation of Buddhism. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973.
Demiéville, Paul. “Buddhisme et Philosophie chinoise,” Cahiers d’Histoire
Mondial 3 (1956): 31–35.
Dumoulin, Heinrich. The Development of Chinese Zen after the Sixth Patriarch
in the light of Mumonkan. New York: First Zen Institute of America, 1953.
———. Zen Buddhism: A History. Vol. 1, India and China. New York: Macmillan,
1988.
———. Zen Buddhism: A History. Vol. 2, Japan. New York: Macmillan, 1990.
Eberhard, Wolfram. A History of China. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press, 1956.
Farkas, Mary. “Obituary,” Zen Notes. New York: First Zen Institute of America,
1967.
Faure, Bernard. The Will to Orthodoxy: A Critical Genealogy of Northern Chan
Buddhism. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 1998.
Feifel, Eugene. Po-chü-i as a Censor: His Memorials Presented to Emperor
Hsien-tsung during the Years 808–810. The Hague: Mouton, 1961.
FitzGerald, C. P. Barbarian Beds: The Origin of the Chair in China. London:
Cresset Press, 1965.
Gregory, Peter N., ed. Sudden and Gradual: Approaches to Enlightenment in
Chinese Thought. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 1988.
Halper, Jon, ed. Gary Snyder: Dimensions of a Life. San Francisco: Sierra Club
Books, 1991.

434 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
Hu Shi 胡適. Shenhui heshang yiji 神會和尚遺集 (The posthumous collection of
Ven. Shenhui). Shanghai: Dongya Tushuguan, 1930.
———. “Xin jiaoding de Dunhuang xieben Shenhui heshang yizhu, liangzhong”
新校定的敦煌寫本神會和尚遺著兩種 (Two newly edited texts of Ven. Shenhui
from the Pelliot Collection of Dunhuang texts). Zhongyang yanjiuyuan lishi
yuyan yanjiusuo jikan 中央研究院歷史語言研究所集刊 29/2 (1958).
Hucker, Charles O. A Dictionary of Oﬃcial Titles in Imperial China. Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1985.
Hurvitz, Leon. Chih-i. Mélanges Chinois et Bouddhiques 12. Bruxelles: Institut
Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises, 1962.
Iriya Yoshitaka入矢義高. “Genkyoku joji zakkō” 元曲助字雜考 (Thoughts on the
use of auxiliary characters in Yuan plays). Tōhō gakuhō 東方學報 14/1 (1943):
70–97.
———. Rinzai roku 臨濟錄. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1989.
Jiang Lihong 蔣禮鴻. Dunhuang bianwen ziyi tongshi 敦煌變文字義通釋. Shanghai: Shanghai guji chubanshe, 1962.
Kanda Kiichirō 神田喜一郎. Nihon shoki kokun kōshō 日本書紀古訓攷證. Tenrishi: Yōtokusha, 1949.
Kern, Hendrik. The Saddharma-puṇḍarīka, or The Lotus of the True Law.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1909.
Lamotte, Étienne. “Le Traité de l’Acte de Vasubandhu.” Mélanges chinois et
bouddhiques 4 (1936): 151–263.
———. L’Enseignement de Vimalakīrti. Louvain: Publications Universitaires,
1962.
———. La Concentration de la Marche Héroïque (Śūraṅgamasamādhi Sutra).
Bruxelles: Institut Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises, 1965.
Legge, James. The Sacred Books of China: The Texts of Taoism. Oxford: The
Clarendon Press, 1891.
Liebenthal, W. Chao lun: The Treatises of Seng-chao. A Translation with Introduction, Notes, and Appendices. New York: Oxford University Press, 1968.
Makita Tairyō 牧田諦亮. Chūgoku kinsei Bukkyō shi kenkyū 中国近世仏教史研
究 (Modern studies of Chinese Buddhist history). Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten,
1957.
McRae, John R. The Northern School and the Formation of Early Ch᾽an Buddhism. Honolulu: University of Hawai‘i Press, 1986.
———. Seeing Through Zen: Encounter, Transformation, and Genealogy in Chinese Chan Buddhism. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003.
Miura, Isshū, and Ruth Fuller Sasaki. The Zen Koan: Its History and Use in
Rinzai Zen. Kyoto: The First Zen Institute of America in Japan, 1965.
———. Zen Dust: The History of the Koan and Koan Study in Rinzai (Lin-chi)
Zen. Kyoto: The First Zen Institute of America in Japan, 1966.

b i b l i o g r a p h y | 435

Murano Senchu. The Sutra of the Lotus Flower of the Wonderful Law. Tokyo:
Nichiren Shu Headquarters, 1974.
Nakamura Hajime 中村元. “Zen ni okeru seisan to rōdō” 禪に於ける生産と勞働
(Production and labor in Zen). Zen Bunka 禪文化 1/3 (1955): 7–15.
Ōta Tatsuo 太田辰夫. Chūgokugo rekishi bunpō 中國語歷史文法 (A historical
grammar of Chinese). Tokyo: Enan Shoin, 1958.
Palmer, Martin, and Elizabeth Breuilly. The Book of Chuang Tzu. London:
Penguin, 1996.
Reischauer, Edwin. Ennin’s Diary: The Record of a Pilgrimage to China in
Search of the Law. New York: Ronald Press, 1955a.
———. Ennin’s Travels in T’ang China. New York: Ronald Press, 1955b.
Ren Erbei 任二北 . Dunhuangqu jiao lu 敦煌曲校錄 (Dunhuang). Shanghai:
Shanghai Wenyi Lianhe Chubanshe 上海文藝聯合出版社, 1955.
Sasaki, Ruth F. The Record of Lin-chi. Kyoto: The Institute for Zen Studies,
1975.
Sasaki, Ruth F., Yoshitaka Iriya, and Dana R. Fraser, trans. The Recorded Sayings of Layman P’ang. Tokyo: John Weatherhill, 1971.
Sheng-yen. The Poetry of Enlightenment. New York: Dharma Drum Publications, 1987.
Soothill, W. E. The Lotus of the Wonderful Law. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1930.
Soymié, M. “L’entrevue de Confucius et de Hsiang T’o.” Journal Asiatique
242/3–4 (1954): 311–390.
Stirling, Isabel. Zen Pioneer: The Life and Works of Ruth Fuller Sasaki.
Emeryville, Calif.: Shoemaker and Hoard, 2006.
Suzuki Teitarō 鈴木貞太郎. Tonkō shutsudo Kataku Jinne Zenji goroku 敦煌出
土荷澤神會禪師語錄 (The Dunhuang text of the Recorded sayings of Chan
Master Heze Shenhui). Ishii Text 石井光雄本. Private edition, 1934.
———. Shōshitsu issho 少室逸書 (Lost works of Bodhidharma). Private edition,
1935.
Suzuki Teitarō 鈴木貞太郎 and Kda Rentarō 公田連太郎, eds. Kōshō-ji bon
Rokuso dangyō 興聖寺本六祖壇經 (Kōshō-ji text of the Platform Sutra of the
Sixth Patriarch). Tokyo: Morie Shoten, 1934.
Ui Hakuju 宇井伯壽. Zenshūshi kenkyū 禪宗史研究 (Studies in the history of the
Zen school), 3 vols. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1939–1943.
Watson, Burton. The Complete Works of Chuang Tzu. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1968.
———. The Lotus Sutra. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993.
Watts, Alan. In My Own Way: An Autobiography, 1915–1965. New York: Pantheon, 1972.
Welter, Albert. The Linji Lu and the Creation of Chan Orthodoxy: The Develop-

436 | b i b l i o g r a p h y
ment of Chan’s Records of Sayings Literature. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2008.
Wright, Arthur. Buddhism in Chinese History. Palo Alto: Stanford University
Press, 1959.
Wright, Dale. Philosophical Meditations on Zen Buddhism. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Yampolsky, Philip B. The Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1967.
Yanagida Seizan 柳田聖山. “Kōke Zonshō no shiden to sono goroku” 興化存奬
の史傳とその語録 (The biography and recorded sayings of Xinghua Cunjiang). Zengaku kenkyū 禪學研究 48 (1958): 54–92.
———. “Rinzai saishō no wa to Fuketsu Enshō no shusse” 臨濟栽松の話と風穴
延沼の出世 (Fengxue Yanzhao and the story of Linji planting pine trees).
Zengaku kenkyū 禪學研究 51 (1961): 45–58.
———. Shoki Zenshū shisho no kenkyū 初期禪宗史書の研究 (A study of early
Chan historical texts). Kyoto: Hōzōkan, 1967.
———. “The Life of Lin-chi I-hsun.” The Eastern Buddhist 5/2 (1972): 70–94.
———. Rinzai roku 臨濟錄. Kyoto: Daizō Shuppan, 1977.
Zhang Xiang 張相. Shiciqu yuci huishi 詩詞曲語辭匯釋 (Dictionary of poetic
and musical terms, with comments). Beijing: Zhonghua Shuju 中華書局,
1955.
Zhou Fagao 周法高, ed. Zhongguo gudai yufa 中國古代語法 (A historical grammar of ancient Chinese). Zhongyang yanjiuyuan lishi yuyan yanjiusuo
zhuankan 中央研究院歷史語言研究所專刊 39. Taipei: Zhongyang Yanjiuyuan
Lishi Yuyan Yanjiusuo, 1959.
Zürcher, E., The Buddhist Conquest of China. Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1959.

List of Personal Names
The following list contains all Chinese names mentioned in the Historical
Introduction and the Text and Commentary sections, arranged alphabetically according to their Chinese reading in Pinyin, followed by the Chinese characters, the WadeGiles pronunciation, and the Japanese pronunciation.

pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

A’nan

阿難

A-nan

Anan

An Lushan

安祿山

An Lu-shan

An Rokusan

An Shigao

安世高

An Shih-kao

An Seikō

Ashifujusha

阿濕縛窶沙

A-shih-feng-chü-sha

Ashibakusha

Bai Juyi

白居易

Pai Chü-i

Haku Kyoi

Baiyun Shouduan

白雲守端

Pai-yün Shou-tuan

Hakuun Shutan

Baizhang Huaihai

百丈懐海

Pai-chang Huai-hai

Hyakujō Ekai

Baofeng Kewen

寶峰克文

Pao-feng K’o-wen

Hōhō Kokumon

Baofu Congzhan

保福從展

Pao-fu Ts’ung-chan

Hofuku Jūten

Baoshou Yanzhao

寶壽延沼

Pao-shou Yen-chao

Hōjū Enshō

Baoshou Zhao

寶壽沼

Pao-shou Chao

Hōjū Shō

Baotan

寶曇

Pao-t’an

Hōdon

Baozhi

寶誌 / 保誌

Pao-chih

Hōshi

Beijian Jujian

北椎居簡

Pei-chien Ch -chien

Hokkan Kokan

Bianhe

辨和

Pien-ho

Benwa

Bieweng Zhen

別翁甄

Pieh-weng Chen

Betsuō Ken

Boluoti

波羅提

Po-lo-t’i

Haradai

Bore

般若

Po-je

Hannya

Cao

操

Ts’ao

Sō

Caoxi

曹溪

Ts’ao-hsi

Sōkei

Cen

岑

Ts’en

Gin

Changqing Huileng

長慶慧稜

Ch’ang-ch’ing Hui-leng

Chōkei Eryō

Changsha Jingcen

長沙景岑

Ch’ang-sha Ching-ts’en

Chōsa Keishin

Changsha Zhenlang

長沙振朗

Ch’ang-sha

Chōsa Shinrō

Changsheng

長生

Ch’ang-sheng

Chōshō

Changweng Rujing

長翁如淨

Ch’ang-weng Ju-ching

Chōō Nyojō

437

438 | p e r s o n a l n a m e s
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Changzi Kuang

長髭曠

Ch’ang-tzu K’uang

Chōshi Kō

Chen Cao

陳操

Ch’en Ts’ao

Chin Sō

Chen Puxie

陳蒲鞋

Ch’en P’u-hsieh

Chin Hoai

Chen Xu

陳詡

Ch’en Hsü

Chin Ku

Chen Zunsu

陳尊宿

Ch’en Tsun-su

Chin Sonshuku

Cheng Yi

程頤

Ch’eng I

Tei I

Chengzong

成宗

Ch’eng-tsung

Seisō

Chijue Daochong

痴絶道冲

Ch’ih-chüeh

Chizetsu Dōchū

Chiyan Guizong

赤眼歸宗

Ch’ih-yen Kuei-tsung

Sekigen Kisu

Chongshun

重順

Ch’ung-shun

Chōjun

Chongyuan

崇遠

Ch’ung-yüan

Sūon

Chuanzi Decheng

船子徳誠

Ch’uan-tzu Te-ch’eng

Sensu Tokujō

Chuji

處寂

Ch’u-chi

Shojaku

Chuzhen

處眞

Ch’u-chen

Ci’en Dashi Kuiji

慈恩大師窺基 T’zu-en Ta-shih K’uei-chi

Jion Daishi Kiki

Ciming

慈明

T’zu-ming

Jimyō

Cui Langzhong

崔郎中

Ts’ui Lang-chung

Sai Rōchū

Cuifeng

翠峯

Ts’ui-feng

Suihō

Cuiwei Wuxue

翠微無學

Ts’ui-wei Wu-hsüeh

Suibi Mugaku

Dachuan Puji

大川普濟

Ta-chuan Fu-chi

Daisen Fusai

Daci Huanzhong

大慈寰中

Ta-tz’u Huan-chung

Daiji Kanchū

Dada Wuye

大逹無業

Ta-ta Wu-yeh

Daidatsu Mugō

Dagui

大潙

Ta-kuei

Dai’i

Dahui (of Dawei)

大慧

Ta-hui

Daie

Dahui Zonggao

大慧宗杲

Ta-hui Tsung-kao

Daie Sōkō

Daizong

代宗

Tai-tsung

Daisō

Dajian Huineng

大鑑慧能

Ta-chien Hui-neng

Daikan Enō

Dajue

大覺

Ta-chüeh

Daikaku

Damei Fachang

大梅法常

Ta-mei Fa-ch’ang

Daibai Hōjō

Danxia Tianran

丹霞天然

Tan-hsia T’ien-jan

Tanka Tennen

Danyuan Yingzhen

耽源應眞

Tan-yüan Ying-chen

Tangen Ōshin

Daocan

道璨

Tao-tsan

Dōsan

Daoqin

道欽

Tao-ch’in

Dōkin

Daosheng

道生

Tao-sheng

Dōshō

Shoshin

p e r s o n a l n a m e s | 439
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Daoshi

道世

Tao-shih

Dōsei

Daowu Yuanzhi

道吾圓智

Tao-wu Yüan-chih

Dōgo Enchi

Daowu Zongzhi

道吾宗智

Tao-wu Tsung-chih

Dōgo Sōchi

Daoxin

道信

Tao-hsin

Dōshin

Daoxing

道興

Tao-hsing

Dōkō

Daoxiu

道秀

Tao-hsiu

Dōshū

Dasheng

大聖

Ta-sheng

Daishō

Dasui Fazhen

大隨法眞

Ta-sui Fa-chen

Daizui Hōshin

Dayu

大愚

Ta-yü

Daigu

Dazhu Huihai

大珠慧海

Ta-chu Hui-hai

Daiju Ekai

Deshan Xuanjian

徳山宣鑑

Te-shan Hsüan-chien

Tokusan Senkan

Deshan Yuanming

德山圓明

Te-shan Yüan-ming

Tokusan Enmyō

Deshan Zongyin

德山總印

Te-shan Tsung-yin

Tokusan Sōin

Deyun Biqiu

徳雲比丘

Te-yün Pi-ch’iu

Toku’un Biku

Dezong

德宗

Te-tsung

Tokusō

Di Hao

翟灝

Ti Hao

Teki Kō

Ding

定

Ting

Jō

Dong si

東寺

Tsung-ssu

Tōji

Donglin Daogan

東林道顏

Tung-lin Tao-yen

Tōrin Dōgan

Dongpo

東坡

Tung-p’o

Tōba

Dongshan Huikong

東山慧空

Tung-shan Hui-kong

Tōzan Ekū

Dongshan Liangjie

洞山良价

Tung-shan Liang-chieh

Tōzan Ryōkai

Dongshan Shouchu

洞山守初

Tung-shan Shou-ch’u

Tōzan Shusho

Dongyue Xiangmo

東嶽降魔

Tung-yüeh Hsiang-mo

Tōgaku Ryūma

Doushuai Congyue

兜率從悦

Tou-shuai Ts’ung-yüeh

Tosotsu Jūetsu

Du Fu

杜甫

Tu Fu

To Ho

Du Mu

杜牧

Tu Mu

To Boku

Du Shun

杜順

Tu Shun

To Jun

Dugu Pei

獨孤沛

Tu-ko P’ei

Dokko Hai

Ezhou Zhuyushan

鄂州茱萸山

E-chou Chu-yü-shan

Gakushū Shuyusan

Fachang

法常

Fa-ch’ang

Hōjō

Fahai

法海

Fa-hai

Hōkai

Fanyun

梵雲

Fan-yün

Bon’un

Farong

法融

Fa-jung

Hōyū

440 | p e r s o n a l n a m e s
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Fayan Wenyi

法眼文益

Fa-yen Wen-i

Hōgen Mon’eki

Fazang

法藏

Fa-tsang

Hōzō

Feiyin Tongrong

費隱通容

Fei-yin T’ung-jung

Hi’in Tsūyō

Feng

奉

Feng

Hō

Fengxue Yanzhao

風穴延沼

Feng-hsüeh Yen-chao

Fuketsu Enshō

Fenyang Shanzhao

汾陽善昭

Fen-yang Shan-chao

Fun’yō Zenshō

Fenzhou Wuye

汾州無業

Fen-chou Wu-yeh

Funshū Mugō

Foguo

佛果

Fo-kuo

Bukka

Fojian Huiqin

佛鑑慧懃

Fo-chien Hui-ch’in

Bukkan Egon

Fori Qisong

佛日契嵩

Fo-jih Ch’i-sung

Butsunichi Kaisū

Foyan Qingyuan

佛眼清遠

Fo-yen Ch’ing-yüan

Butsugen Seion

Fu Dashi

傅大士

Fu Ta-shih

Fu Daishi

Fubei

浮盃

Fu-pei

Fuhai

Fuli

復禮

Fu-li

Bukurei

Gan Bao

干寶

Kan Pao

Kan Bō

Ganquan Zhixian

甘泉志賢

Kan-ch’üan Chih-hsien

Kansen Shiken

Gao’an Dayu

高安大愚

Kao-an Ta-yü

Kōan Daigu

Gaozong

高宗

Kao-tsung

Kōsō

Gongcheng Yi

公乘億

Kung-ch’eng I

Kōjō Oku

Guanding

灌頂

Kuan-ting

Kanjō

Guangtong Fashi

光統法師

Kuang-t’ung Fa-shih

Kōzu Hōshi

Guangxiao Huijue

光孝慧覺

Kuang-hsiao Hui-chüeh

Kōkō Ekaku

Guannan

關南

Kuan-nan Chang-lao

Kannan

Guanshiyin

觀世音

Kuan-shih-yin

Kanzeon

Guanxi Zhixian

灌溪志閑

Kuan-hsi Chih-hsien

Kankei Shikan

Guanyin

觀音

Kuan-yin

Kannon

Guifeng Zongmi

圭峰宗密

Kuei-feng Tsung-mi

Keihō Shūmitsu

Guishan Da’an

潙山大安

Kuei-shan Ta-an

Isan Dai’an

Guishan Dayuan

潙山大圓

Kuei-shan Ta-yüan

Isan Dai’en

Guishan Lan’an

潙山懶安

Kuei-shan Lan-an

Isan Ran’an

Guishan Lingyou

潙山靈祐

Kuei-shan Ling-yu

Isan Reiyū

Guizong Zhichang

歸宗智常

Kuei-tsung Chih-ch’ang

Kisu Chijō

Gulin Qingmao

古林清茂

Ku-lin Ch’ing-mao

Kurin Seimo

Guo Maoqing

郭茂清

Kuo Mao-ch’ien

Kaku Mosei

p e r s o n a l n a m e s | 441
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Guo Tianxi

郭天錫

Kuo T’ien-hsi

Kaku Tenshaku

Guquan Dadao

谷泉大道

Ku-ch’üan Ta-tao

Yokusen Daidō

Gushan Shigui

鼓山士珪

Ku-shan Shih-kuei

Kuzan Shikei

Gutazhu

古塔主

Ku-t’a-chu

Kotōshu

Guyin Yuncong

谷隱蘊聰

Ku-yin Yün-ts’ung

Yokuin Onsō

Haiyun Yinjian

海雲印簡

Hai-yün Yin-chien

Kaiun Inkan

Han Jian

韓簡

Han Chien

Kan Kan

Han Yu

韓愈

Han Yü

Kan Yu

Han Yunzhong

韓允忠

Han Yün-chung

Kan Inchū

Hanshan

寒山

Han-shan

Kanzan

Hao Yixing

郝懿行

Hao I-hsing

Kaku Ikō

Haoyue

皓月

Hao-yüeh

Kōgetsu

He Hongjing

何弘敬

Ho Hung-ching

Ka Kōkei

Hengyue Huisi

衡嶽慧思

Heng-yüeh Hui-ssu

Kōgaku Eshi

Heyang

河陽

Ho-yang

Kayō

Heze Shenhui

荷澤神會

Ho-tse Shen-hui

Kataku Jinne

Hongren

弘忍

Hung-jen

Gunin

Hongzhi Zhengjue

宏智正覺

Hung-chih Cheng-chüeh

Wanshi Shōgaku

Hu Sanxing

胡三省

Hu San-hsing

Ko Sansei

Huaicheng

懷澄

Huai-ch’eng

Echō

Huang Tingjian

黄庭堅

Huang T’ing-chien

Kō Teiken

Huangbo Xiyun

黄檗希運

Huang-po Hsi-yün

Ōbaku Kiun

Huanglong Huinan

黄龍慧南

Huang-lung Hui-nan

Ōryō Enan

Huayan Zhizang

華嚴智藏

Hua-yen Chih-tsang

Kegon Chizō

Huijiao

慧皎

Hui-chiao

Eko

Huiju

慧炬

Hui-chü

E’en

Huijue

慧覺

Hui-chüeh

Ekaku

Huike

慧可

Hui-k’o

Eka

Huiming

慧明

Hui-ming

Emyō

Huineng

慧能

Hui-neng

Enō

Huishi Shiming

晦室師明

Hui-shih Shih-ming

Kaishitsu Shimei

Huiwen

慧文

Hui-wen

Emon

Huiweng Wuming

晦翁悟明

Hui-weng Wu-ming

Kaiō Gomyō

Huixiang

慧祥

Hui-hsiang

Eshō

442 | p e r s o n a l n a m e s
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Huiyuan

慧遠

Hui-yüan

Eon

Huizang

慧藏

Hui-tsang

Ezō

Huizhong

慧忠

Hui-chung

Echū

Huizong

徽宗

Hui-tsung

Kisō

Huo

奯

Huo

Katsu

Huo’an Shiti

或庵師體

Huo-an Shih-t’i

Wakuan Shitai

Huqiu Shaolong

虎丘紹隆

Hu-ch’iu Shao-lung

Kukyū Jōryū

Hutou

虎頭

Hu-t’ou

Kotō

Ji

齊

Chi

Shi

Jianatipo

迦那提婆

Chia-na ti-p’o

Kanadaiba

Jianfu Chenggu

薦福承古

Chien-fu Ch’eng-ku

Senpuku Shōko

Jiang Shen

蔣伸

Chiang Shen

Shō Shin

Jiang Yi

蔣乂

Chiang Yi

Shō Gai

Jiang Zhiqi

蔣之奇

Chiang Chih-ch’i

Shō Shiki

Jianzong

鑒宗

Chien-tsung

Kanjū

Jiashan Shanhui

夾山善會

Chia-shan Shan-hui

Kassan Zenne

Jiashe Fo

迦葉佛

Chia-she Fo

Kashō Butsu

Jingjue

淨覺

Ching-chüeh

Jōkaku

Jingqing Daofu

鏡淸道怤

Ching-ch’ing Tao-fu

Kyōsei Dōfu

Jingshan Hongyan

徑山鴻諲

Ching-shan Hung-yen

Kinzan Kōshin

Jingzhao Mihu

京兆米胡

Ching-chao Mi-hu

Keichō Beiko

Jinniu

金牛

Chin-nui

Kingyū

Jixin

紀信

Chi-hsin

Kishin

Jiyin Zunzhe

寂音尊者

Chi-yin Tsun-che

Jakuon Sonja

Jizang

吉藏

Chi-tsang

Kichizō

Jue Tiezui

覺鐡觜

Chüeh T’ieh-tsui

Kaku Tetsushi

Jueduo Sanzang

崛多三藏

Chüeh-to San-tsang

Kutta Sanzō

Juefan Huihong

覺範慧洪

Chüeh-fan Hui-hung

Kakuhan Ekō

Junxiong

君雄

Chün-hsiung

Kunyū

Juzhou Baotan

橘洲寶曇

Chü-chou Pao-t’an

Kisshū Hōdon

Kang Mengxiang

康孟詳

K’ang-meng-hsiang

Kōmōshō

Ke (see Huike)

可

K’o

Ka

Kongzi

孔子

K’ung-tzu

Kōshi

Kuyai

枯崖

K’u-ai

Kogai

p e r s o n a l n a m e s | 443
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Langye Huijue

瑯溪慧覺

Lang-yeh Hui-chüeh

Rōya Ekaku

Lanxi Daolong

蘭溪道隆

Lan-hsi Tao-lung

Rankei Dōryū

Lanzan

懶贊

Lan-tsan

Ransan

Le Yanzhen

樂彦禎

Lo Yen-chen

Raku Gentei

Lepu Yuan’an

樂普元安

Le-p’u Yüan-an

Rakuho Gen’an

Letan Kewen

椛潭克文

Le-t’an K’o-wen

Rokutan Kokubun

Li Baojia

李寶嘉

Li Pao-chia

Ri Hōka

Li Bo

李渤

Li Po

Ri Botsu

Li Jing

李璟

Li Ching

Ri Ei

Li Kuangwei

李匡威

Li K’uang-wei

Ri Kyōi

Li Su

李愬

Li Su

Ri So

Li Tongxuan

李通玄

Li T’ung-hsuan

Ri Tsūgen

Li Xu

李勗

Li Hsü

Ri Kyoku

Li Ying

李膺

Li Ying

Ri Yō

Li Zunxu

李遵勗

Li Tsun-hsü

Ri Junkyoku

Liang Baozhi

梁寶志

Liang Pao-chih

Ryō Hōshi

Liang Wudi

梁武帝

Liang Wu-ti

Ryō Butei

Lingshu Rumin

靈樹如敏

Ling-shu Ju-min

Reiju Nyobin

Lingyun Zhiqin

靈雲志勤

Ling-yün Chih-ch’in

Reiun Shigon

Linji Yixuan

臨濟義玄

Lin-chi I-hsüan

Rinzai Gigen

Linquan Conglun

林泉從倫

Lin-ch’üan Ts’ung-lun

Rinsen Jūrin

Liu Jishu

劉季述

Liu Chi-shu

Ryū Kijutsu

Longguang

龍光

Lung-kuang

Ryōkō

Longshu

龍樹

Lung-shu

Ryūju

Longtan Chongxin

龍潭崇信

Lung-t’an Ch’ung-hsin

Ryūtan Sōshin

Longya Judun

龍牙居遁

Lung-ya Chü-tun

Ryūge Kodon

Lu Geng

陸亘

Lu Ken

Riku Kō

Lü Shun

呂舜

Lü Shun

Ro Shun

Lu Xingzhe

廬行者

Lu Hsing-che

Ro Gyōja

Lu Xisheng

陸希聲

Lu Hsi-sheng

Riku Kisei

Lu Yi

廬奕

Lu I

Ro Eki

Luohan Guichen

羅漢桂琛

Lo-han Kuei-ch’en

Rakan Keishin

Luopu Yuan’an

洛浦元安

Lo-p’u Yüan-an

Rakuho Gen’an

Luoshan Daoxian

羅山道閑

Lo-shan T’ao-hsien

Razan Dōkan

444 | p e r s o n a l n a m e s
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Lushan Guizong

廬山歸宗

Lu-shan-Kuei-tsung

Rozan Kisu

Ma Fang

馬防

Ma Fang

Ba Bō

Mayu Baoche

麻谷寶徹

Ma-ku Pao-ch’e

Mayoku Hōtetsu

Mazu Daoyi

馬祖道一

Ma-tsu Tao-i

Baso Dō’itsu

Meng Haoran

孟活然

Meng Hao-jan

Mō Kōzen

Mi

米

Mi

Bei

Mi’an Xianjie

密庵咸傑

Mi-an Hsien-chieh

Mittan Kanketsu

Miaode

妙德

Miao-te

Myōtoku

Mile

彌勒

Mi-le

Miroku

Minghua

明化

Ming-hua

Myōke

Mingjue

明覺

Ming-chüeh

Myōkaku

Mingzhao Deqian

明招徳謙

Ming-chao Te-ch’ien

Myōshō Tokken

Miyun Yuanwu

密雲圓悟

Mi-Yün Yüan-wu

Mitsu’un Engo

Mo Junhe

默(墨)君和

Mo Chün-ho

Moku Kunka

Mohe Jiashe

摩訶迦葉

Mo-ho Chia-she

Maka Kashō

Monaluo

摩拏羅

Mo-na-la

Manura

Mozi

墨子

Mo-tzu

Bokushi

Muan Shanqing

睦庵善卿

Mu-an Shan-ch’ing

Bokuan Zenkyō

Muan Xingdao

木菴性瑫

Mu-an Hsing-tao

Mokuan Shōtō

Mukou

木口

Mu-k’ou

Mokkō

Mulian

目連

Mu-lien

Mokuren

Muta

木塔

Mu-t’a

Mokutō

Muzhou Daoming

睦州道明

Mu-chou Tao-ming

Bokujū Dōmyō

Muzhou Daozong

睦州道蹤

Mu-chou Tao-tsung

Bokujū Dōshō

Nanquan Puyuan

南泉普願

Nan-ch’üan P’u-yuan

Nansen Fugan

Nantang Yuanjing

南堂元靜

Nan-t’ang Yüan-ching

Nandō Genjō

Nanyang Huizhong

南陽慧忠

Nan-yang Hui-chung

Nanyō Echū

Nanyuan Huiyong

南院慧顒

Nan-yüan Hui-yung

Nan’in Egyō

Nanyue Huairang

南嶽懷讓

Nan-yüeh Huai-jang

Nangaku Ejō

Nanyue Mingzan

南嶽明瓚

Nan-yüeh Ming-tsan

Nangaku Myōsan

Nanyue Qiji

南嶽齊己

Nan-yüeh Ch’i-chi

Nangaku Saiki

Niutou Farong

牛頭法融

Niu-t’o Fa-jung

Gozu Hōyū

Pang Jushi

龐居士

P’ang Chü-shih

Hō Koji

Pang Yun

龐蘊

P’ang Yün

Hō On

p e r s o n a l n a m e s | 445
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Panshan Baoji

盤山寶積

P’an-shan Pao-ch’i

Banzan Hōshaku

Pei Xiu

裴休

P’ei Hsiu

Hai Kyū

Ping

平

P’ing

Byō

Piyun

披雲

P’i-yün

Hiun

Puhua

普化

P’u-hua

Fuke

Puji

普寂

P’u-chi

Fujaku

Putidamo

菩提達磨

P’u-t’i-ta-mo

Bodaidaruma

Putiliuzhi Sanzang

菩提流支三藏

P’u-t’i-liu-chih San-tsang

Bodairushi Sanzō

Puxian

普賢

P’u-hsien

Fugen

Puxiang Jiang Gong

蒲相蔣公

P’u-hsiang Chiang-kung

Hoshō Shōkō

Qianming Huiche

乾明慧徹

Ch’ien-ming Hui-ch’e

Kenmei Etetsu

Qianqing Chu’nan

千頃楚南

Ch’ien-ch’ing Ch’u-nan

Senkei So’nan

Ch’ing-liang Ch’eng-kuan

Shōryō Chōkan

Qingliang Chenguan 清凉澄觀
Qingliang Taiqin

清涼泰欽

Ch’ing-liang Tai-ch’in

Shōryō Taikin

Qingyuan Xingsi

靑原行思

Ch’ing-yüan Hsing-ssu

Seigen Gyōshi

Qingzhuo
Zhengcheng

淸拙正澄

Ch’ing-cho Cheng-ch’eng

Seisetsu Shōchō

Sanping Yizhong

三平義忠

San-p’ing I-chung

Sanpyō Gichū

Sansheng Huiran

三聖慧然

San-sheng Hui-jan

Sanshō E’nen

Sengcan

僧粲

Seng-ts’an

Sōsan

Sengting Shouze

僧挺守賾

Seng-t’ing Shou-tse

Sōtei Shusaku

Sengzhao

僧肇

Seng-chao

Sōjō

Shancai Tongzi

善財童子

Shan-ts’ai T’ung-tzu

Zenzai Dōshi

Shandao

善道

Shan-tao

Zendō

Shanhui Dashi

善慧大士

Shan-hui Ta-shih

Zen’e Daishi

Shanshan

杉山

Shan-shan

Sanzan

Shao Yaofu

邵堯夫

Shao Yao-fu

Shō

Shao Yong

邵雍

Shao Yung

Shō Yō

Shenxing

神行

Shen-hsing

Jingyō

Shenxiu

神秀

Shen-hsiu

Jinshū

(Shi) Huize

(釋)慧賾

(Shih) Hui-tse

(Shaku) Esaku

Shigong Huizang

石鞏慧藏

Shih-kung Hui-tsang

Shakkyō Ezō

Shigong Xin

石鞏新

Shih-kung Hsin

Shakkyō Shin

Shijiamouni

釋迦牟尼

Shih-chia-mou-ni

Shakamuni

Shishi Shandao

石室善道

Shih-shih Shan-tao

Sekishitsu Zendō

446 | p e r s o n a l n a m e s
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Shishi Xingzhe

石室行者

Shih-shih Hsing-che

Sekishitsu Gyōja

Shishuang Chuyuan

石霜楚圓

Shih-shuang Ch’u-yüan

Sekisō Soen

Shitou Xiqian

石頭希遷

Shih-t’ou Hsi-ch’ien

Sekitō Kisen

Shoushan

壽山

Shou-shan

Juzan

Shoushan Shengnian 首山省念

Shou-shan Hsing-nien

Shuzan Shōnen

Shuangshan Yuan

雙杉元

Shuang-shan Yüan

Sōsan Gen

Shushan Guangren

疎山光仁

Shu-shan Kuang-jen

Sozan Kōnin

Sikongshan Benjing

司空山本淨

Ssu-k’ung-shan Pen-ching Shikūzan Honjō

Sixin Wuxin

死心悟新

Ssu-hsin Wu-hsin

Shishin Goshin

Song Ding

宋鼎

Sung-Ting

Sō Tei

Songshan Huian

嵩山慧安

Sung-shan Hui-an

Sūzan Ean

Songyuan Chongyue

松源崇嶽

Sung-yüan Ch’ung-yüeh

Shōgen Sūgaku

Songyue Puji

嵩嶽普寂

Sung-yüeh P’u-chi

Sūgaku Fujaku

Suxi

蘇溪

Su-chi

Sokei

Suzong

肅宗

Su-tsung

Shukusō

Taiyuan

太原

T’ai-yüan

Taigen

Taiyuan Fu

太原孚

T’ai-yüan Fu

Taigen Fu

Taizong

太宗

T’ai-tsung

Taisō

Tanguo

曇果

T’an-kuo

Donka

Tanlin

曇林

T’an-lin

Donrin

Tanluan

曇鸞

T’an-luan

Donran

Tanqian

曇遷

T’an-ch’ien

Donsen

Tao Hongjing

陶弘景

T’ao Hung-ching

Tō Kōkei

Tengteng

騰騰

T’eng-t’eng

Tōtō

Tianhuang Daowu

天皇道悟

T’ien-huang Tao-wu

Tennō Dōgo

Tiantai Deshao

天台徳韶

T’ien-t’ai Te-shao

Tendai Tokushō

Tiantong Hongzhi

天童宏智

T’ien-t’ung Hung-chih

Tendō Wanshi

Tianyi Yihuai

天衣義懷

T’ien-i I-huai

Ten’e Gikai

Tipo

提婆

Ti-p’o

Daiba

Tipodaduo

提婆達多

Ti-p’o-ta-to

Daibadatta

Touzi Fazong

投子法宗

T’ou-tzu Fa-tsung

Tōsu Hōshū

Touzi Yiqing

投子義青

T’ou-tzu I-ch’ing

Tōsu Gisei

Tuling Renyou

荼陵仁郁

T’u-ling Jen-yu

Toryō Nin’iku

Wang Changshi

王常侍

Wang Ch’ang-shih

Ō Jōji

p e r s o n a l n a m e s | 447
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Wang Chengzong

王承宗

Wang Cheng-ts’ung

Ō Shōshū

Wang Fanzhi

王梵志

Wang Fan-chih

Ō Bonji

Wang Jingchu

王敬初

Wang Ching-ch’u

Ō Keishō

Wang Ju

王琚

Wang-chü

Ō Kyō

Wang Rong

王鎔

Wang Jung

Ō Yō

Wang Shaoding

王紹鼎

Wang Shao-ting

Ō Shōtei

Wang Shaoyi

王紹懿

Wang Shao-i

Ō Shōi

Wang Sui

王隨

Wang Sui

Ō Zui

Wang Tingcou

王庭湊

Wang Ting-ts’ou

Ō Teisō

Wang Wei

王維

Wang Wei

ŌI

Wang Xizhi

王羲之

Wang Hsi-chih

Ō Gishi

Wang Yinzhi

王引之

Wang Yin-chih

Ō Inshi

Wang Yuankui

王元逵

Wang Yüan-k’uei

Ō Genki

Wanji Xingmi

頑極行彌

Wan-ji Hsing-mi

Gankyoku Gyōmi

Wansong Xingxiu

萬松行秀

Wan-sung Hsing-hsiu

Banshō Gyōshū

Wei Ju

韋璩

Wei Chü

I Kyo

Weimojie

維摩詰

Wei-mo-chieh

Yuimakitsu

Weituotian

韋駄天

Wei-t’o-t’ien

Idaten

Wenxi

文喜

Wen-hsi

Monki

Wenzong

文宗

Wen-tsung

Bunsō

Wolun

臥輪

Wo-lun

Garin

Wu

武

Wu

Bu

Wu Yuanji

吳元濟

Wu Yüan-chi

Go Gensai

Wufeng Puxiu

五峯普秀

Wu-feng P’u-hsiu

Gohō Fushū

Wugou

無垢

Wu-kou

Mugō

Wumen Huikai

無門慧開

Wu-men Hui-k’ai

Mumon Ekai

Wuming Huixing

無明慧性

Wu-ming Hui-hsing

Mumyō Eshō

Wuxie Lingmo

五洩靈默

Wu-hsieh Ling-mo

Gosetsu Reimoku

Wuzhu

無住

Wu-chu

Mujū

Wuzhun Shifan

無凖師範

Wu-chun Shih-han

Mujun Shihan

Wuzhuo

無著

Wu-cho

Mujaku

Wuzong

武宗

Wu-tsung

Busō

Wuzu Fayan

五祖法演

Wu-tsu Fa-yen

Goso Hōen

Wuzu Shijie

五祖師戒

Wu-tsu Shih-chieh

Goso Shikai

448 | p e r s o n a l n a m e s
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Xiang Tuo

項託

Hsiang T’o

Kō Taku

Xiang Yu

項羽

Hsiang Yü

Kō U

Hsiang-lin Ch’eng-yüan

Kyōrin Chōon

Xianglin Chengyuan 香林澄遠
Xiangtian

象田

Hsiang-t’ien

Zōden

Xiangyan Zhixian

香嚴智閑

Hsiang-yen Chih-hsien

Kyōgen Chikan

Xianzong

憲宗

Hsien-tsung

Kensō

Xiaozong

孝宗

Hsiao-tsung

Kōsō

Xie Liangzuo

謝良佐

Hsieh Liang-tso

Sha Ryōsa

Xinghua Cunjiang

興化存奬

Hsing-hua Ts’un-chiang

Kōke Zonshō

Xingjiao Hongshou

興教洪壽

Hsing-chiao Hung-shou

Kōkyō Kōju

Xingshan Jianhong

杏山鑑[鑒]洪 Hsing-shan Chien-hung

Anzan Kankō

Xingshan Weikuan

興善惟寬

Hsing-shan Wei-k’uan

Kōzen Ikan

Xingyang Rang

興陽讓

Hsing-yang Jang

Kōyō Jō

Xitang Zhizang

西堂智藏

Hsi-t’ang Chih-tsang

Seidō Chizō

Xiu

秀

Hsiu

Shū

Xizong

僖宗

Hsi-tsung

Kisō

Xuangao

玄高

Hsüan-kao

Genkō

Xuansha Shibei

玄沙師備

Hsüan-sha Shih-pei

Gensha Shibi

Xuanzang

玄奘

Hsüan-tsang

Genjō

Xuanzong

宣宗

Hsüan-tsung

Sensō

Xuedou Chongxian

雪竇重顯

Hsüeh-tou Ch’ung-hsien

Setchō Jūken

Xuefeng Huikong

雪峯慧空

Hsüeh-feng Hui-kung

Seppō

Xuefeng Yicun

雪峰義存

Hsüeh-feng I-ts’un

Seppō Gison

Xuetang Puren

雪堂普仁

Hsüeh-t’ang P’u-jen

Setsudō Fu’nin

Xutang Zhiyu

虚堂智愚

Hsü-t’ang Chih-yü

Kidō Chigu

Yang

煬

Yang

Yō

Yang Danian

楊大年

Yang Ta-nien

Yō Dainen

Yang Yi

楊億

Yang I

Yō Oku

Yangjuemoluo

殃掘摩羅

Yang-chüeh-mo-lo ching

Ōkutsu Mara

Yangqi Fanghui

楊岐方會

Yang-ch’i Fang-hui

Yōgi Hōe

Yangshan Huiji

仰山慧寂

Yang-shan Hui-chi

Kyōzan Ejaku

Yanguan Qian

鹽官齊安

Yen-kuan Ch’i-an

Enkan Sai’an

Yanlao

閻老

Yen-lao

Enrō

Yanmo

閻魔

Yen-mo

Emma

p e r s o n a l n a m e s | 449
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Yanshou

延壽

Yen-shou

Enju

Yantou

巖頭

Yen-t’ou

Gantō

Yanxi Guangwen

偃溪廣聞

Yen-ch’i Kuang-wen

Enkei Kōmon

Yanyang Shanxin

嚴陽善信

Yen-yang Shan-hsin

Genyō Zenshin

Yanyi

延一

Yen-i

En’ichi

Yaoshan Weiyan

藥山惟儼

Yao-shan Wei-yen

Yakusan Igen

Yexian Guixing

葉縣歸省

Yeh-hsian Kuei-hsing

Yōken Kisei

Yijing

義淨

I-ching

Gijō

Yinfeng

隱峯

Yin-feng

Inpō

Ying’an Tanhua

應庵曇華

Ying-an T’an-hua

Ōan Donge

Yinyuan Longqi

隱元隆琦

Yin-yüan Lung-ch’i

Ingen Ryūki

Yinzong

印宗

Yin-tsung

Inshū

Yishan Liaowan

一山了萬

I-shan Liao-wan

Issan Ryōman

Yishan Yining

一山一寧

I-shan I-nei

Issan Ichinei

Yizong

懿宗

I-tsung

Isō

Yongjia Xuanjue

永嘉玄覺

Yung-chia Hsüan-chüeh

Yōka Genkaku

Yongming Yanshou

永明延壽

Yung-ming Yen-shou

Yōmei Enju

Youzhou Yanwang

幽州燕王

Yu-chou Yen-wang

Yūshū En’ō

Yu Di

于頔

Yü Ti

U Teki

Yu Zhengxie

兪正燮

Yü Cheng-hsieh

Yu Seishō

Yuanfeng Qingman

元豐淸滿

Yüan-feng Ch’ing-man

Genpō Seiman

Yuanjue Zongyan

圓覺宗演

Yüan-chüeh Tsung-yen

Engaku Sōen

Yuanwu Keqin

圜悟克勤

Yüan-wu K’o-ch’in

Engo Kokugon

Yuezhou Qianfeng

越州乾峰

Yüeh-chou Ch’ien-feng

Esshū Kenpō

Yun’an Puyan

運庵普巖

Yün-an P’u-yen

Un’an Fugan

Yunju Daojian

雲居道簡

Yün-chü Tao-chien

Ungo Dōkan

Yunju Shanwu

雲居善悟

Yün-chü Shan-wu

Ungo Zengo

Yunju Xiaoshun

雲居曉舜

Yün-chü Hsiao-shun

Ungo Gyōshun

Yunjushan Chang

雲居山昌

Yün-chü-shan Ch’ang

Ungozan Shō

Yunmen Wenyan

雲門文偃

Yün-men Wen-yen

Unmon Bun’en

Yunyan

雲嵓

Yün-yen

Ungan

Yunyan Tansheng

雲巖曇晟

Yün-yen T’an-sheng

Ungan Donjō

Zanning

贊寧

Tsan-ning

Sannei

Zetian Dasheng

則天大聖

Tse-t’ien Ta-sheng

Sokuten Taisei

450 | p e r s o n a l n a m e s
pinyin

chinese

wade-giles

japanese

Zhang Bai

張伯

Chang Pai

Chō Haku

Zhang Jiucheng

張九成

Chang Chiu-ch’eng

Chō Kyūsei

Zhang Jun

張浚

Chang Chün

Chō Shun

Zhang Shangying

張商英

Chang Shang-ying

Chō Shōei

Zhang Wujin

張無盡

Chang Wu-chin

Chō Mujin

Zhang Yunshen

張允伸

Chang Yun-shen

Chō Inshin

Zhang Zhuo

張拙

Chang Cho

Chō Setsu

Zhang Zishao

張子韶

Chang Tzu-shao

Chō Shishō

Zhantang Wenzhun

湛堂文準

Chan-t’ang Wen-chun

Tandō Monjun

Zhao Lin

趙璘

Chao Lin

Chō Rin

Zhaozhou Congshen

趙州從諗

Chao-chou Ts’ung-shen

Jōshū Jūshin

Zheng Yu

鄭愚

Cheng Yü

Tei Gu

Zhenjing Kewen

眞淨克文

Chen-ching K’o-wen

Shinjō Kokubun

Zhenzhou Puhua

鎮州普化

Chen-chou P’u-hua

Chinshū Fuke

Zhenzhou Zhaowang

鎮州趙王

Chen-chou Chao-wang

Chinshū Chō’ō

Zhenzong

眞宗

Chen-tsung

Shinsō

Zhichang

智常

Chih-ch’ang

Chijō

Zhigong

誌公

Chih-kung

Shikō

Zhihai

智海

Chih-hai

Chikai

Zhiyan

智巖

Chih-yen

Chigan

Zhiyi

智顗

Chih-che

Chigi

Zhongguan Zhao

中觀沼

Chung-kuan Chao

Chūkan Shō

Zhonghe Zhang

中和璋

Chung-ho Chang

Chūwa Shō

Zhongzong

中宗

Chung-tsung

Chūsō

Zhu Falan

竺法蘭

Chu Fa-lan

Jiku Hōran

Zhu Xi

朱熹

Chu Hsi

Shu Ki

Zhu Zhangwen

朱長文

Chu Chang-wen

Shu Chōbun

Zhu Zi

朱子

Chu-tzu

Shushi

Zhuangzi

莊子

Chuang-tzu

Sōshi

Zhuozhou Kefu

涿州剋符

Cho-chou K’o-fu

Takushū Kokufu

Zhuozhou Zhiyi

涿州紙衣

Cho-chou Chih-i

Takushū Shi’i

Zihu Lizong

子湖利蹤

Tzu-hu Li-tsung

Shiko Rishō

Zihushan Lizong

子湖山利蹤

Tzu-hu-shan Li-tsung

Shikozan Rishō

Cumulative Index

Abhidharma, 241, 395–394, 411
Abhidharmakōśa, 225, 395
abstruse principle, 184, 220
activity, marvelous, 187, 228, 292
activity-consciousness, 263
acts of speech, 26, 260
aﬄicting passions. See kleśa
Afghanistan, 380
Āgama sutras. See Ahan jing
Ahan jing 阿含經, 365, 369, 379, 407,
427–428
Alan Watts, xvii, xx
ālaya-vijñāna, 395, 410, 426
almsgiving, 174, 211, 269, 270
Amitābha Buddha (Amitāyus Buddha),
161, 244, 271, 307, 386–387, 415, 418; A.
B.’s Pure Land of Bliss, 244, 386, 415;
visualization of., 415; vows of, 415
Amitāyur-dhyāna Sutra, 386
Amituo jing 阿彌陀經, 386, 418
An Lushan 安祿山, 61, 63, 108; rebellion
of, 108
An Shigao 安世高, 130, 287, 373, 392
Anāgāmin, 168
Ānanda, 47, 244, 328, 383, 392
anāsrava (passionlessness), 212–213
ancestral school, 3, 117–118, 340
Aṅgulimāla, 31, 279, 384, 424
Aṅgulimāla Sutra. See Foshuo Yangjueji
jing, Foshuo Yangjuemo jing,
Yangjuemoluo jing
Aṅguttara Nikāya. See Zengyi ahan jing
anitya (impermanence), 159
anuttarā samyak saṃbodhi (supreme
enlightenment), 213, 244
Anwan 安晩, Layman, 419
Anxin famen 安心法門, 199, 272, 365, 420
Apidamo jushe lun 阿毘達磨俱舍論. See
Jushe lun
App, Urs, xiv, xxx
arhat, 10, 13, 22, 31, 123, 130, 166, 168, 170,
177, 187, 192, 228, 236, 274, 279, 392

armrest, 47, 54, 167, 327
arūpadhātu (formless realm), 158
asaṃkhyeya kalpas, 10, 19, 166, 170, 223,
231, 328
asaṃskṛta, 212–213
Asaṅga (Wuzhuo 無著), 408, 426
Ashikaga Yoshimitsu 足利義滿, 112
āsrava, 212–213
Asura, 19, 144, 180, 226, 282
Aśvaghoṣa (Maming Pusa 馬鳴菩薩), 377,
385
Avalokiteśvara (Guanyin 觀音), 15, 128,
170, 203–204, 247, 381, 388; and Mount
Putuo, 185, 203; universal gate of, 170,
247, 381, 387
Avataṃsaka dharma-world, 390
Avataṃsaka Sutra, 105, 107, 130, 161, 164,
184, 196, 203–205, 209, 230–231, 236,
243, 254, 283, 286–287, 297, 302, 366, 374,
390–391, 420. See also Huayan jing
Avīci Hell, 177, 187, 262, 282
avidyā (ignorance), 175, 187, 240, 241, 242,
248, 249, 275, 276
Awakening, Marvelous, 166, 238
Awakening of faith. See Dasheng qixin lun

Backrest, 40, 47, 309, 327
Bai Juyi 白居易, 119, 283, 293, 297, 366
Bai lun 百論, 378
Baifa lun 百法論, 37, 299, 366, 376, 400
Baima 白馬, 75–76
Baishi wenji 白氏文集, 119, 366
Baizhang guanglu 百丈廣錄, xxxi, 81, 366,
378; cited, 172, 228, 231, 249, 296
Baizhang Huaihai 百丈懐海, vii, ix, xxxi,
47, 62, 69, 83, 90, 93, 95, 109–110, 120,
131, 154, 157, 159, 167, 194, 197, 207, 228,
267, 271–272, 274, 276–277, 290, 296,
320–321, 323, 326–327, 329, 332, 366–367,
370, 378, 400, 412; memorial inscription
of, 109, 321, 366
Baizhang Huaihai Chanshi yulu 百丈懐海
禪師語録, 366

451

452 | i n d e x
Baizhang Huaihai Chanshi yuyao 百丈懐
海禪師語要, 366
Baizhang qinggui 百丈清規, 299, 366–367,
370
Baizhangshan heshang yaojue 百丈山和尙
要訣, 109, 367
Ban Biao 班彪, 389, 408
Ban Gu 班固, 389, 408
Ban Zhao 班昭, 389, 408
Bandhuprabha (Qinguang 親光), 383
Bannan Eishu 萬安英種, 137, 169, 367
Bannan shō 萬安鈔, 137, 167, 367, 406
Baoche 寶徹, 99. See also Mayu Baoche
Baofu Congzhan 保福從展, 146
Baogui 寶貴, 394
Baoji jing 寶積經. See Da baoji jing
Baolin zhuan 寶林傳, xxxi, 367, 378, 399,
423, 432; cited, 119, 165–166, 182, 202,
205, 244, 263, 269, 329, 340
Baoshou Yanzhao 保壽延沼, 53, 73–74, 84,
101, 313, 341, 344
Baotan 寶曇, 139, 373
Baoying chanyuan 寶應禪院, 104, 411
Baoying si 寶應寺, 108
Baoying yuan 寶應院, 78
Baoyun 寶雲, 418
Baozang lun 寶藏論, 178, 227, 367
Baozhi 寶(保)志(誌), 168, 172, 214, 367, 378,
409
Baozhi heshang shisike song 寶誌和尚十四
科頌. See Shisike song
barbarian seat, 306
Bassui Tokushō 拔隊得勝, 113
Bei shi 北史, 402
Beizong school 北宗 of Chan, 246, 377,
429. See also Northern school
benze 本則, 368
Bernard, Pierre A., xvi
bhikku of right demeanor, 268
bhūmi, 168, 426. See also ten stages
Bhutatāra (Fotuoduoluo 佛陀多羅), 425
bhūtatathatā, 162–164, 186, 249, 285. See
also suchness
bianwen 變文 literature, 191, 283, 293, 379
Bieweng Zhen 別翁甄, 267
Biexing yishu 別行義疏. See Guanyin
yishu

Bimbisāra, King, 386
Bing 幷, 8, 151–152
Bingzhou 幷州, 98, 332
birth stories. See Jātaka
birth-and-death, 8, 10, 14, 17, 27, 153, 171,
173, 189, 197, 199–200, 210–211, 260, 263,
285; bonds of, 170; demon of, 16, 208;
sea of, 12, 20, 188, 231. See also samsara
birthlessness, 26, 259
birth-nature, 221
Biyan lu 碧巖錄, xxxi, 89, 110, 367–368,
383–384, 395, 401, 419, 422–423; cited,
94, 100–102, 104, 115, 127, 138, 140–142,
146, 166, 172, 246, 252, 257, 308, 313, 317,
327, 335
Black-bean-eating old priest, 46, 326
Blofeld, John, 93, 99, 203
Blue cliﬀ record. See Biyan lu
blue lapis lazuli, 331
blue-lotus eyes of The World-Honored
One, 319
bodhi tree, 23, 107, 240–242
bodhi, 10, 16, 19, 21, 26, 107, 154, 162, 166,
169–171, 174, 179, 206, 212–213, 215, 222,
234, 244, 259, 285, 406
bodhicitta, 93, 169, 376, 378, 406
Bodhidharma (Putidamo 菩提達磨), vii,
ix, 28, 47, 79, 90, 105–106, 118, 153, 156,
165–166, 168, 175, 180–182, 189, 199–200,
202, 221, 252, 264–265, 269, 272, 329,
333, 341, 365, 372, 380, 387, 398–399, 405,
417, 419, 423
Bodhidharma’s memorial tower, 47, 69,
329
Bodhiruci (Putiliuzhi 菩提流支), 167, 207,
273–274, 279, 329, 373, 376, 393, 398,
406, 418
Bodhisattva Aruṇa, 236
bodhisattva ideal, b. vows, 160, 368, 415,
418
bodhisattva nature, 280
bodhisattva: of complete and immediate
[enlightenment], 13, 193; of equivalent
enlightenment, 10, 166, 168–169; of
Intrinsic Wisdom, 246; of marvelous
enlightenment, 10, 166, 169; of Marvelous Wisdom, 145; of Pure Wisdom, 214;

i n d e x | 453
of Universal Law, 246
bodhisattvas of the ten stages, 168–169,
394. See also ten stages
bodhisattva precepts, 91, 113, 181, 382
bodhisattvas-who-abide-in-inconceivable-emancipation, 285
body of buddha, 154, 160–161, 196
body-realm, body-ﬁeld, 130, 242. See also
kāyadhatū
Boluoti 波羅提, 165
Bore jing 說般若經, 368, 376, 382, 419
bowl-bag, 25, 252–253
Brahma Heaven, 233, 271
Brahma-net sutra. See Fanwang jing
Buck, Pearl, 411
buddha lands, 9, 17, 130, 162–163, 195, 210,
243, 244, 415, 418
Buddha, xxv, 4, 10, passim; of equivalent
enlightenment, 169; as phantom body,
19, 222; as pureness of the mind, 29, 272
Buddha of Supreme Penetration and
Surpassing Wisdom, 29, 271. See also
Tathāgata Mahābhijñājñānabhibhū
Buddha’s previous existences, 429
Buddhabhadra (Fotuobatuoluo 佛陀跋陀
羅), 387, 391, 404, 418
Buddhacarita, 385
buddhadharma, 3, 5, 6, 8, 11, 24, 26, 29, 35,
39, 42, 43, 62, 67, 68, 119, 120, 132, 135, 136,
146, 153, 173, 179, 180, 185, 213–214, 247,
248, 250, 253, 254, 258, 261, 267, 271–272,
275, 293, 300, 302, 306, 312, 314, 316, 329,
342, 374
buddha-ground, 303
buddhahood, 10, 15–16, 18–19, 92, 123–124,
168, 170–171, 174, 179, 187, 191–192, 206,
218, 222–223, 244, 280, 282, 380–381, 387,
400, 407, 409, 411, 415, 418
Buddhajīva (Fotuoshi 佛陀什), 417
Buddha-Māra, 12, 19, 188, 190, 223
buddha-mind, 118, 202, 229, 253
Buddhamitra (Futuomituo 伏駄密陀), 340
Buddhanandi (Fotuonanti 佛陀難提), 263
buddha-nature, 4, 107, 122, 124, 126, 162,
164, 175, 200, 208, 229–230, 241–242,
245–246, 250, 329, 378, 385, 404, 408;
functioning of the total body of the

b.-n., 245–246
Buddhapāli (Fotuoboli 佛陀波利), 203,
383–384
buddha-realm, 191, 374, 406
buddhatā. See buddha-nature
buddha-way, 29, 187, 190, 209, 271–272
buddha-wisdom, 303
buddhayāna, 380. See also ekayāna
Buddhadhyāna-samādhisāgara Sutra, 387
Buddhayaśas (Fotuoyeshe 佛陀耶舍), 256,
369
Buddhism, vii, ix, xvii, 118. See also Chinese Buddhism
Buddhist canon, 59, 62, 162, 375, 413
burning house parable, 8, 158–159, 302
Buzhenkong lun 不眞空論, 186, 368, 427

C

ailiang 才良, 382
Caizhou 蔡州, 152
cakravartin (wheel-king, universal monarch), 19, 224
cangue, 24, 31, 170, 179, 245, 247, 279
Cantong qi 參同契, 219, 369, 403
Cao 曹, 51, 65, 133, 303, 341
Caoan ge 草庵歌, 369, 409
Caodong 曹洞 school of Chan, vii, 78–79,
99, 104, 111–113, 125, 394, 406, 417, 423, 432
Caoxi 曹溪, 107–108, 136, 200, 223, 367
Caozhou 曹州, 99, 341
cardinal principle of the buddhadharma,
3, 5, 39, 42, 119–120, 132, 135–136, 223, 306,
312, 315
Cat’s Yawn, xix
cause-and-eﬀect, law of, 32, 123, 124, 282,
285, 290, 407
Cen, Venerable 岑和尙, 101
Chan and Zen lineage, xxiv, 65, 77–78,
83, 89, 96, 104–105, 107, 113, 118–121, 165,
243, 294, 297, 319, 367, 372, 373, 398–400,
409, 412, 414, 429, 431–432
Chan literature, 72, 119, 140, 143, 167, 170,
238, 257, 266, 303, 330, 389, 421, 428
Chan school, 62–64, 78–83, 94, 157, 165,
193–194, 196, 245–246, 367, 369–371, 399,
406, 410, 417, 429, 431–432
Chang ahan jing 長阿含經, 225, 277, 306,
365, 369, 379

454 | i n d e x
Chang’an, 61, 91, 93, 107, 181, 255, 309, 376,
404, 409, 427
Changqing Huileng 長慶慧稜, 105
Changsha Jingcen 長沙景岑, 297–298
Changsha Zhenlang 長沙振朗, 298
Changshan zhenshi zhi 常山貞石志, 96,
339, 369
Changshi 常侍, 96–97
Changweng Rujing 長翁如淨, 113
Changzi Kuang 長髭曠, 138
Chanlin leiju 禪林類聚, 120, 369
Chanlin sengbao zhuan 禪林僧寶傳, xxxi,
340, 369–370, 407; cited, 94, 144, 145,
147, 148, 150
Chanmen guishi 禪門規式, 131, 289, 370
Chanmen zhang 禪門章, 250, 370
Chanmen zhuzushi jiesong 禪門諸祖師偈
頌, 100, 370, 399, 413
Chanyuan zhuquanji duxu 禪源諸詮集都
序, 86, 89, 129, 192, 252, 370
Chanzong wumen guan 禪宗無門關. See
Wumen guan
Chanzong Yongjia ji 禪宗永嘉集, 222, 371
Chen Changqi 陳昌齊, 386
Chen Puxie 陳蒲鞋. See Chen Zunsu
Chen Shou 陳壽, 390, 408
Chen Xu 陳詡, 109, 321
Chen Zunsu 陳尊宿, 94
Cheng Guan 澄觀, 374
Cheng Hao 程顥, 407, 424
Cheng weishi lun 成唯識論, 229, 371, 416
Cheng Yi 程頤, 109, 407, 424
Chengdefu 成德府 (Chengde Military
Prefecture), 54, 70, 75, 85, 96–97, 128
Chengzong 成宗, Emperor, 114
Chijue Daochong 痴絶道冲, 114
China’s four great Buddhist mountains,
203
Chinese Buddhism, vii, xxiv, 60–64, 79,
148, 194, 378, 382; suppression of, 63–64,
68, 91, 94, 203, 332
Chinese Tripiṭaka, 61, 89
Chinese Vinaya, 417
Chinese zodiac, 217
Chinggis Khan, 112, 424
Chiyan Guizong 赤眼歸宗 (Red-eyed
Guizong), 256

Chizhou 池州, 93, 99, 297
Chizhou Nanquan Puyuan Chanshi yuyao
池州南泉普願禪師語要, 260, 371
Chongke guzunsu yulu 重刻古尊宿語錄.
See Guzunsu yulu
Chongshun 重順, 102
Chongyuan 崇遠, 108–109, 405
Chōō Nyojō 長翁如淨. See Changweng
Rujing
Chuandeng da guangming zang 傳燈大光
明藏. See Da guangming zang
Chuandeng lu 傳燈錄, 64, 66, 69, 74, 77,
82–84. See also Jingde chuandeng lu 景
德傳燈錄

Chuandeng yuying ji 傳燈玉英集, 102, 371
Chuanfa baoji 傳法寶紀, 372
Chuanfa zhenzong ji 傳法正宗記, xxxi, 64,
74, 372
Chuanxin fayao 師傳心法要, xxxi, 81,
83, 89, 93–94, 372, 390; cited, 164–165,
167–168, 171–173, 180, 182, 190, 203,
210–211, 229, 272, 342
Chuanzi Decheng 船子德誠, 101–102
chuishi 垂示, 368
Chuji 處寂, 95, 399
Chuogeng lu 輟耕錄, 169, 372, 402
Chusanzang jiji 出三藏記集, 89, 373
Chuzhen 處眞, 333
Cidi chanmen 次第禪門, 421
Ci’en Dashi Kuiji 慈恩大師窺基, 162, 168,
210, 377, 381, 426
Ciming 慈明. See Shishuang Chuyuan
circle-ﬁgures 圓相, 96–97
citta (mind), 213, 242, 268
clay oxen, 331
colloquial Chinese, x, 62, 89, 118–119, 120,
121, 125, 126–127, 131–132, 135, 137–139,
143, 145, 157, 169, 171, 174, 176, 178,
199–200, 205, 219, 223–224, 232–233,
248, 258, 261, 263, 265, 283, 293, 309, 314,
316–318, 335, 427
Complete and Immediate One Vehicle,
193
Complete and Immediate Precepts, 193
complete satisfaction 知足 (saṃtuṣṭi), 270
completed mind, 168–169
completed mind of the tenth stage, 10, 29,

i n d e x | 455
166, 168, 198, 251, 270
Comprehensive records of Eihei. See Eihei
kōroku.
Confucianism, 88, 106, 108
Confucius, 101, 233
Congrong lu 從容錄, 395, 423
consciousness-only, 20, 66, 221, 228–230,
371, 408. See also Yogācāra
constant sitting, 387
constant walking, 387
cook, chief, 37, 95, 299, 414; head ricecook, 34, 289; head vegetable-cook, 295
Council of Lhasa, 285
Councilor Wang 王常侍, 3–4, 38, 52,
70–71, 74, 97, 117, 128, 301, 343
cracked jug, 16, 208
critical examinations, 86, 289
Cui 崔, 110
Cuifeng 翠峯, 49, 334–335
Cuiwei Wuxue 翠微無學, 100, 305
Cunjiang’s stele inscription, 74–78,
101–102
customary gift, 36, 43, 296, 316

Da anban shouyi jing 大安般守意經, 287,
373
Da banniepan jing shu 大般涅槃經疏, 250,
373
Da baoji jing 大寶積經, 207, 211, 279–280,
373, 418
Da bore boluomiduo jing 大般若波羅蜜多
經, 201, 206, 213, 368, 393
Da foding rulai miyin xiuzheng liaoyi
zhupusa wanxing shouleng’yan jing 大佛
頂如來密因修證了義諸菩薩萬行首楞嚴經.
See Shouleng’yan jing
Da foding shouleng’yan jing 大佛頂首楞嚴
經. See Shouleng’yan jing
Da guangming zang 大光明藏, 102, 139,
150, 371, 373
Da Huayan jing shu 大華嚴經疏, 107, 374
Da piluzhe’na chengfo jing shu 大毘盧遮那
成佛經疏, 207, 260, 374
Dachuan Puji 大川普濟, 416
Daci Huanzhong 大慈寰中, 48–49,
332–333
Dada Wuye 大逹無業, 237

Dafan si 大梵寺, 80, 107–109, 399
Dafangdeng daji jing 大方等大集經, 236,
250, 374, 375
Dafangguang fo huayan jing 大方廣佛華嚴
經, 130, 262, 374, 390, 391, 424. See also
Avataṃsaka Sutra, Huayan jing
Dafangguang fo huayan jing suishu yanyi
chao 大方廣佛華嚴經隨疏演義鈔, 374,
390
Dafangguang yuanjue xiuduoluo liaoyi
jing 大方廣圓覺修多羅了義經. See Yuanjue jing
Dagui 大潙, 303
Dahui 大慧 (of Dawei 大隗), 297
Dahui nianpu 大慧年譜. See Dahui Pujue
Chanshi nianpu
Dahui Pujue 大慧普覺. See Dahui Zonggao
Dahui Pujue Chanshi nianpu 大慧普覺禪
師年譜, 152, 374–375
Dahui Pujue Chanshi pushuo 大慧普覺禪
師普說. See Dahui pushuo
Dahui Pujue Chanshi yulu 大慧普覺禪師
語錄, 131, 261, 267, 375
Dahui pushuo 大慧普說, 324, 375
Dahui wuku 大慧武庫, 127, 375
Dahui yulu 大慧語錄. See Dahui Pujue
Chanshi yulu
Dahui Zonggao 大慧宗杲, 85, 96, 100, 111,
127, 131, 152, 261, 267, 320, 324, 368, 370,
374–375, 395, 406, 428, 431
Dainichi Nōnin 大日能忍, 388
Dainihon kōtei manjiban zōkyō 大日本校
訂卍版藏經. See Dai-Nippon kōtei zōkyō
Dai-Nippon kōtei zōkyō 大日本校訂藏經,
152, 375
Daitoku-ji 大徳寺, x, xiv, xviii, xx–xxii
Daizong 代宗, Emperor, 106, 108, 137, 329
Daji 大寂. See Mazu Daoyi
Daji jing 大集經, 375. See also Dafangdeng
daji jing
Dajue 大覺, 39, 73–74, 100, 102, 304–305
Damamūka-nidāna Sutra. See Xianyu
jing
Damei Fachang 大梅法常, 95
Daming 大名 Prefecture, 52–54, 74, 76, 77,
87, 343–344

456 | i n d e x
Daming sanzang fashu 大明三藏法數. See
Sanzang fashu
Damo lun 達磨論, 105
dāna (giving), 211
Danxia Chun 丹霞子淳, 423
Danxia heshang wanzhuyin 丹霞和尚翫珠
吟. See Wanzhuyin
Danxia Tianran 丹霞天然, 26, 235,
254–258, 309, 331, 375, 388, 416
Danyuan Yingzhen 耽源應眞, 97, 307
Daoan 道安, 373
Daocan 道璨, 109
Daode jing 道德經, 148, 209, 376, 430
Daoqin 道欽, 96, 310
Daosheng 道生, 124, 417, 429
Daoshi 道世, 172, 382
Daowu Yuanzhi 道吾圓智, 101
Daowu Zongzhi 道吾宗智, 313
Daoxin 道信, 79–80, 106, 181, 372,
398–399
Daoxing 道興, 338
Daoxuan 道宣, 422
Dapin bore boluomi jing 大品般若波羅.
See Mohe bore boluomi jing
Dapin jing 大品經. See Mohe bore boluomi
jing
Dari jing shu 大日經疏, 376
Daśabhūmika Sutra, 391
Dasazhe Niqianzi suoshuo jing 大薩遮尼乾
子所說經, 274, 376
Dasheng baifa mingmen lun 大乘百法明門
論. See Baifa lun
Dasheng bensheng xindi guan jing 大乘本
生心地觀經, 181–182, 376
Dasheng chengye lun 大乘成業論, 250,
260, 371, 376–377
Dasheng dunjiao song 大乘頓教頌, 249,
377
Dasheng fayuan yilin zhang 大乘法苑義林
章, 162, 377, 382, 424
Dasheng qixin lun 大乘起信論, xxxi, 377,
406; cited, 174, 249, 263, 273
Dasheng wu fangbian beizong 大乘五方便
北宗, 377
Dasheng wusheng fangbian men 大乘無生
方便門, 80, 107, 241, 377
Dasheng yizhang 大乘義章, 250, 377

Dasheng zan 大乘讚, 172, 189, 231, 261,
378, 398
Dasong sengshi lue 大宋僧史略, 128–129,
378, 407
Dasui Fazhen 大隨法眞, 321
Datang shaozhou shuangfengshan caohouxi baolin zhuan 大唐韶州雙峯山曹候
溪寶林傳. See Baolin zhuan
Datong 大通, Chan master, 107
Datong Zhisheng Fo 大通智勝佛. See
Tathāgata Mahābhijñājñānabhibhū
Dayu 大愚, 42–43, 52, 54, 66–69, 91–93,
256, 314–317, 342
Dayuan 大原, 214
Dayun si 大雲寺, 108–109, 405
Dazhi Chanshi yuyao 大智禪師語要. See
Baizhang guanglu
Dazhidu lun 大智度論, xxxi, 225, 378,
400–401, 428; cited, 177, 190, 225, 243,
259, 268, 270. See also Zhidu lun
Dazhu Huihai 大珠慧海, 179, 273, 379, 430
dead bodies, 24, 33, 245, 248, 286
death-dealing demon of impermanence,
9, 158–160
demon: of birth-and-death, 16, 208; of
lust, 176
dependent powers, 20, 227
dependent transformations, 16, 19, 209, 222
Deshan Xuanjian 德山宣鑑 (Deshan of
the second generation), 37, 38, 44, 66,
68, 73, 92, 101, 105, 136, 141, 168, 175–177,
198, 202, 223, 237–238, 245, 251, 270, 285,
296, 300, 301, 303, 318
Deshan Yuanming 德山圓明, 148
Deshan Zongyin 德山總印, 301
Deva Māra, 238
Dezong 德宗, Emperor, 102, 108, 172
dharma: of the Hidden and the Revealed,
205; of mind, 11, 180; of mind-ground,
11, 181; of no-activity, 199; of the senseﬁelds, 31, 277; of the six pāramitās, 210;
ultimate d., 292; unconditioned d., 189;
of the universal purity of things, 210;
of the universal voidness of self-nature,
210; of the Way, 189
dharmas, pure and impure, 221
dharma assembly, 4, 125

i n d e x | 457
dharma body, 164, 242, 328, 337
dharma gate, 333; of the mind-ground,
182; subtle, 118
Dharma Master Yinzong 印宗法師, 107
dharma realm, 13, 14, 25, 29, 30, 33, 151,
192, 193, 195, 196, 205, 212, 214, 220, 229,
254, 272, 276, 286, 287, 369, 391; of nobirth, 14, 196; of Vairocana, 13, 195
dharma-base, 123
dharma-eye, 21, 28, 68, 235, 256, 268; pure
Dharma Eye, 340
Dharmagupta (Damojiduo 達磨笈多 or
Jiduo 笈多), 279, 381, 393, 408
Dharmagupta-vinaya, 417
Dharmākara, King, 418
dharmakāya, 9, 16, 101, 137, 149, 160–162,
168, 170, 179, 196, 204, 207, 209–210,
222, 247, 303, 394, 404, 406. See also
body of buddha
Dharmakāya Bodhisattva, 192
Dharma-King, 298
Dharmakṣema (Tanwuchen 曇無讖), 130,
374, 394, 404, 426
Dharmamati (Fayi 法意), 381
dharma-nature, 163, 210, 258
dharma-natured bodies, dharma-natured
lands, 9, 17, 162–163, 210
Dharmapāla (Hufa 護法), 366, 371
Dharmarakṣa (Zhu Fahu 竺法護), 381,
384, 398, 401, 406, 421
dharma-realm meditation, Huayan, 390,
429
Dharmaruci (Tanmoliuzhi 曇摩流支),
272, 406
dharma-substance, 253
Dharmavikurvaṇa (bodhisattva), 272
dhyāna (meditation), 62, 79, 212
Di Hao 翟灝, 415
diamond jar, 208
Diamond Sutra, 66, 92, 107, 142, 197,
224–225, 368, 378, 393, 398. See also
Jingang jing
Diamond Sutra Zhou, 92
Diamond Sword of the Vajra King, 40,
308
Diamond-Storehouse Bodhisattva, 230
Dīgha Nikāya, 369

Ding, Elder 定上座, 39, 74, 102, 306
Dīrgha Āgama, 225, 365, 369, 379
Divākara (Dipoheluo 地婆訶羅), 384
Dōgen Kigen 道元希玄, 88, 113, 140,
379–380, 403, 410, 414
Dong Gao 董誥, 406
Dongshan Liangjie 洞山良价, 99–100, 125,
143, 156, 239, 325, 370, 383
Dongshan Shouchu 洞山守初, 303
Dongshan si 東山寺, 106
Dongshan Xuefeng Kong heshang yulu 東
山雪峰空和尚語録. See Xuefeng Huikong
Chanshi yulu
Dongyang Dehui 東陽徳輝, 366
dragon-elephant, 32, 284–285
dragon’s given birth to a golden phoenix,
48, 331
Du Fei 杜朏, Layman, 372
Du Fu 杜甫, 283
Du Mu 杜牧, 297
Du Shun 杜順, 253, 390, 429
Du Xingyi 杜行顗, 384
Dugu Pei 獨孤沛, 109, 405
Dunhuang, manuscripts, 80, 92, 100, 105,
108–109, 137, 142, 181, 191, 195, 206, 215,
222, 224, 233, 240–241, 245, 253, 261,
265, 275, 283, 285, 293, 333, 335, 338, 372,
377, 379–380, 389, 395, 398–399, 403,
405, 413, 415, 419–420, 428
Dunhuang bianwen ji 敦煌變文集, xxxi,
379; cited, 137, 139, 143, 199, 211, 233, 302,
318, 339
Dunhuang duosuo 敦煌掇瑣, 143, 379
Dunwu rudao yaomen lun 頓悟入道要門
論, 273, 379, 430
Dunwu wusheng bore song 頓悟無生般若
頌, 108, 379, 419
Dunwu yaomen 頓悟要門. See Dunwu
rudao yaomen lun
Dushi fangyu jiyao 讀史方輿紀要, 341, 379
duty-monk, 44, 49, 257, 320–321, 333
Dvādaśanikāya śāstra, 378

E

astern Hall, 52, 54, 74, 77, 343
eight directions, 36, 271, 295
eighteen sense-realms (dhātu), 165
eighth stage of bodhisattvahood, 242

458 | i n d e x
eighty secondary marks of a buddha, 19,
224, 387
Eihei kōroku 永平廣錄, 113, 379
Eihei shingi 永平淸規, 113, 380, 403, 414
Eihei-ji 永平寺, 113, 380
ekayāna, 380–381
Ekottara Āgama, 365, 427
Elder Ding 定上座. See Ding, Elder
Elder Huo 奯上座. See Huo, Elder
Elder Taiyuan Fu 太原孚上座. See Taiyuan
Fu, Elder
Eleven-faced Guanyin, 307, 409–410;
dhāraṇī, 409–410
emptiness, 10, 14, 141, 166, 170, 179, 186,
189, 196, 198, 213, 219, 222, 236, 251, 254,
368–369, 376, 409, 411, 419, 421
empty appearances, 23, 240
empty forms, 20, 30, 227–228, 275
empty names, 16, 19, 25, 28, 174, 208, 221,
254, 264
Enchin 圓珍, 109, 367, 403
Engaku-ji 圓覺寺, xix, 114
enlightenment, 124, 141, 153, 187, 192, 241,
267, 391, 395–398; complete and immediate e., 13, 31, 32, 193, 280, 281, 285;
equivalent e., 10, 166, 168–170; gradual
e., 107, 194, 215, 425; in Hinayana, 168,
170; initial e., 175; karmic causes of,
313; of Linji, 42–43, 67–69, 91, 315–316;
marvelous e., 10, 166, 168–170; of Mazu,
95; original e., 174–175; perfect, supreme
e., 171, 190, 213, 214, 244, 270–271, 425;
seal of, 195; sudden e., 80, 107, 194, 215,
377, 400, 419, 425, 431; terrace of, 271; in
Tiantai, 168; tree of, 107, 241; true e., 213;
during work, 324; in Yogācāra, 426
Enmyō kokushi gyōjitsu nenpu 圓明國師行
實年譜, 88, 380, 395
Ennin 圓仁, 64, 90–91, 99, 109, 203, 367,
392, 403–405, 435
Enpuku-ji 圓福寺, xviii, 112
Er zhong ru 二種入, 420
Erru sixing lun 二入四行論, 105–106, 275,
380
esoteric Buddhism, 90, 91, 112, 129, 135,
176, 184, 307, 374, 387
Everett, Edward Warren, xvi, xviii

Everett, Eleanor, xvi, xvii
evil paths (gati), 212, 231, 243, 280
expedient means (skillful means), 7,
48, 80, 127, 145, 147, 148, 149, 154, 171,
198–199, 212, 231, 267, 273, 280, 325, 330,
368, 376, 377, 381, 414, 430
eye: of the dharma, 209; of knowledge, 209; of prajñā, 209; of the True
Dharma, 340. See also three eyes
eyebrows, loss of, 21, 235
Ezhou Zhuyushan 鄂州茱萸山, 121

F

ahai 法海, 80, 81, 109, 399
Fahua jing 法華經, 380–381, 400. See also
Lotus Sutra
Fahua xuanzan 法華玄贊, 282, 381, 400
Fahua yishu 法華義疏, 327, 381
faith, 127, 155–156, 168, 172, 174–175
Faju 法炬, 384
Fan Ye 范曄, 390, 408
Fang La 方腊, 411
Fang Xuanling 房玄齡, 393
Fangguang bore jing 放光般若經, 186, 382,
401
Fangzhang 方丈, mythical mountain, 332
Fanwang jing 梵網經, 181, 382
Farkas, Mary, xvi–xvii
Faru 法如, 372
Faxian 法顯, 381, 404, 417–418
Faxiang 法相 school of Buddhism, ix, 61,
162, 280, 371, 377, 381; and the doctrine
of the ﬁve natures (wuxing 五性),
280–281; and Linji, 280
Fayan Chanshi yulu 法演禪師語錄, 257,
382, 419
Fayan 法眼 school of Chan, vii, 78–79,
105, 406, 431
Fayan Wenyi 法眼文益, 78–79, 105, 427,
431
Fayuan yilin 法苑義林. See Dasheng
fayuan yilin zhang
Fayuan zhulin 法苑珠林, 172, 382
Fazang 法藏, 161, 205, 391
Fazhu jing 法住經. See Fo lin niepan ji
fazhu jing
Feiyin Tongrong 費隱通容, 114
Fen 汾, 8, 151–152

i n d e x | 459
Fenggan 豊干, 389. See also Hanshan, Shide
Fenglin 鳳林, 50, 336–338
Fengxue Yanzhao 風穴延沼, 44, 78, 85,
103, 134, 144, 146, 150–151, 318–319,
340–341
Fenyang Shanzhao 汾陽善昭, 78, 85, 104,
112, 149, 232, 383, 421
Fenyang Wude Chanshi yulu 汾陽無徳禪
師語録, 383
Fenyang’s Eighteen Questions, 232
Fifth Patriarch, 95, 121, 138, 240, 261
ﬁfty-two stages of enlightenment, Tiantai,
168
Final Age of the Law, 146
First Buddhist Council, 392
First Patriarch, ix, 118, 342. See also Bodhidharma
First Statement, 7, 28, 144–145, 149, 151,
264–265
First Zen Institute of America, x, xvi,
xx–xxi, 433
First Zen Institute of America in Japan,
xi, xiv, xxi, xxix, 434
ﬁve deadly sins, 177, 187
ﬁve grave sins, 274
ﬁve heinous crimes (pañcānantaryakarmāni), 12, 30, 186–187, 273–275, 280
Five Houses of Chinese Chan, vii, 78–79,
108, 406, 417
Five Houses and Seven Schools, ix, 121
ﬁve hundred bodhisattvas, 279–280
ﬁve kinds of food for renunciants, 243.
See also food
Five Mountains, Chinese, 85
Five Mountain literary movement, Japanese, 112
ﬁve natures, 31–32, 280–281, 285–286
Five Periods and Eight Teachings of
Tiantai, 414
ﬁve powers, 225, 227
Five Ranks, 104, 143, 151, 369, 383
ﬁve sense organs, 127–130, 373, 394
ﬁve skandhas, 20, 130, 228–229, 258, 280;
seepage of, 20, 228
ﬁve spiritual roots (pañcendriyāni), 127
ﬁve vital organs, 129, 177, 267
ﬁve-colored radiance of the Tathāgata, 130

Fo lin niepan ji fazhu jing 佛臨涅槃記法住
經, 207, 383
Fochui banniepan lueshuo jiaojie jing 佛垂
般涅槃略説教誡經. See Foyijiao jing
Fodi jing lun 佛地經論, 383
Foding zuisheng tuoluoni jing 佛頂最勝陀
羅尼經. See Foding zunsheng tuoluoni
jing
Foding zunsheng tuoluoni jing 佛頂尊勝陀
羅尼經, 203, 384, 432
Foguo Keqin Chanshi xinyao 佛果克勤禪
師心要, 136, 384
Foguo Yuanwu Chanshi yulu 佛果圜悟禪師
語録. See Yuanwu Foguo Chanshi yulu
Foguo Yuanwu Keqin Chanshi biyan lu 佛
果圜悟克勤禪師碧巖錄. See Biyan lu
Foguo Yuanwu Zhenjue Chanshi xinyao
佛果圜悟眞覺禪師心要. See Foguo Keqin
Chanshi xinyao
food: of delighting-in-samādhi, 243; of
eight ways of emancipation, 243; of joy,
243; of meditation, 243; of recollection,
243; of reﬂection, 243; of rejoicing, 243;
of rejoicing-in-the-dharma, 243; of
resolve, 243; of thought, 243
forbearance (kṣānti), 212
Fori Qisong 佛日契崇, 372
formlessness, 23, 29, 80, 213, 239, 271;
samādhi of, 182
forty-eight vows of Dharmākara, 418
Foshuo da anban shouyi jing 佛説大安般守
意經. See Da anban shouyi jing
Foshuo daban niyuan jing 佛説大般泥洹
經. See Niepan jing
Foshuo guan wuliangshou fo jing 佛説觀無
量壽佛經. See Guan wuliang shou jing
Foshuo guanfo sanmeihai jing 佛説觀佛三
昧海經. See Guanfo sanmeihai jing
Foshuo Mile dachengfo jing 佛説彌勒大成
佛經. See Mile dachengfo jing
Foshuo Mile xiasheng jing 佛説彌勒下生經.
See Mile dachengfo jing
Foshuo Shiyimian Guanyin shenzhou jing
佛説十一面觀世音神呪經. See Shiyimian
Guanyin shenzhou jing
Foshuo wuliangshou jing 佛説無量壽經.
See Wuliangshou jing

460 | i n d e x
Foshuo Yangjueji jing 佛說鴦崛髻經, 279,
384, 424
Foshuo Yangjuemo jing 佛說鴦崛摩經, 279,
384
Foshuo zhufa benwu jing 佛説諸法本無經.
See Zhufa wuxing jing
Four Categories (Classiﬁcations), 150–151
Four Dharma Realms, 151, 369
four duties or gratitudes, 376
four (great) elements, 9, 14–15, 23,
163–164, 197, 200–202, 229, 240
four forms of demeanor, 222
four foundations of mindfulness, 412
four fruits of sagehood, 168–169. See also
four grades of attainment
four functions, 164
four grades of attainment, 168–169
four kinds of food for people in the
world, 243. See also food
Four Methods of Instruction (Tiantai),
387
four modes of birth, 23, 241
four necessities, 194–195
four objects of contemplation, 222, 268,
411–412
four orders of believers, 81
four phases, 14, 200–201
four practices of Bodhidharma, 380
Four Shouts, 134, 308
four stages of mindfulness, 268–269
Four Statements, 150–151
Four Teachings, 387, 411, 414
Four Treatise school, 378
Four Types of samādhi (Tiantai), 387
four wisdoms, 229, 383
Fourfold Relation of Guest and Host, 134.
See also guest and host
Fourth Patriarch, 106
foxes, fox-spirits, 10, 18, 20, 21, 22, 176,
178, 217–218, 227, 228, 235, 237, 238, 278,
290, 323
Foxing lun 佛性論, 249, 384–385
Foyijiao jing 佛遺教經, 383, 385, 388
Fozu lidai tongzai 佛祖歴代通載, 409
Fraser, Dana R., xi, xxiv, xxix, 435
Fu Dashi 傅大士, 6, 130, 141–142, 224–225,
398, 407, 420

Fu Dashi lu 傅大士 錄, 142
Fu Dashi xinwang ming 傅大士心王銘. See
Xinwang ming
Fu Xi 傅翕, 142, 407
Fuke 普化 school, 97, 113
Fuli 復禮, 161, 409
functioning of the total body of the
buddha-nature, 245–246
fundamental darkness (avidyā), 249
Fuzhou Xuansha Zongyi Dashi guanglu
福州玄沙宗一大師廣録. See Xuansha
Zongyi Dashi guanglu
Fuzhu Wang Changshi 府主王常侍. See
Wang Changshi

G

an Bao 干寶, 205, 413
Gaṇḍa-vyūha Sutra. See Huayan jing
Ganquan Zhixian 甘泉志賢, 266
Gao’an Tantou Dayu 高安灘頭大愚
(Gao’an Dayu 高安大愚). See Dayu
Gaoseng zhuan 高僧傳, xxxi, 385; cited,
118, 172
Gaozong 高宗, Emperor (Tang dynasty),
409; (Song dynasty), 110
Gates of the Three Mysteries, 7, 148–150
gati, 143, 158, 180, 211, 243, 267, 280, 428.
See also paths of existence
Gautama Prajñāruci (Qutan Boreliuzhi 瞿
曇般若流支), 428
Gautama Saṃghadeva (Qutan Sengqie
Tipo 瞿曇僧伽提婆), 427–428
Genben shuo yiqie you bu nituona 根本說
一切有部尼陀那, 194, 385
geya (verse), 123
ghee (clariﬁed butter), 16, 208
ghosts, 22, 169, 227, 237–238
Gidō Shūshin 義堂周信, 88, 112, 395
Go-Daigo 後醍醐, Emperor, 113
Godaizan Nenbutsu, 91
gods, 6, 19, 28, 29, 32, 89, 127, 142, 143, 158,
192, 198, 225, 227, 241, 243, 251, 264, 270,
285, 292; of the Brahma Heaven, 271; of
the Trayastrimśās, 291
Gojō 五條, Empress, 91
golden chick pecks through the lapis
lazuli shell, 332
Golden Grain Tathāgata 金粟如來

i n d e x | 461
(Vimalakīrti), 141
golden ox, 48, 330–331
golden-haired lion crouching on the
ground, 40, 308
Gongcheng Yi 公乘億, 74, 101–102
Gotama Buddha, xvii
Gotō Zuigan 後藤瑞巖, x, xx, xxii
Go-Uda 後宇多, Emperor, 113–114
great bodhi tree, 241
Great Compassionate One, 4, 128. See also
Avalokiteśvara
great cyclic cataclysms, 226
Great Death, 245
Great Intrinsic Wisdom, 254
Great Matter, 3–4, 117–118, 125
Great perfection of wisdom sutra. See Bore
jing
Great Teacher Ke 可大師, 156
Great Way, 50, 156, 178, 202, 222, 260, 338
Great Wind, 44, 318–320
Gu qingliang zhuan 古清凉傳, 203, 386,
387, 405, 422
Gu Zuyu 顧祖禹, 379
Guan jing 觀經. See Guan wuliang shou
jing
Guan Wudang 關無黨, 367
Guan wuliang shou jing 觀無量壽經, 209,
384, 386, 418
Guanchang xianxing ji 宮場現形記, 219,
386
Guanding 灌頂, 170, 373, 388, 401, 412, 414
Guanfo sanmeihai jing 觀佛三昧海經, 226,
384, 386–387
Guang qingliang zhuan 廣清涼傳, 146, 203,
386, 387, 422
Guangdeng lu 廣燈錄. See Tiansheng
guangdeng lu
Guangdong tongzhi 廣東通誌, 109, 387
Guangtong Fashi 光統法師, 329
Guangzan jing 光讃經. See Mohe bore
boluomi jing
Guannan, Venerable 關南長老, 253, 392
Guanshiyin pusa pumen pin 觀世音菩薩普
門品, 170, 381, 388
Guanxi Zhixian 灌溪志閑, 74, 102
Guanxin lun 觀心論, Northern school
text, 107, 387, 405; Tiantai text, 387

Guanxin lun yi ming jianru lun 觀心論
亦名煎乳論. See Guanxin lun (Tiantai
text)
Guanyin 觀音 (Guanshiyin 觀世音), 39,
128–129, 185, 203, 306–307, 310, 387,
409–410; Eleven-faced Guanyin, 307;
Twelve-faced Guanyin, 39, 306–307. See
also Avalokiteśvara
Guanyin jing 觀音經. See Fahua jing
Guanyin jing shu 觀音經疏. See Guanyin
yishu
Guanyin si 觀音寺, 75, 101
Guanyin yishu 觀音義疏, 170, 247, 367,
388, 405
Guanyin yuan 觀音院, 94, 99
Gude chanyuan 古德禪院, 92
guest, 190; guest examines guest, 24, 247
guest and host, 5, 7, 12, 21, 23, 36, 51, 54,
133–134, 144, 188, 232, 245–246, 297, 339;
Fourfold Relation of Guest and Host,
134; guest examines host, 24, 246; host
examines guest, 24, 247
Guifeng Zongmi 圭峰宗密, 93, 108, 121,
129, 174, 192, 245–246, 252–253, 370–371,
406, 425, 429
Guishan Dayuan Chanshi jingce 潙山大圓
禪師警策. See Guishan jingce
Guishan jingce 潙山警策, 118, 388
Guishan Lingyou 潙山靈祐, 34, 43–47,
51, 68, 71, 92, 94–97, 118, 136–137, 141,
159–160, 223, 290–291, 315, 317–320,
322–325, 327–328, 338–339, 388, 424
Guisi leigao 癸巳類稿, 281, 388
Guiyang 潙仰 school of Chan, vii, 78–79,
96–97, 406, 417, 424
Guizong si 歸宗寺, 105, 256
Guizong Zhichang 智常歸宗, 26, 91, 184,
254, 256. See also Lushan Zhichang
Gujiyin 孤寂吟, 255, 388
Gulin Qingmao 古林淸茂, 114
Guṇabhadra (Qiunabatuoluo 求那跋陀
羅), 126–127, 242, 278–279, 395–398, 408,
424, 427
guṇas (objects of sensory perception), 165
Gunavarman (Qiunabamo 求那跋摩), 426
Guo Ningzhi 郭凝之, Layman, 417, 424
Guo Tianxi 郭天錫, 87, 89, 112

462 | i n d e x
Guoqing si 國清寺, 389
Guyin Yuncong 谷隱蘊聰, 83, 110, 414
Guzunsu yulu 古尊宿語錄, xxxi, 65, 86,
371, 388–389, 411; cited, 88, 91, 113,
127–129, 134, 153–154, 157, 162, 164, 179,
190, 194, 197, 210, 219, 233, 245, 250, 264,
275, 277, 280, 287, 296, 301–303, 306,
322–323, 329, 336, 341, 366, 375, 380, 390,
392, 395, 402, 404, 427
Guzunsu yuyao 古尊宿語要, xii, 86, 88,
296, 388, 389, 402, 411, 422–423

H

aihui si 海會寺, 105, 382
Haiyun Yinjian 海雲印簡, 87, 111
Hakuin Ekaku 白隱慧鶴, 143
half-sitting, half-walking Tiantai meditation, 387
Han dynasty, 60, 89, 96; Eastern Han, 60;
Later Han, 281, 373, 390, 394, 399
Han Wudi 漢武帝, Emperor, 408
Han Yu 韓愈, 297
Han Yunzhong 韓允忠, 103
Hangzhou 杭州, 68, 85, 87, 93, 95–96,
110–111, 113, 366; Ten Temples of, 85
Hanlin Academy, 102, 366
Hanshan 寒山, 319, 389, 415
Hanshan shi 寒山詩, 248, 389, 407
Hanshan shi ji 寒山詩集. See Hanshan shi
Hao Yixing 郝懿行, 249, 428
Hattō Enmyō 法燈圓明. See Shinchi
Kakushin
Hattō 法燈 lineage, 113
He Hongjing 何弘敬, 102–103
head of the lower hall, 334–335
head of the upper hall, 334
head-seat, 133
Hebei 河北, 47, 52, 54, 63, 64, 69, 71–72,
74–75, 84–85, 87, 96–97, 100–101, 107–
108, 110, 117, 119, 128, 327, 333, 342
Hebu jinguangming jing 合部金光明經. See
Jinguangming jing
Hell of Uninterrupted Torment, 187, 276,
282. See also Avīci Hell
hell-dwellers, 144, 158, 231, 241, 428
Henan 河南, 47, 54, 66, 69, 75–76, 92–93,
97, 102, 106, 108, 128, 133, 152, 255, 297,
327, 329

Henandao 河南道, 65
Hengyue Huisi 衡嶽慧思, 193
Heyang 河陽, Elder, 35, 73, 294
Heze Dashi xianzong ji 荷澤大師顯宗記.
See Xianzong ji
Heze 荷澤 school, 93, 108, 121, 246,
370–371, 425, 429. See also Southern
school
Heze Shenhui 荷澤神會, 80–81, 107–109,
163–164, 215, 252–253, 377, 389, 399–400,
403, 405, 419
Heze Shenhui Chanshi yulu 荷澤神會禪師
語錄, 109, 377, 389
Hezhong 河中, 75–76, 102
Hinayana, xvii, 95, 122–123, 168, 187, 212,
269, 283, 286, 370, 378, 385
hindrances (āvaraṇa), 213; of emancipation, 214; of names, 31, 277; of past
karma, 239, 280; from previous lives,
280
Hōjō Sadatoki 北條貞時, 114
Hōjō Tokiyori 北條時賴, 114
holy relics (śārira), 235
Home-renouncer, 12–13, 21–22, 27, 32,
188–189, 194, 198, 235, 238, 251, 261, 284,
308. See also śramaṇa
Hongren 弘忍, 79–80, 95, 106–107, 121,
181, 372, 398–399. See also Fifth Patriarch
Hongzhi Zhengjue 宏智正覺, 111
Hongzhou 洪州, 67, 90–91, 93, 95
Hongzhou 洪州 school of Chan, 246,
370–371, 429
horned water chestnuts, 17, 210
host, 5, 7, 12, 21, 23–24, 36, 51, 54, 131,
133–134, 141, 144, 188, 232, 245–247, 297,
339; host examines host, 24, 247
Hottō Enmyō 法燈圓明. See Shinchi
Kakushin
Hou Han shu 後漢書, 108, 389, 390, 408
houses: of Chan, 3, 120, 121; of Chinese
zither music, 121; Five Houses of Chinese Chan, 78–79, 108, 406, 417; Five
Houses and Seven Schools, ix, 121; Four
Houses, 78
Hu Sanxing 胡三省, 249, 431
Hu Shi 胡適, 215, 389, 434

i n d e x | 463
Huangbo Duanji Chanshi wanling lu 黄蘗
斷際禪師宛陵録. See Wanling lu
Huangbo Duanji yulu 黃檗斷際語錄. See
Huangbo Xiyun Chanshi yulu
Huangbo tree, 26, 258
Huangbo Xiyun 黃檗希運 (Duanji 斷
際), ix, xiii, 3, 6, 34, 40–49, 52, 54,
67–69, 71–74, 81, 83, 91–95, 100, 102, 110,
120–121, 136, 154, 156–157, 159, 164–165,
167–168, 171, 179–180, 182, 190, 194, 197,
199, 203, 210–211, 220, 230, 236, 241, 253,
256, 267, 272–273, 280, 289–291, 310–312,
314–318, 320–331, 334, 342, 372, 390, 402,
412, 415–416
Huangbo Xiyun Chanshi yulu 黃檗希運禪
師語錄, 93, 390
Huanglong Huinan 黃龍慧南, 78, 104–105
Huanglong 黃龍 line of Linji Chan, 78,
105, 111
Huayan doctrine, 370–371, 392
Huayan fajie guanmen 註華嚴法界觀門,
390, 429
Huayan fajie xuanjing 華嚴法界玄鏡, 205,
390, 429
Huayan jing 華嚴經, 105, 130, 164, 184, 196,
203, 209, 230, 231, 254, 286, 287, 366, 374,
390–391, 420. See also Dafangguang fo
huayan jing, Avataṃsaka Sutra
Huayan jing 華嚴經, eighty-fascicle edition, 391
Huayan jing shu 華嚴經疏. See Dafangguang fo huayan jing suishu yanyi chao
Huayan jing tanxuanji 華嚴經探玄記, 243,
391
Huayan jing yihai baimen 華嚴經義海百
門, 161, 205, 391
Huayan 華嚴 school, ix, 61, 66, 93, 121, 129,
145, 149, 151, 161, 203, 205, 253, 285–286,
367, 369, 370, 371, 374, 390–392, 407, 425,
427, 429
Huayan yuan 華嚴院, 333
Huayan Zhizang 華嚴智藏, 333
Huijiao 慧皎, 385
Huiju 慧炬 (Zhiju 智炬), 119, 367
Huijue 慧覺, 286, 419
Huike 慧可, 118, 264–265, 329, 372,
398–399. See also Second Patriarch

Huilin si 慧林寺, 235, 255
Huiming 慧明, 175
Huineng 慧能, ix, 80–81, 106–109, 119,
138, 175, 181–182, 215, 240–241, 261, 367,
399–400, 428
Huishi Shiming 晦室師明, 86, 111, 422
Huiwen 慧文, 193
Huiweng Wuming 晦翁悟明, 100, 431
Huixiang 慧祥, 203, 386
Huiyan 慧嚴, 208, 404
Huiyan Zhizhao 晦巖智昭, 406
Huizong 徽宗, Emperor, 110
Hunan 湖南, 73, 78, 92, 94–95, 97, 100–101,
111, 138, 172
hungry ghost, 13, 20, 25, 144, 187, 192, 230,
254. See also preta
Hunlun 渾崙, 38, 304
Huo, Elder 奯上座, 74
Huo’an Shiti 或庵師體, 422
Huozhi zhuan 貨殖傳, 283
Huozhuyin 獲珠吟, 253, 392
Huqiu Shaolong 虎丘紹隆, 111, 425
Hurvitz, Leon, xxii, 194, 224, 434
Hutuo 滹沱 River, 52, 69, 117, 342

Icchantika, 124, 381, 404;
icchantika bhikku, 282
ignorance (avidyā), 32, 175, 187, 241, 249,
256, 263; primal i., 241. See also avidyā
illusory transformations, 19, 26, 224,
254–255, 259, 279
indeterminate nature, 280
India, vii, 60–61, 122, 135, 203, 208,
214–215, 272, 386, 390, 395, 421, 433; as
“Western Land,” 28, 180, 264
Indian Buddhism, vii, 151, 168, 194, 320,
326, 417
Indian dhyāna masters, 62
Indian patriarchs, 118–119, 182, 205, 244,
263, 269, 340, 367, 372, 399, 409, 417,
423, 428, 431, 432
Indra, 19, 226, 282
Indriya, 165, 394
informal discourses, talks, 131, 150, 375,
383, 390, 402, 423, 425
Ingen Ryūki 隱元隆琦. See Yinyuan Longqi
Iriya Yoshitaka 入矢義高, x, xi–xii, xxi,

464 | i n d e x
xxiii–xxiv, xxvi, xxix, 59, 131, 136, 156,
171, 174, 179, 198, 234, 339, 434, 435
Issan Ichinei 一山一寧. See Yishan Yining

Jade hare pushes open the blue sea gate,
332
Jambudvīpa, 234
Japanese Rinzai Zen, x, 78, 88–89, 105,
111, 113–114, 143, 154, 167, 333–334, 369,
395, 419
Japanese Tendai, 90–91
Jātaka, 124
Jayata (Sheyeduo 闍夜多), 269
Je-gwan 諦觀, 269, 414
Ji 齊 (of Dongchan), 296
Jiang Shen 蔣伸, 75–76, 102
Jiang Yi 蔣乂, 102
Jiangnan 江南, 67, 105
Jiangxi chanyuan 江西禪院, 75–76
Jiangxi Mazu Daoyi Chanshi yulu 江西馬
祖道一禪師語錄. See Mazu yulu
Jianzhong Jingguo xudeng lu 建中靖國續燈
録, 417, 431
Jianzong 鑒宗, 310
Jiashan Shanhui 夾山善會, 74, 100–101,
167, 324
Jiashe jie jing 迦葉結經, 130, 392
Jiashe Moteng 迦葉摩騰, 189, 412
Jiatai pudeng lu 嘉泰普燈録, 417, 431
Jijie lu 撃節録, 383
Jikaku Daishi 慈覺大師. See Ennin
Jikaku Daishi shōrai mokuroku 慈覺大師
將來目錄, 91, 367, 392
Jin shu 晉書, 296, 392
Jing 静, 432
Jingang jing 金剛經, 66, 142, 224, 393
Jingde chuandeng lu 景德傳燈錄, xxxi, 64,
89, 393, 414, 417, 431; cited, 91, 93–94, 97,
99–102, 109, 118, 120–121, 129–131, 136,
138, 143–145, 147–148, 150, 153, 155, 159–
160, 163–167, 171–172, 184–186, 192–193,
211, 219–220, 234, 237, 239, 245, 248, 253,
255–256, 258, 261–262, 264–266, 269,
288–289, 292, 294–298, 301–302, 305,
307, 309–310, 313–315, 317–319, 321–323,
326–327, 330–331, 333, 337–340, 369, 394,
421, 430

Jinghui Fayan Chanshi zongmen shigui
lun 淨慧法眼禅師宗門十規論. See Zongmen shigui lun
Jingjue 淨覺, 105, 154, 398
Jingluan bu’er 淨亂不二, 214
Jingqing Daofu 鏡淸道怤, 103, 177
Jingshan Hongyan 徑山鴻諲, 325
Jingtu lun zhu 淨土論註. See Wangsheng
lun zhu
Jinguangming jing 金光明經, 207, 394
Jinguangming zuishengwang jing 金光明最
勝王經. See Jinguangming jing
Jingzhou 荊州, 106, 108, 401
Jingzhuan shici 經傳釋詞, 191, 394
Jinling 金陵, 105, 332–333
Jinniu 金牛, 51, 339
Jiu Tang shu 舊唐書, 70, 94, 133, 152, 394,
413, 420
Jiu Wudai shi 舊五代史, 71, 98, 394–395,
398, 416
Jizang 吉藏, 327, 381
Jizhou 吉州, 97, 106
jñāna, 212, 225, 242, 394
Jñānagupta (She’najueduo 闍那崛多), 381,
430
Jōwa ruishu soon renpōshū 貞和類聚祖苑
聯芳集, 112, 395
Jue’an Baozhou 覺岸寶洲, 409
Jueduo Sanzang 崛多三藏, 214
Juefan Huihong 覺範慧洪, 94, 369, 409
Jueguan lun 絕觀論, 287, 395
Juexin 覺心, Laywoman, 389
Juhō kaisan Hattō Enmyō Kokushi gyōjitsu
nenpu 鷲峰開山法燈圓明國師行實年譜.
See Enmyō Kokushi gyōjitsu nenpu
Junna 淳和, Empress, 91
Jurchen, 111, 152
Jushe lun 俱舍論, 225, 241, 395–394
Jushi zhuan 居士傳, 94, 394

K

aifeng, 開封, 76, 85, 111
Kaihe ji 開河記, 294, 394
Kaiyuan si 開元寺, 94–95, 108
Kakushin 覺心. See Shinchi Kakushin
Kālayaśas (Jiangliangyeshe 畺良耶舍), 386
kalpa, 8, 27, 29, 143, 157, 158, 166, 260, 261,
270, 275, 283, 328; asaṃkhyeya k., 10, 19,

i n d e x | 465
21, 170, 223, 231, 328; k. of destruction,
262; minor, 271
kalpa-stone, 223
kalyāṇamitra (good friend), 174
kāmadhātu (sense realm), 158
Kamakura, xix, 88, 112–114
Kameyama 龜山, Emperor, 113
Kanadeva (Jianatipo 迦那提婆), 269
Kanaseki Hisao 金関寿夫, x, xi, xxi, xxix
Kang Mengxiang 康孟詳, 130, 429
Kapilavastu, 217
karma, 10, 12–13, 17–18, 29–30, 32, 42,
153–154, 171, 173, 186–187, 189, 194, 210,
212–213, 216–217, 221, 227, 239, 268,
273, 275, 280, 282, 313, 338, 376–377,
394; birth-and-death k., 17, 173, 210;
of death, 189; hell-creating k., 13, 194;
hell-k., 17, 212, 267; past k., 10, 42, 171,
227, 239, 280, 313; pure k., 17, 212–213; of
samsara, 249
karma-creating activities, 10, 171, 173
karma-creating beings, 12, 188–189
karma-nature, 263
karmic aﬃnity, 314
karmic causality, 428
karmic consciousness, 27, 263
karmic obstructions, 313
Kassan shō 夾山鈔, 167, 394
Kāśyapa, 392. See also Mahākāśyapa
Kāśyapa Buddha, 290
Kāśyapa Mātanga, 189, 412
Kattō gosen 葛藤語箋, 115, 303, 394
kāyadhatū, 242. See also body-ﬁeld
Kenchō-ji 建長寺, 88, 114
Kennin-ji 建仁寺, 88, 112–114
King Māra, 270
King of Geese, 12, 188–189
Kissa yōjōki 喫茶養生記, 334, 394
kleśa (deluding passion), 126, 212–214, 249
koan 公案, xi, xix, xxv, xxvii, 99, 102, 104,
110–113, 127, 144, 238, 246, 252, 308, 326,
375, 383, 394, 401, 417, 423, 424, 425, 431;
collections of, 100, 104, 110, 112–113, 146,
367–369, 372, 379, 383, 394–395, 401, 406,
418, 422, 426, 428, 432. See also Biyan lu,
Fenyang Wude Chanshi yulu, Wumen
guan, and Xuedou baize songgu

koan-introspecting Chan, 111
Kōkoku-ji 興國寺, 88, 113, 419
Konggu ji 空谷集, 112, 394, 424
Kongzi Xiang Tuo xiangwen shu 孔子項託
相問書, 233
Kōno Mukai 河野霧海, xviii
Kōshō Chidō 光紹智堂, 380
Kōshō-ji 興聖寺, 113, 380, 414
Kōtei Rinzai roku 校訂臨濟錄, 96, 395
kṣana (thought-instant), 156, 160, 166
kṣānti (forbearance), 212
Kśitigarbha (Dizang 地藏), 203; K. and
Mount Jiuhua, 203
Kūge 空花, xviii
Kūge nichiyō kufū ryakushū 空華日用工夫
略集, 112, 395
Kuiji 窺基. See Ci’en Dashi Kuiji
Kumārajīva (Jiumoluoshi 鳩摩羅什), 118,
124, 127, 159, 177, 186, 191, 195, 202, 222,
224, 231, 271, 367, 373, 378, 381–382, 385,
393, 398, 400–401, 409–410, 416–417,
419, 427, 429–430
Kuśinagara, 19, 223
Kuyai heshang manlu 枯崖和尚漫錄, 267,
395
Kuyai Yuanwu 枯崖圓悟, 395

Labor, monastic, vii, 44, 45, 62, 79–80, 90,
107, 320–321, 323–324, 435
Lamp Records, 414, 417, 431–432
lands, 13, 163; buddha l., 9, 17, 130,
162–163, 195, 210, 243, 244, 415, 418; of
dependent transformations, 19, 222;
dharma-natured l., 9, 17, 162–163, 210;
of Emancipation, 16, 25, 209, 254; of
Nondiﬀerentiation, 16, 209; of Pure
Mystery, 16, 209; of Purity, 25, 254; of
Supernatural Powers, 25, 254; selfnatured l., 162; of the Three Eyes, 16,
208–209; of Vairocana, 25, 195, 254
Langzhou 朗州, 68, 92, 100, 301
Laṅkāvatāra Sutra, 105, 126, 242, 273, 278,
280, 297, 342, 395–398, 406. See also
Lengqie jing
lanterns, 21, 177, 234
Lanxi Daolong 蘭溪道隆, 88, 114
Laozi 老子, 376

466 | i n d e x
lapis lazuli, 270, 331–332
Later Han 後漢, 130, 281, 373, 390, 395, 399
Layman Pang 龐. See Pang Yun
leakage, discharge, seepage, 20, 212, 228
lecture halls (lecture shops), 341
lecture master, 4, 37, 72, 101, 122, 124–125,
299–300
Ledao ge 樂道歌, 172, 185–186, 223, 282,
292, 395
Lengqie abaduoluobao jing 楞伽阿跋多羅
寶經, 126, 242, 278, 342, 395–398. See
also Lengqie jing
Lengqie jing 楞伽經, 395–398
Lengqie shizi ji 楞伽師資記, 80, 105, 121,
154, 398–399
Lepu Yuan’an 樂普元安, 37–38, 73–74, 100,
167, 300–301, 304
Li Baojia 李寶嘉, 219, 386
Li Bo 李渤, 256, 333
Li Dashi 李大師, 402
Li Fang 李昉, 413
Li Jing 李璟, 105
Li Tongxuan 李通玄, 164, 204, 302, 420
Li Yanshou 李延壽, 402
Li Zunxu 李遵勗, 83, 109–110, 129, 414
Liandeng huiyao 聯燈會要. See Zongmen
liandeng huiyao
Liang Baozhi 梁寶志. See Baozhi
Liang gaoseng zhuan 梁高僧傳. See Gaoseng zhuan
Liang Tang Jin Han Zhou shu 梁唐晉漢周
書. See Jiu Wudai shi
Liang Wudi 梁武帝, Emperor, 142, 166,
252
Liangchao Fu Dashi song jin’gang jing 梁朝
傅大士頌金剛經, 224, 398
Liaoyuan ge 了元歌, 262, 398–399
Lidai fabao ji, 81, 109, 333, 399
light, 10, 13, 28, 130, 160, 173, 174, 192, 196,
243, 264, 266, 276, 287; of the body,
243–244; Eternal L., 244; of knowledge,
243–244; of the mind, 160; nondiﬀerentiating l., 9, 15, 160, 161, 204; nondiscriminating l., 9, 160, 161; omnipresent
l., 196; pure l., 9, 28, 160; Radiant L.,
244; six-rayed divine l., 8, 158, 159
Lingquan yuan 靈泉院, 102, 110, 368

Linji poxia yinyuan 臨濟破夏因緣, 326
Linji 臨濟 school, ix, 59, 65, 71–72, 74,
77–78, 84–85, 87, 101, 110–111, 134, 144,
149–150, 153, 318–319, 326, 367, 411, 414,
432
Linji lu 臨濟錄. See Record of Linji
Linji Yixuan 臨濟義玄, vii, ix, 59, 64–79,
89, 117, 312–317; death of, 51, 52, 55,
77–78, 340, 343; enlightenment of,
42–43, 67–69, 91, 315–316
Linji yuan 臨濟院, 69, 71, 74, 87, 89, 117
Linji’s Four Shouts, 40, 134, 308
Linji’s memorial tower, 52, 77–78, 344
Linji’s posthumous titles, 52, 77–78, 344
Linquan Conglun 林泉從倫, 87, 89, 112,
394, 423
Linquan Laoren pingchang Touzi Qing
heshang songgu kong gu ji 林泉老人評唱
投子青和尚頌古空谷集. See Konggu ji
Little Śākya (Yangshan) 仰山小釋迦, 52,
342
Liu Bannong 劉半農 (Liu Fu 劉復), 379
Liu Jishu 劉季述, 249
Liu Xu 劉昫, 394, 420
Liu Yiqing 劉義慶, 409
Liu Zhao 劉昭, 390
Liu Zhiyuan 劉知遠, 399
Liu Zhiyuan zhugongdiao 劉知遠諸宮調,
266, 399
Liushi ermu ji 劉氏耳目記, 98
Liuzu tanjing 六僧壇經, 80–81, 86, 399
living patriarch, 8, 18, 155–156, 220
Lokaksema (Zhiloujiachen 支婁迦讖), 418
Longguang 龍光, 47–48, 330–331
Longmen 龍門, 61, 108
Longtan Chongxin 龍潭崇信, 92, 136, 300
Longxing si 龍興寺, 94–95, 108, 403
Longya Judun 龍牙居遁, 73, 99–100, 413
Lord He 何公, 75, 76. See also He Hongjing
Lord Jiang 蔣公, 75–76. See also Jiang Shen
Lotus school, 193
Lotus Sutra, 62, 103, 118, 132, 135, 159,
169–170, 193, 209, 231, 243, 270–271,
282–283, 292, 302, 325, 327, 380–381, 385,
388, 400, 435. See also Fahua jing
Lotus World, 25, 254

i n d e x | 467
Lou Ying 樓頴, 407
Lou Zhao 樓炤, 407
lower hall, 45, 133, 332, 334–335
Lu 廬, Mount, 256, 370, 372, 377
Lu Geng 陸亘, 297
Lü Qiuyin 閭丘胤, 389
Lu Xingzhe 廬行者, 138. See Huineng
Lu Xisheng 陸希聲, 98
Luechen mingshu lun 略陳名數論. See
Baifa lun
lump of red ﬂesh, 4, 129–130
Luo Guanzhong 羅貫中, 411
Luohan Guichen 羅漢桂琛, 105, 253
Luojing Heze Shenhui Dashi yu 洛京荷澤
神會大師語, 389, 400
Luoyang 洛陽, 61, 81, 106–108, 128, 172,
272, 274, 279, 287, 373
Lushan Guizong 廬山歸宗, 315. See also
Guizong Zhichang
Lushan Huiyuan 廬山慧遠, 372, 377
Lushan Zhichang 廬山智常, 26, 91, 184,
254, 256. See also Guizong Zhichang

Ma Fang 馬防, ix, xii, xxvii, 54, 77, 85–89,
103
Madhyamaka doctrine, 370–371
Magadha, Queen, 386
Mahābhijñājñānabhibhū. See Tathāgata
Mahābhijñājñānabhibhū
Mahākaruṇa (Avalokiteśvara), 128
Mahakaśyapa, 118, 154, 182, 221, 309, 340;
and the transmission of the dharma, 118
Mahāmati Bodhisattva, 126, 242–243, 278
Mahāmaudgalyāyana, 126
Mahāparinibbāna-sutta, 403
Mahāparinirvāṇa Sutra, 130, 207–208, 286,
383, 400, 403–404. See also Niepan jing
Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā śāstra, 177, 225,
400. See also Dazhidu lun
Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra, 191, 193,
201–202, 211, 262, 368, 378
Mahasatya Nirgrantha, 274, 376
mahāvaipulya (comprehensive) sutras,
390
Mahāvairocana Sutra, 207, 260, 374
Mahāvyutpatti, 224, 243, 400
Mahayana Buddhism, 161, 184, 212, 381

Mahāyāna śatadharmā-prakāśamukha
śāstra, 366
Mahāyāna-karmasiddha śāstra, 376
Mahāyāna-saṃgraha-byāṣya, 408
Mahīśāsaka school, 417
Maitreya (Mile 彌勒), 13, 16, 27, 142,
195–196, 208, 225, 262, 286, 393, 398,
400, 426; Maitreya’s buddha-land, 244;
Tower of, 13, 16, 195, 208
Maitreya (Mile 彌勒), Yogācāra patriarch,
393, 426
Makita Tairyō 牧田諦亮, 172, 434
man of old, 9–10, 12, 17–19, 23, 25, 29, 33,
162, 171–173, 175, 186, 210, 215, 218–219,
224, 244, 248–249, 272, 287, 302
man of the Way, 14, 16, 20, 25, 28, 172,
197–198, 206, 227, 250, 264–265. See also
person of the Way
manas (faculty of thought), 263
mandala, 392, 404
mani-jewel, 159
Mañjuśrī (Wenshu 文殊), 11, 15, 31, 91,
99, 127, 142, 145–147, 176, 184–185, 187,
196, 202–204, 221, 246, 255, 272, 276,
279–280, 286, 292, 342, 376, 383, 386,
407, 416; and Mount Qingliang, 146,
184, 203, 386; and Mount Wutai, 15,
22, 91, 99, 145–147, 184–185, 202–203,
383–384, 386
manomāyakāya (body created through
thought), 242
Manorhita (Monaluo 摩拏羅), 244
Māra, 12, 16, 127, 188, 190–191, 203, 208,
238, 270, 274–275
Maudgalyāyana (Mulian 目連), 233
Mayu 麻谷, 4, 26, 39, 73, 99, 128, 234, 254,
257–258, 306–307
Mazdaism, 402
Mazu Daoyi 馬祖道一, ix, 67, 83, 90–91, 93,
95, 97, 99, 109, 110, 120, 136, 157, 171–172,
175, 179, 182, 184, 186–187, 211, 219, 220,
245–246, 255, 256, 266, 273, 288, 297, 301,
329, 332, 333, 336, 339, 367, 370–371, 379,
400, 402, 405, 412, 430
Mazu yulu 馬祖語錄, 172, 257, 392, 400
McGovern, William M., xvii
McRae, John R., xxx, 59, 119, 387, 434

468 | i n d e x
meditation, xvi, xxiv, 10, 21, 38, 45, 66–67,
95, 106, 173–174, 179, 195, 212, 215, 225,
235, 240, 248–250, 264, 301, 322, 326,
370, 373, 376, 387, 402, 410, 420, 421,
424; essence of Buddhist m., 266; ﬁve
ms., 412; food of m., 243; hindrances to
m., 250; Huayan dharma-realm m., 390,
429; m. chair, 327; m. hall, xviii, xxi,
133, 184, 234, 334; m. platform, 231; m.
retreat, xviii; method of m., 248–249;
Nanyue’s advice on m., 95; sitting m.,
215; Śūraṅgama samādhi m., 410; ten
gates of m. on universal inclusion, 390;
Tiantai m., 103, 193, 412
Meiwu Nianchang 梅屋念常, 409
memorial inscriptions, Linji, 65–66, 69,
71–78, 84–87, 91, 98, 101, 313, 341; for
Fu Dashi, 407; for Guifeng Zongmi,
93; for Guishan Lingyou, 94; for Guyin
Yuncong, 110; for Huineng, 109; memorial tower i. for Baizhang Huihai, 109,
321, 366; stele i. for Xinghua Cunjiang,
74–76, 101, 102; stele i. Xuedon Chongxian, 401; stele i. for Yangshan Huiji, 98;
tomb i. for Bodhidharma, 166; tomb i.
for Musō Soseki, 395; Yuan-dynasty m.
i. for Linji, 96
mendicancy, 61–62, 79, 416
Meng Gong 孟珙, 419
Meng Haoran 孟活然, 293
Mi 米, 306–307
Miaode 妙德, 184. See also Mañjuśrī
Miaofa lianhua jing 妙法蓮華經, 118, 381,
400
Miaoji chanyuan 妙濟禪院, 100
Miaojie 妙解, 7, 145–146. See also Mañjuśrī
Miaoli yuancheng guan 妙理圓成觀, 107,
400
Miaoxie 妙叶, 379, 430
middle way, 170, 247, 411
Mile 彌勒, 196, 400–401. See also Maitreya
Mile dachengfo jing 彌勒大成佛經, 244,
384, 400
mind, 8, 9, 10, passim; buddha-m., 118,
202, 229, 253; completed m., 168–169;
completed m. of the tenth stage, 10, 29,

166, 168, 198, 251, 270; dharma of, 11,
180; enlightened m., 168; enlightened
m. of all the tathāgatas, 170; Ineﬀable
M. of Nirvana, 118; light of the m.,
160; m. is void, 10, 153, 165, 166; m. is
without form, 9, 11, 165; m. of the living
patriarch, 8, 155; One M., 90, 165, 187,
193, 204, 230, 240, 341, 407; ordinary
m., 18, 175, 219–220; original m., 27, 157,
166, 262–263, 421; original purity of the
m., 209; outside m. there is no dharma
(buddha), 17, 210–211; Single M., 269;
this very mind is buddha, 156, 161, 179,
211, 220, 420; three degrees of m. (entering m., abiding m., completed m.), 168
Mind King, 130–131, 420
mind-dharma, 181, 372
mind-dharmas, mind-names, 257
mind-faculty, 263
mindfulness, 156, 222, 268–269, 412; root
of, 127. See also four foundations of
mindfulness, four stages of mindfulness
mind-ground, 11, 23, 181–183, 376; m. g.
doctrine, 181
mind-only, 20, 228–230
mind-seal, 114
Minghua 明化, 49–50, 334–335
Mingji zhenge 銘記箴歌, 399
Mingjue Chanshi yulu 明覺禪師語錄, 139,
289, 317, 401, 422
Minyue 閩越, 63
miraculous transformations, 26, 258
Misha saibu hexi Wufen lü 彌沙塞部和醯
五分律, 233, 401, 417. See also Wufen lü
Miura Isshū 三浦一舟, xi, xv, 434
Miyun Yuanwu 密雲圓悟, 114
Mo Junhe 默(墨)君和 (Mo Kunlun 墨崑
崙), 52, 71, 98–99, 342–343
Mochizuki Bukkyō daijiten 望月佛教大辭
典, 132, 135, 168, 181, 221, 256, 274, 401
Mohe bore boluomi jing 摩訶般若波羅蜜
經, 368, 376, 378, 382, 387, 401. See also
Mahā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra
Mohe zhiguan 摩訶止觀, 159, 401–402, 412
Mohr, Michel, xiv, xxx
Mokṣala (Wuluocha 無羅叉 or Zhu Luocha 竺羅叉), 186, 382, 401

i n d e x | 469
monastic code (m. discipline, m. rule),
90, 95, 115, 320–321, 366–367, 370, 380,
392, 409, 414, 417, 427
Montoku 文德, Emperor, 91
morning star, 267
Mount Baiyai 白崖, 92
Mount Baiyun 白雲, 382
Mount Baizhang 百丈, 95, 109, 367
Mount Chi 赤, 90–91
Mount Daci 大慈, 332
Mount Dangyang 當陽, 106, 401
Mount Danxia 丹霞, 255
Mount Dawei 大隗, 297
Mount Daxiong 大雄, 90
Mount De 德, 92, 301
Mount Dong 東, 111
Mount Dufu 獨浮, 92
Mount Emei 蛾眉, 185, 203. See also
Samantabhadra
Mount Fenyang 汾陽, 104
Mount Fuji 富士, xiii
Mount Gu 鼓, 289
Mount Gui 潙, 95–96, 319
Mount Guyin 谷隱, 110
Mount Heng 衡, 95, 172
Mount Hiei 比叡, 90–91, 112–113, 392
Mount Huangbo 黃檗, 46, 54, 67, 69,
93–94, 326
Mount Huanglong 黃龍, 105
Mount Huangmei 黃梅, 106–107, 382
Mount Jia 夾山, 102, 110, 368
Mount Jin 金, 110
Mount Jing 徑, 40–41, 68, 96, 111, 310–311
Mount Jiuhua 九華, 203. See also
Kśitigarbha
Mount Kōya 高野, 112–113
Mount Lepu 樂普/洛浦/落浦, 100
Mount Liang 梁, 411
Mount Longya 龍牙, 100–101
Mount Lu 廬, 91, 106, 184, 256, 370
Mount Lumen 鹿門, 333
Mount Mayu 麻谷, 99
Mount Nanquan 南泉, 297
Mount Nanyue 南嶽, 172
Mount Potou 破頭, 106
Mount Putuo 普陀, 185, 203. See also
Avalokiteśvara

Mount Qingliang 清凉, 184, 203, 386, 388,
422. See also Mañjuśrī
Mount Sanjue 三角, 301
Mount Shimen 石門, 95
Mount Shou 首, 103, 411
Mount Simian 四面, 382
Mount Song 嵩, 172, 288, 297, 420
Mount Sumeru, 35, 213, 226, 252, 291
Mount Taiping 太平, 382
Mount Tianmu 天目, 96
Mount Tiantai 天台, 90, 93, 319, 389
Mount Tiantong 天童, 113
Mount Wutai 五臺, 15, 72, 91, 99, 145–147,
184–185, 202–203, 383, 386, 392, 404
Mount Xing 杏, 100
Mount Xiong’er 熊耳, 329
Mount Xuefeng 雪峰, 110
Mount Yangqi 楊岐, 104
Mount Yao 藥, 337
Mount Yungai 雲蓋, 105
Mount Yunju 雲居, 111
Mount Zhongnan 終南, 309
mountain monk, xxvi, 3, 11, 117–118, 181
Mozi 墨子, 191
Muan Shanqing 睦庵善卿, 84, 110, 432
Muan Xingtao 木菴性瑫, 115
mugwort, branch of, 6, 68, 136–137
Muhu ge 牧護歌, 292, 402, 413
Mujaku Dōchū 無著道忠, 89, 96, 98, 115,
119, 132, 136, 139, 140, 146, 147, 154, 157,
161, 164, 183, 191, 247, 251, 252, 267, 277,
283, 303, 306, 320, 332, 333, 394–395,
406, 427
Mujaku Ryōen 無著良緣, 88, 114
Mukou 木口, 100, 138
Mūlamadhyamaka śāstra, 378
Mūlasarvāstivādin school, 194, 385–386
Mumonkan. See Wumen guan
Murano Senchū 村野宣忠, 271, 381, 435
Musō Soseki 夢窓疎石, 112, 395
Muta 木塔, 35, 73, 294
Muzhou Daoming 睦州道明 (Daozong 道
蹤), 94–95, 119, 127, 338, 402
Muzhou yulu 睦州語錄, 95, 119, 127, 402
Myōan Yōsai (Eisai) 明庵榮西, 105, 113,
333, 394
Myōshū 妙秀, 88, 114

470 | i n d e x
Myōzen 明全, 113
mysterious principle, 11, 15, 23, 27,
183–184, 206, 244, 260

Nāgārjuna (Longshu 龍樹), 177, 225, 297,
366, 378
Nakamura Hajime 中村元, 321, 435
names, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 23, 27, 30, 31, 126,
162, 163, 164, 168, 173, 174, 175, 180, 183,
197, 202, 244, 257, 260, 273, 277, 287;
empty n., 16, 19, 25, 28, 174, 202, 208,
221, 238, 254, 264; of praise-bondage, 23,
239; tabooed n., 341; unreal n., 19, 224;
worthless n., 19, 174, 222
Nan shi 南史, 172, 402
Nanben niepan jing shu 南本涅槃經疏. See
Da banniepan jing shu
Nancun chuogeng lu 南村輟耕録. See
Chuogeng lu
Nanhua 南華, 51, 65, 97, 341
Nanquan Puyuan 南泉普願, 36, 93, 95, 99,
101, 121, 127, 162, 176, 210–211, 220, 237,
248, 256–257, 260, 262, 275, 277, 296,
297–298, 313–314, 331, 371, 389, 402, 408
Nanquan Puyuan Chanshi yuyao 南泉普
願禪師語要, 260, 275, 371, 402–403
Nanquan yuan 南泉院, 297
Nanquan yuyao 南泉語要, 296, 402–403.
See also Nanquan Puyuan Chanshi yuyao
Nanshinken 南針軒, xviii
Nanyang heshang dunjiao jietuo chanmen
zhiliaoxing tanyu 南陽和上頓教解脱禪門
直了性壇語, 80, 108–109, 403, 408
Nanyang heshang wenda zazheng yi 南陽
和尙問答雜徵義, 108, 389, 403, 408
Nanyang Huizhong 南陽慧忠, 92, 97, 263
Nanyang Zhong heshang yanjiao 南陽忠和
尙言敎, 109, 403
Nanyuan Chanshi yuyao 南院禪師語要,
289, 403
Nanyuan Huiyong 南院慧顒, 78, 103, 134,
144, 150, 318–319, 340–341, 403
Nanyue Huairang 南嶽懷讓, ix, 73, 95,
100, 108, 136, 182, 287–288, 297, 331, 370,
389, 412, 414, 432
Nanyue Mingzan 南嶽明瓚, 172, 185–186,
223, 282, 292, 395

Nanyue Qiji 南嶽齊己, 100, 413
Nanyue Shitou heshang cantong qi 南嶽石
頭和尚參同契. See Cantong qi
Nanzen-ji 南禪寺, xviii, 112, 114
Nanzong Heze Chanshi wenda zacheng 南
宗荷沢禪師問答雜徴, 403
Nanzong Tianzhen 南宗天眞, 83
Nara 奈良, 90, 112
Narendrayaśas (Nalianyeshe 那連耶舍), 374
Neo-Confucian(ism), 407, 424, 429
Nichi’iki Sōdō shoso Dōgen zenji shingi
日域曹洞初祖道元禪師淸規. See Eihei
shingi
Nichiren 日蓮 school, 381, 435
Niepan jing 涅槃經, 373, 400, 402–404. See
also Nirvana Sutra
Niepan wuming lun 涅槃無名論, 427
Nihonkoku jōwa gonen nittō guhō
mokuroku 日本國承和五年入唐求法目錄,
91, 392, 404–405
nirvana, xvii, xxv, 10, 14, 16, 19, 21, 26,
51, 62, 95, 154, 159, 162, 166, 169–170,
191–192, 194, 196, 206–208, 212, 222,
234, 259, 275, 278, 280, 282, 285, 329,
340, 373, 381, 383, 385, 415, 427; Ineffable Mind of, 118
Nirvana school, 404
Nirvana Sutra, 124, 130, 159, 174, 208, 211,
221, 229, 233, 249–250, 268, 275, 282, 286,
314, 373, 403–404; Northern N. S., 130,
159, 211, 221, 275, 282; Southern N. S.,
208, 233, 286, 404. See also Niepan jing
Nishida Kitarō 西田幾多郎, vii
Nishimura Eshin 西村恵信, xiv, xxx
Nittō guhō junrei kōki 入唐求法巡禮行記,
64, 91, 404
Nittō shingu shōgyō mokuroku 入唐新求聖
敎目錄, 91, 392, 404
Niutou Farong 牛頭法融, 171, 185, 239, 287,
395, 405, 420
Niutou 牛頭 school of Chan, 96, 171, 185,
192, 239, 246, 395, 420, 429
Niutoushan chuzu Farong Chanshi xin
ming 牛頭山初祖法融禪師心銘. See Xin
ming
no-birth, 14, 196, 242, 269
no-mind, 20, 138, 173, 179–180, 227, 231,

i n d e x | 471
372, 399
nondiﬀerentiating, 9, 15, 160, 161, 204
nondiscriminating, 9, 160, 161
nonduality, 142, 196, 213, 272, 416; of enlightenment, 409; of truth, 421; of utter
stillness, 191
Nongzhuyin 弄珠吟, 258, 405. See also
Wanzhuyin
nonleakage (anāsrava), 212, 275
nonseeking, 159
non-Way, 187
Northern Nirvana Sutra, 130, 159, 211, 221,
275, 282
Northern school of Chan, 80, 107–108,
121, 172, 215, 344, 370–372, 374, 377, 387,
395–398, 405, 434
nothing to do, 8, 11–13, 17, 20, 22, 28–31,
158–159, 178–179, 185, 191, 193, 197, 210,
212, 218, 223, 238, 266, 270, 276, 281
no-thought, 158, 222, 419
nourish the sacred fetus, 172
Nowick, Walter, xv, xxii

Ōbaku-san 黃檗山, 115
objective world, 151, 161, 222, 263
objects; of cognition, 209; external o., 222;
four o. of contemplation, 373; of mind,
209; of sensory perception, 165, 229; of
the six roots, 222
ocean of emancipation, 12, 186–187
Oda Sessō 小田雪窓, xx
Ögedei, 424
Okimoto Katsumi 沖本克己, xiv, xxx
Old Yama (Yanlao 閻老), 10, 176–177
one hundred dharmas, Yogācāra doctrine
of, 366
One Mind, 90, 165, 187, 193, 204, 230, 240,
341, 407
one pure radiance, 10, 165–166
One Vehicle, 376, 407–408; Complete and
Immediate O. V., 193
one-piece gown, 41, 311–312
ordinary mind is the Way, 18, 175, 219–220
ordination; o. certiﬁcates, 108, 118; o.
platform, 90, 101
original enlightenment, 174–175
original face, 223, 307

original mind, 27, 157, 166, 262–263, 421
original name, 103, 394
original nature, 185, 211, 215, 223, 292, 337
original purity of the mind, 209
original vow, 212–213, 243
Óryadeva (Tipo 提婆), 366, 378
Ōta Tatsuo 太田辰夫, 155, 157, 178, 435
Other Power, 415
outﬂow of the kleśas (passions), 212, 225,
274
outlaws, 15, 132, 206–207
Outlaws of the marsh (Shuihu zhuan 水滸
傳), 138, 294, 411
Ouyang Xiu 歐陽脩, 394–395, 420
Oxhead school, 96, 239, 370–371, 395. See
also Niutou school

Pali Mahāparinibbāna-sutta, 403
Pali Majjhima Nikāya, 428
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā
Sutra, 186, 368, 382, 401
Pang Jushi yulu 龐居士語錄, xxi, xxiii, 133,
141, 405
Pang Yun 龐蘊 (Layman Pang 龐居士),
141, 207, 228, 255, 405
Panshan Baoji 盤山寶積, 97, 252
Paramārtha (Zhendi 眞諦), 263, 377, 385,
393, 395, 408, 426
pāramitās, 17, 28–29, 179, 210–212, 267,
270, 272, 368, 378; six p., 17, 28, 179,
202, 210–212, 267, 270, 378; ten p., 29,
211–212, 272
Pāramiti (Bancimidi 般刺蜜帝), 328, 410
parinirvāṇa, 374, 404, 429
passing-the-word game, 27, 261
passions, 20, 30, 196, 212, 231, 249, 274,
276, 282, 315; aﬄicting p., 126; deﬁling p.
(āsrava), 17, 190, 212–214, 225; deluding
p., 219, 239; p.-stream, 212; worldly p.,
229
paths of existence, 11, 23, 143, 158, 180, 231,
241, 242, 253, 428; ﬁve p. of e., 11, 180;
six p. of e., 23, 143, 158, 180, 241, 242,
253. See also gati
paths of mind, 238
Patriarch Chan, 107, 431
patriarchal school, 24, 248, 431

472 | i n d e x
patriarch-buddha, 8–9, 18, 155–156, 160,
163, 220
patriarchs, 10, 13, 15, 17, 19, 22, 23, 28, 31,
32, 38, 125, 141, 156–157, 159, 168, 174, 192,
202, 205, 212, 214–216, 220–222, 223,
236, 239, 281, 285, 301, 326, 370; barriers
of the p., 238; Chinese p., 79, 118–119,
165, 181, 367, 417; Faxiang school p., 162,
377, 381; Fuke school p., 97; Heze-school
p., 93, 108, 121, 253, 398, 425; Huayan
school p., 93, 121, 161, 204, 205, 236, 253,
374, 390, 391, 407, 425, 429; Indian p.,
118–119, 182, 205, 244, 263, 269, 340, 367,
372, 399, 417, 423, 428, 431, 432; Japanese
Tendai p., 90, 392, 404; Linji school p.,
78, 101, 134, 144, 149, 318, 411; living p.,
8, 18, 155–156, 220; Niutou school p., 171,
185, 192, 420; Northern school p., 172,
374, 387; Pure Land p., 192, 415; of the
three periods and the ten directions,
11, 180; Yogācāra p., 393, 426; Yunmen
school p., 372
Patriarch’s coming from the West, 28,
39–40, 100, 177, 258, 298, 305–306,
309–310
Pei Xiu 裴休, 67, 93–94, 246, 372, 406, 416,
429
Pelliot Collection, 248, 379, 434
Peng Jiqing 彭際清, Layman, 394
Penglai 蓬來, mythical mountain, 332
perfection of wisdom. See prājñā
pāramitā
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, 80, 106, 121,
155, 167, 186, 368, 376, 378, 382, 393, 401,
416
person of the Way, 29, 159, 270. See also
man of the Way
phantom city, 271
phoenix, golden, 48, 331–332
pilgrimage, 22, 39–40, 47, 52, 66, 72,
74–76, 79, 93, 95, 97, 99–101, 105, 111,
113, 115, 127, 145–146, 185, 194, 203, 239,
253, 286, 305, 310, 313, 319, 330, 342, 386,
404, 421
pillar, 21, 36, 234, 298; outdoor p., 234, 298
Piṇḍola (Bintoulu 賓頭盧), 184
pines, 13, 43, 48, 54–55, 120, 317, 332

Ping 平, Venerable, 48, 330–331
pit, 21, 24, 232, 247; bottomless black p.,
25, 248–250; deep p., 138–139, 276; of
the demon of lust, 176; of emancipation, 250
platform, 81; meditation p. (sitting p.), 21,
45, 231, 322; ordination p. (precept p.),
90, 101, 108, 403
Platform Sutra of the Sixth Patriarch,
xxiii, 80, 108–109, 175, 181, 195, 219, 222,
240, 285–286, 288, 399, 405, 435–436.
See also Liuzu tanjing
Po xiang lun 破相論, 420. See Guanxin
lun (Northern school text)
Potala (Lhasa), 416
powers, 63, 233, 410; dependent p., 20, 227;
magical p., 209, 227; miraculous p., 141,
416; reward p., 20, 227; six supernatural
p., 19–20, 225, 227; spirit p., 227; spiritual
p., 192, 258; supernatural p., 131, 243, 279,
280, 342, 386, 409
praise-bondage, names of, 23, 239
prājñā, 79, 163–164, 170, 175, 181–182, 212,
219, 247, 254, 258, 378, 393, 419, 427; eye
of, 209; p. dharma transmission, 108;
p.-light, 272, 406; p. wisdom, 184; root
of, 127; sea of, 164
prājñā pāramitā, 202, 213, 368, 374, 393,
430; prājñā pāramitā (perfection of
wisdom) sutras, 368, 401. See Bore jing
Prajñā-pāramitā-hṛdaya Sutra, 368
praniḍhāna. See six pāramitās
pratyekabuddha, 10, 122–123, 166, 170, 174,
181, 269, 274, 280, 376, 381, 411
precepts (vinaya), 101, 146, 169, 181, 189,
193–195, 211, 235, 240, 267, 269, 341,
377, 382, 399, 403, 410, 430; Mahayana bodhisattva p., 91, 181, 382;
Mūlasarvāstivādin p., 386
preta (hungry ghost), 144, 428
primal ignorance, 241
primal source of all the buddhas, 9,
163–164
principle, 18, 29, 72, 124, 149, 150, 186–187,
189, 203–204, 215, 218, 252, 256, 268,
341, 380, 409, 429; abstruse p., 220; of
bhūtatathatā, 162–163; cardinal p., 3, 5,

i n d e x | 473
39, 42, 119–120, 132, 135–136, 223, 306,
312, 315; complete and immediate p.
of the Lotus, 193; marvelous p., 222;
mysterious p., 11, 15, 23, 27, 183–184, 206,
244, 260; realm of, 196
Puhua 普化, 35–36, 41, 46, 52, 71–72, 97, 151,
291–296, 311–312, 325, 342
Puji 普寂, 172, 215
Pumen pin shu 普門品疏, 170, 381, 388,
405. See also Guanyin yishu
Puṇyatara (Furuoduoluo 弗若多羅), 409
Punyayaśas (Funayeshe 富那夜奢), 205
Puquan ji 瀑泉集, 317, 401
pure consciousness (arūpadhātu), 158
Pure Land, 13, 192–193, 196, 209, 386, 409,
415, 418; P. L. of Bliss, Amitābha’s, 386,
418; P. L. sutras, 386–387, 415, 418; P. L.
teachings, 91
pure light, 9, 28, 160, 264
pure mystery: Land of P. M., 16, 209; state
of p. m., 16, 206
Pūrṇa (Fulouna 富樓那), 243
Pusa dichi jing 菩薩地持經, 426
Pusa shanjie jing 菩薩善戒經, 426
Pusa zhusuo pin 菩薩住所品, 203
Putidamo nanzong ding shifei lun 菩提達
磨南宗定是非論, 109, 405
Putiliuzhi Sanzang 菩提流支三藏. See
Bodhiruci
Putong chanyuan 普通禪院, 104
Puxian 普賢, 184, 203. See also Samantabhadra
Puxian pusa xing pin 普賢菩薩行品, 286
Puxiang Jiang Gong 蒲相蔣公, 102
Puzhao 普照, 367
Puzhou 蒲州, 76, 99, 102, 332

Qian Hongshu 錢弘俶, King of Wuyue,
414, 431
Qianqing Chu’nan 千頃楚南, 94
Qifeng 齊峰, 141
Qin ji 琴集, 121
Qin shi 琴史, 121, 405
Qinglao 慶老, 370
Qingliang Chengguan 清凉澄觀, 204–205,
236, 390, 407, 429
Qingliangshan zhuan 清凉山傳. See Gu

qingliang zhuan
Qingping 清平, 145
Qingyuan lineage, 73, 99–100, 138
Qingyuan Xingsi 靑原行思, 108, 331, 414,
432
Qingzhuo Zhengcheng 淸拙正澄, 114
Qixin lun 起信論. See Dasheng qixin lun
Qizhou 蘄州, 106, 121
Qu Ruji 瞿汝稷, 428
Quanfa putixin wen 勸發菩提心文, 93, 406
Quantangwen 全唐文, xxxi, 406; cited, 94,
98, 102, 109
Quanzhou 泉州, 104, 432
Queen Mother of the West, 304
Queen of Magadha, 386
Queen Śrīmālā. See Śrīmālā, Queen

R

āhula, son of Gautama, 282
Rāhulata, 269
Rājagṛha (site of First Buddhist Council),
81, 392
rakṣasas, 286
Rankei Dōryū. See Lanxi Daolong
realm: of the asuras, 32, 284; of beasts, 25,
254; dharma r., see dharma realm; of
form, 23, 239; of formlessness, 23, 239;
of hungry ghosts, 25, 254; of the lotuswomb, 14, 196; of matter, 158; of nonduality, 196; of nonform, 239; of principle,
196; of pure form, 158; of relativity, 241;
of the skandhas, 229; of suchness, 141;
three r., see three realms; of worthless
dusts, 15, 205
Record of Linji, i, iii, vii–xv, xxii–xxx, 59,
79, 82–89, 395
Record of Pilgrimages, 42, 52, 65, 67–69,
71, 77, 86, 91, 96, 101, 133, 291, 312–313,
341–342, 359
Reischauer, Edwin, 64, 91, 99, 203, 290, 435
Renjian 仁儉, 399
renouncer of home, 12–13, 21–22, 27, 32,
188–189, 194, 198, 235, 238, 251, 261, 284,
376. See also śramaṇa
Rentian yanmu 人天眼目, xxxi, 89, 406;
cited, 144, 145, 147–150, 232, 246
renunciation: r. great, medium, and
small, 236; of the three periods, 237

474 | i n d e x
Renzong 仁宗, Emperor, 83
Rinsen-ji 臨川寺, 112
Rinzai Eshō zenji goroku shō 臨濟慧照禪師
語錄鈔. See Bannan shō
Rinzai Eshō zenji goroku soyaku 臨濟慧照
禪師語錄疏瀹, 89, 98, 136, 147, 154, 406
Rinzai roku Bannan shō 臨濟錄萬安鈔. See
Bannan shō
Rinzai roku Kassan shō 臨濟錄夾山鈔, 394
robe, 14, 26–27, 52, 54, 77, 94, 138, 162, 172,
194, 199–200, 259, 260, 270, 284, 309,
342–343; of birthlessness, 26, 259; of
bodhi, 26, 259; of brightness, 16, 209;
buddha-r., 26, 259; Confucian r., 255; of
nirvana, 26, 259; of nondiﬀerentiation, 16,
209; patriarch-r., 26, 259; purple r., 111; r.
and bowl, 107; r. of purity, 16, 26, 209, 259
rope-bottomed chair, 39, 44, 177, 306–307,
309, 318
root, 14, 25, 179, 198, 251, 252, 257; of the
dharma, 123; of the Dharma-King, 298;
of endeavor, 127; of faith, 4, 126–127;
ﬁve spiritual r., 127; of goodness, 177,
250, 282; of human consciousness, 395;
lotus r., 19, 226; of mindfulness, 127; of
prājñā, 127; of samādhi, 127; six r., 222
Ru fajie pin 入法界品, 195–196, 286, 391, 420
Ru Lengqie jing 入楞伽經, 273, 280, 398,
406. See also Lengqie jing
Rulai zhuangyan zhihui guangming ru
yiqie fojingjie jing 如來莊嚴智慧光明入一
切佛境界經, 272, 428
rules: of dharma, 204; Mahīśāsaka school
r., 417; monastic r., 62, 80, 90, 115, 268, 326–
327, 366, 370, 380, 392, 409, 427; of the
summer season, 46, 327; Theravada r., 194
Runingfu 汝寧府, 152
rūpa (form), 209
rūpadhātu (realm of pure form), 158
Ruzhou 汝州, 78, 103, 318
Ryōsen-an 龍泉庵, x–xii, xiv, xx–xxi, xxiii,
xxvii, xxix
Ryūge-in 龍華院, 115
Ryūtaku-ji 龍澤寺, xiii

ś

abda (sound), 209
śaḍ viśayā. See six dusts

ṣaḍabhijñāḥ. See six supernatural powers
Saddharma-puṇḍarīka Sutra. See Lotus
Sutra
Saddharma-smṛty-upasthāna Sutra, 428
Saichō 最澄, 90, 405
Saizen-ji 西禪寺, 114
Śākyamuni (Śākya), xxv, 4, 8, 31, 62, 81, 95,
118–119, 126–127, 131, 135, 141, 159, 158–161,
165, 182, 184, 196, 231, 240, 243, 267, 271,
279, 365, 367, 369, 372, 374, 384, 386–387,
400, 409, 414, 416, 428, 431–432. See also
Little Śākya
śāla trees, 19, 142, 223
samādhi, 17, 23, 170, 175, 179, 182, 214–215,
219, 242, 243, 247; 386–387, 396, 410;
Avalokiteśvara s., 15, 204; Chan s. of
formlessness, 182; diamond s., 169; of
the extinction of the principle, 162; of
the extinction of the signiﬁcation, 162;
of Joyful Play of the Lion, 201; of one
practice, 121; of Play, 297; requitingbirth s., 192; root of s., 127; s. power of
creating bodies through thought, 243;
Śūraṅgama s., 410; Tiantai Four Types
of S., 387
Samādhi-0cean of Contemplating Buddha, 387
Samantabhadra, 11, 15, 176, 184–185,
203–204, 246, 286, 407; essence-body
of, 407; and Mount Emei, 185, 203
Samantamukha (chapter of Lotus Sutra),
381
śamatha, 401, 420–421
saṃbhogakāya, 16, 149, 160–161, 166–167,
210, 222
saṃbhogakāya buddha, 9–10, 16, 160,
166–167, 209
Saṃghavarman (Kang Sengkai 康僧鎧), 418
samsara, 21, 110, 153, 158, 190–191, 219, 228,
231, 249, 368, 395, 411
saṃskṛta (conditioned), 212–213
samyaksaṃbodhi (perfect enlightenment), 171
Saṃyukta Āgama, 127, 365, 427
Saṃyutta Nikāya, 268, 407, 427. See also
Za ahan jing
San sheng yuanrong guanmen 三聖圓融觀

i n d e x | 475
門, 204, 407
Sanfeng 三峯, 48, 330
sangha, 30, 177, 187, 192, 275–276, 279,
282–283, 309, 384
Sanghavarman (Sengqiepoluo 僧伽婆羅),
406
Sanguo zhi 三國志, 389–390, 408
Sanlun 三論 (Three Treatise) school, ix,
297, 381, 427
Sanping Yizhong 三平義忠, 257
Sansheng Huiran 三聖慧然, 3, 51–52,
73–74, 77, 82, 84, 100–101, 117, 296, 335,
340–341, 343
Sansheng yuan 三聖院, 100
Sanyin ji 三隠集. See Hanshan shi
Sanzang fashu 三藏法數, 243, 407
sanzen 參禪, xix–xx, xxii, 88
Saptaśatikā-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra, 121
Śāriputra, 209, 217, 244, 400
śārira (holy relics), 235
Sarvabuddha-viṣayāvatāra-jñānālokālaṃkāra Sutra, 272, 406
Sarvadharmapravṛtti-nirdeśa, 127, 430
Sarvāstivāda, 194, 386, 395, 409; S. Abhidharma, 394
Sasaki, Ruth Fuller iii, v, x, xiii–xxix
Sasaki Shigetsu 佐々木指月, x, xviii. See
also Sōkei-an
satori 悟り, xvii, 256
sea, 50, 286, 291, 331, 337; of birth-anddeath, 12, 20, 188–189, 231, 261; of breath
in your belly, 26, 259; of deﬁling passions, 214; of dharma-nature, 258; great
s., 35; great s. does not detain dead bodies, 33, 286; great s. of emancipation,
187; of Prajñā, 164; of samsara, 249; of
transmigration, 181
seal, 145; of dharma, 52, 342; of sanction,
xix, 13, 52, 114, 130, 145, 194–195, 342
Second Patriarch (Huike 慧可), 28,
264–265
Second Statement, 7, 28, 145, 147–148, 151,
203, 229, 264–265
Seiwa 淸和, Emperor, 91
self-nature, 19, 25, 103, 165, 210, 213, 221,
250, 272, 285, 319, 423, 430; of all dharmas, 213; universal voidness of, 210

self-realization (svasiddhānta), 398
Sengbao zhuan 僧寶傳, xxxi, 340, 369–370,
407. See also Chanlin sengbao zhuan
Sengcan 僧粲, 106, 154, 180, 184, 265, 273,
370, 372, 398–399, 421, 428
Sengjiu 僧就, 374
Sengshi lue 僧史略, 128–129, 378, 407. See
also Dasong sengshi lue
Sengting Shouze 僧挺守賾 (Ze Zangzhu
賾藏主), 86, 111, 389
Sengyou 僧祐, 373
Sengzhao 僧肇, 118, 178, 186–187, 222, 252,
367, 369, 427, 429
sense organs, 127–130, 159, 165, 373, 394
sense-ﬁelds, 31, 276–277
sentient beings, 12–13, 27, 118, 123–124, 147,
156, 164, 174–175, 180–182, 189, 191–192,
210, 212–213, 221, 229–230, 241, 243, 263,
267, 274, 278, 280, 307, 314, 368, 376,
381–382, 404, 416, 430; and buddhanature, 124; with unlimited karmic
consciousness, 27, 263
Seven Buddhas of the Past, 370, 374, 394,
417, 428, 431–432
Seven Schools. See Five Houses and
Seven Schools
Seventh Patriarch, 108, 253, 398. See also
Shenhui
Shaku Sōen 釋宗演, xix, 96
Shaku Sōkatsu 釋宗活, x, xix–xx
Shancai Tongzi 善財童子. See Sudhana
Shandao 善道, 100, 138, 386
Shandong 山東, 64–65, 90, 92, 99, 103, 128,
341
Shangcai yulu 上蔡語錄, 109, 407
Shangtang duiji 上堂對機, 402
Shanhui Dashi 善慧大士. See Fu Dashi
Shanhui Dashi lu 善慧大士錄, 142, 385, 407
Shanshan 杉山, 176
Shanxi 山西, 93, 99, 102, 104, 112, 152, 184,
203, 386
Shao Yaofu 邵堯夫 (Shao Yong 邵雍), 302,
315
Shaolin si 少林寺, 264, 419
Shaoshi liumen 少室六門, 419–420
Shaozhou 韶州, 80–81, 97, 108–109
She dasheng lun shi 攝大乘論釋, 249, 408

476 | i n d e x
Shen Tao 沈濤, 369
Shengman jing 勝鬘經, 249, 385, 408
Sheng-yen, 420–421, 435
Shenhui tanyu 神會壇語, 81, 403, 408. See
also Nanyang heshang dunjiao jietuo
chanmen zhiliaoxing tanyu
Shenhui yulu 神會語録, 403, 408. See also
Nanyang heshang wenda zazheng yi
Shenli Chanshi yulu 神力禪師語錄, 277, 408
Shenxing 神行, 109, 366
Shenxiu 神秀, 80, 106–108, 121, 214–215,
240, 344, 372, 374, 377, 387, 395–398, 400
Shi Jingtang 石敬瑭, Emperor, 394
Shi Nai’an 施耐庵, 411
Shide 拾得, 389. See also Fenggan 豊干
and Hanshan 寒山
Shiermen lun 十二門論, 378
Shigong Huizang 石鞏慧藏, 26, 254–259
Shigong Xin 石鞏新, 336
Shiji 史記, 121, 248, 283, 389, 408, 415, 426
Shijian qigu lue 釋鑑稽古略. See Shishi
qigu lue
Shijiazhuang 石家莊, 96, 128
Shimen bianhuo lun 十門辯惑論, 161, 409
Shimen wenzi chan 石門文字禪, 94, 409
Shinchi Kakushin 心地覺心, 88, 97,
112–113, 380, 419
Shingon 眞言, 91, 113, 135, 392
Shishi qigu lue 釋氏稽古略, 95, 408–409
Shishi Shandao 石室善道 (Shishi Xingzhe
石室行者), 100, 138
Shishuang Chuyuan 石霜楚圓, 78, 85,
104–105, 110, 383
Shishuo xinyu 世說新語, 292, 409
Shisike song 十四科頌, 214, 367, 409
Shisong lü 十誦律, 274, 409
Shitou heshang caoan ge 石頭和尚草庵歌.
See Caoan ge
Shitou Xiqian 石頭希遷, 125, 141, 219, 255,
266, 298, 330, 369
Shiyimian Guanyin shenzhou jing 十一面
觀音神呪經, 307, 384, 409–410
Shizi xuemai chuan 師資血脈傳. See Lidai
fabao ji
Shōbōgenzō 正法眼藏, 113, 140, 410
Shōkun 聖薫, 380
Shouan 壽安, Princess, 70

Shoujian 守堅, 426
Shouleng’yanyan jing 首楞嚴經, 165, 373,
410, 413
Shōun-an 祥雲庵, 88, 114
Shoushan Nian Heshang yulu 首山念
和尚語錄, 134, 411. See also Shoushan
Shengnian yulu
Shoushan Shengnian 首山省念, 78, 85,
103–104, 110, 134, 371
Shoushan Shengnian yulu 首山省念語錄,
319, 411
Shoushan yulu 首山語錄, 134, 289, 411. See
also Shoushan Shengnian yulu
Shuihu zhuan 水滸傳, 138, 294, 411
Shunzhen 順貞, 384
Shuryō shingi 衆寮淸規, 380
Si jiao yi 四教義, 169, 269, 411–412, 414
Si nianchu 四念處, 222, 411–412
Sifen lü 四分律, 417
Sijia yulu 四家語錄, xxxi, 83, 87, 110, 400,
412; cited, 162, 307, 336, 366
Sikongshan Benjing 司空山本淨, 118, 218
Śikṣānanda (Shicha’nantuo 實叉難陀,
652–710), 130, 195, 374, 377, 391, 398
śīla (moral precepts), 211
Sīlabhadra 尸羅抜陀提, 371
silent-illumination meditation, 111
Sima Biao 司馬彪, 390
Sima Guang 司馬光, 414, 430
Sima Qian 司馬遷, 389, 408
Simhaṃati Bodhisattva, 213
Single Mind, 269
Sishi’er zhang jing 四十二章經, 188, 388, 412
sitting cloth, 39, 305
sitting platform, 45, 322
six daily times of worship, 29, 268–270
six dusts, 16, 208–209
six gati, 211. See also gati
six objects of cognition. See six dusts
six objects of sensory perception (guṇas),
165
six pāramitās (perfections), 17, 28, 179,
202, 210–212, 267, 270, 378
six paths of existence. See gati, paths of
existence
six sense organs (indriya, mūla), 159, 165
six supernatural powers. See powers

i n d e x | 477
sixteen contemplations for rebirth in the
Pure Land, 387
Sixth Patriarch, ix, xxiii, 80–81, 97, 107,
109, 118, 136, 138–139, 149, 154, 163, 175,
181–182, 195, 200, 214–215, 218–219,
222–223, 229, 240, 285–288, 338, 393,
398–400, 403, 405, 421–422, 428, 433,
435–436. See also Huineng
skandas, 276
skillful means. See expedient means, upāya
Snyder, Gary, xi, xv, xxi–xxii, xxix
Sōkei-an 曹谿庵, x, xiv, xviii–xxii, xxix
Song gaoseng zhuan 宋高僧傳, xxxi,
64–65, 69, 73, 78, 81, 385, 412; cited, 97,
128, 145–146, 255–256, 333, 337, 378, 383
Song Jiang 宋江, 411
Song of Enlightenment, 118, 159, 200,
217, 242, 277, 282, 413, 428. See also
Zhengdao ge
Song Qi 宋祁, 394, 420
Soothill, W. E., 271, 381, 435
Sōtō 曹洞 school, 89, 99, 114, 137, 140, 367,
369, 410
Soushen ji 搜神記, 205, 413
Southern Nirvana Sutra, 208, 233, 286,
404. See also the Da banniepan jing
(Huiyan and Huiguan text)
Southern 南 school of Chan, 80, 107–108,
215, 252, 379, 389, 403, 405, 419
Southern Song, 85, 96, 294
Soymié, M., 233, 435
śramaṇa, 127, 188–189, 257, 279
śrāvaka, 122–123, 214, 250, 274, 280, 376,
381, 411
Śrāvastī, 175, 266
Śrīmālā, Queen, 249, 385, 408
Śrīmālādevĩ-simhanāda Sutra, 408
Stirling, Isabel, xv, xxx, 435
storehouse-consciousness (ālaya-vijñāna),
263, 371, 395, 410, 426
Su Dongpo 蘇東坡, 242
Śubhākarasiṃha (Shanwuwei 善無畏), 374
Subhūti, 192, 195, 224–225, 393
subjective mind, 19, 21, 222–223, 234
suchness, 13, 141, 149, 162, 186, 192–193,
229, 249, 276, 369. See also bhūtatathatā,
tathatā, undivided reality

Sudarśana bhikku (Shanxian biqiu 善現
比丘), 209
sudden enlightenment, 80, 107, 215, 249,
377, 400, 419, 425, 431
Śuddhādhimukti, Bodhisattva, 213
Sudhana (Shancai Tongzi 善財童子), 32,
196, 209, 285–286, 391
Sui 隋 dynasty, ix, 61, 178, 315, 371–372,
394, 423
Suichutang shumu 遂初堂書目, 412
Sukhāvatī-vyūha Sutra, 418
Sun Jue 孫覺, 422–423
Sun Wukong 孫悟空 (Monkey), 421
Sunakṣātra bhikku (icchantika bhikku),
32, 282
supernatural knowledge (āśravaksayajñāna), 225
supernatural powers, 20, 35, 202, 228,
291; of the bodhisattva, 409; marvelous
activity of, 35, 291
supreme knowledge (pariniṣpanna), 398
Śūraṅgama samādhi, 410
Śūraṅgama Sutra, 165, 175, 282, 328, 338,
410, 413
Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment, 121, 170,
191, 214, 240, 245, 253, 277, 280, 287, 291,
413, 425. See also Yuanjue jing
Suvarṇa-prabhāsa Sutra, 394
Suxi 蘇溪, 292, 402
Suxi heshang muhu ge 蘇溪和尚牧護歌.
See Muhu ge
Suzong 肅宗, Emperor, 108, 263
Suzuki, Beatrice Lane, xvii
Suzuki Teitarō (D. T. Suzuki) 鈴木貞太郎,
viii, xvii–xviii, 435
sword of wisdom, 18, 219, 279–280, 302

T

aigong jiajiao 太公家教, 328, 413
Taimitsu 台密, 91. See also esoteric Buddhism
Taiping guangji 太平廣記, 98, 413
Taipingxingguo chanyuan 太平興國禪
院, 110
Taishō shinshū daizōkyō 大正新修大藏經,
xii, xxxi, 190, 198, 267, 283 367, 395, 413
Taiyuan 太原, 104, 197
Taiyuan Fu, 太原孚, Elder, 145

478 | i n d e x
Taizi yuan 太子院, 104
Taizong 太宗, Emperor, 106, 393, 412
Takakusu Junjirō 高楠順次郎, 413
tāla trees, 279
Tang gaoseng zhuan 唐高僧傳. See Xu
gaoseng zhuan
Tang shu 唐書. See Jiu Tang shu
Tanguo 曇果, 130, 429
Tanlin 曇林, 105
Tanluan 曇鸞, 192, 415
Tanqian 曇遷, 118
Tantou Dayu 灘頭大愚. See Dayu
Tanxuanji 探玄記. See Huayan jing
tanxuanji
Tanzhou 潭州, 68, 95, 97, 104–105, 138,
301, 319
Tanzhou Longyashan Dun Chanshi song
潭州龍牙山遁禪師頌, 100, 413
Tao Zongyi 陶宗儀, 372
Taoism, 63, 82, 106, 108, 130, 137, 148–149,
154, 171, 176, 209, 230, 264, 304, 332, 376,
406, 409, 412, 430
Tathāgata, 19, 126–127, 130, 141, 169,
170–171, 181, 190, 208, 214, 221, 224,
225, 276; bodily features of, 19, 224; T.
Mahābhijñājñānabhibhū, 271; T. nature,
280; womb of, 159, 249
tathāgatagarbha, 249, 338, 367, 370–371,
395, 408, 410, 430
tathatā, 127, 369. See also suchness
tea, 48–49, 185, 331, 333–334, 394; beneﬁts
of, 394
ten abodes, ten actions, ten goals, ten
stages. See ﬁfty-two stages of enlightenment, Tiantai
ten gates of meditation on universal
inclusion, 390
Ten Methods of Contemplation, Tiantai,
387, 411, 414
ten mystic gates, Huayan, 390
Ten Oxherding Pictures, 303
ten pāramitās, 29, 211–212, 272
Ten Profound Doctrines, Huayan, 149
ten stages of bodhisattva practice,
168–169, 394
Ten States of the Five Dynasty period, 63
Tendai 天台 school, Japanese, 64, 90–91,

99, 114, 169, 367, 392, 403–405. T. meditation practices, 90; T. ordination
platform, 90; T. Zasu 天台座主, 91. See
also Taimitsu; Tiantai
Tengteng 騰騰, 262, 399
Tengteng Heshang Liaoyuan ge 騰騰和尚了
元歌. See Liaoyuan ge
Tenzō kyōkun 典座敎訓, 88, 380, 414
terrapin-nosed snake, 293
thera (elder), 102
Theravada Buddhism, xvi–xvii, 235, 417
Third Patriarch, 106, 154, 180, 273, 370, 421
third seat, 49, 333–334
Third Statement, 7, 28, 148, 264–265
thirty-two auspicious bodily marks of a
buddha, 19, 224, 243, 267, 387
thought-created body, 242–243
thought-instant, thought-moment
(kṣana), 14, 156, 190, 200, 402
thousand eyes of the Great Compassionate One, 4, 128, 226
three bodies. See threefold body, trikāya
three categories of student, 25, 251
three degrees of mind (entering mind,
abiding mind, completed mind), 168
Three Essential (States), 7, 144–145,
148–150
three eyes, 209; as dharma eye, eye of
knowledge, and eye of prajñā, 209
Three Fundamentals, 54. See also Three
Essential (States)
three hells, 20, 228, 230–231
three holy ones (Mañjuśrī, Samantabhadra, and Avalokiteśvara; Vairocana
Buddha, Mañjuśrī, and Samantabhadra), 204, 407
three karmas, 18, 218
Three Kingdoms era, 60, 157
Three Mountains, 49, 332–333
three mythical mountains, 332
three realms, 8, 9, 13, 14, 16, 20, 23, 27, 90,
158–159, 163, 175, 181, 192, 197, 202, 207,
208, 228–230, 238–240, 242, 249, 253,
260, 283, 341. See also triloka
Three Statements, 134, 144–145, 148–149,
265
three strongholds, 63

i n d e x | 479
Three Sutras of the Buddhas and Ancestors, 388
three truths (emptiness, consensual existence, and the Middle Way), 411
Three Vehicles, 4, 19, 31–32, 37, 122, 222,
280–281, 283, 285–286, 299–300, 376,
380–381, 411
threefold body (three bodies), 9, 19,
160–162, 168, 210, 222, 409
threefold dependency, 9, 162, 209
Tianning Wanshou si 天寧萬壽寺, 111, 369
Tianpin miaofa lianhua jing 添品妙法蓮
華經, 381
Tiansheng guangdeng lu 天聖廣燈錄, xxxi,
64, 74, 82–84, 386, 414, 417, 431; cited,
100, 102, 110, 128, 129, 134, 144, 147, 148,
150, 153, 190, 206, 245, 257, 264, 280, 305,
306, 336, 340
Tiantai 天台 school, ix, 61–62, 114,
159, 169–169, 193, 222, 250, 269, 280,
285–286, 370, 372-373, 381, 387, 401–402,
411–412, 414, 421, 431; Ming-dynasty T.,
430; T. Four Teachings, 269, 412, 414;
T. meditation, 103, 248, 421. See also
Tendai
Tiantai si jiao yi 天台四教儀, 269, 414
Tianyi Yihuai 天衣義懷, 127
Tibet, 63
Tipodaduo pin 提婆達多品, 209, 270
Tōdai-ji 東大寺, 90, 112
tomb inscriptions. See memorial inscriptions
Tōmitsu 東密, 91
Tongjian jishi benmo 通鑑紀事本末, 70, 98,
152, 249, 414, 430
Tongmeng zhiguan 童蒙止觀. See Xiuxi
zhiguan zuochan fayao
Tongsu bian 通俗編, 118, 283, 296, 315, 415
total dharma-body as essential substance,
164
Toujia zhefumi jing 偸迦遮復彌經. See
Xiuxing daodi jing
Touzi Yiqing 投子義青, 303, 305–306, 394
Tōyō Eichō 東陽英朝, 320
transference of merit, 415
transmission of mind by mind, 62, 79
transmission verses, 77, 181–182, 205,

244–245, 367
Tri Ralpachen, Tibetan king, 400
triloka, 158, 428. See also three realms
Tripiṭaka, 17, 61, 86, 89–90, 106, 216, 285,
373, 375, 387, 407, 411, 413, 421, 426, 431
triyāna, 122, 381. See also Three Vehicles
True Dharma Eye, 51, 118, 256, 340
true insight, 8, 11–14, 31, 153, 178,, 194–195,
197, 281
true man of the Way, 28, 264. See also
man of the Way
true mind, 186, 229, 371
true nature, 156, 218, 390; of the mind,
402, 410
True Principle, 189
true student, 24, 246; of the Way, 13, 20,
194–195, 228
true vehicle, 265; “one true vehicle”
(ekayāna), 380–381
true Way, 17, 27, 215–216, 263–264
Tsuṣita Heaven, 426
turning word (turning phrase), 34,
289–290
twelve divisions of the teachings (scriptures), 4, 14, 19, 32, 37, 122–124, 169, 197,
208, 222–223, 258, 282, 299–300, 378
Twelve-faced Guanyin, 39, 306–307. See
also Guanyin
twelve-limbed buddha-discourses,
twelve-limbed buddha-teaching, 123
twenty-eighth Indian patriarch. See
Bodhidharma
Twenty-ﬁve Expedient Means of Contemplation, 414
Twenty-four Histories of China, 393–394,
420
two entrances (principle and practice), 380
two vehicles (śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas), 211

U

dāna (breath), 123, 259–260
udumbara tree, 32, 284
ultimate Way is without diﬃculty, 180
unconditioned (asaṃskṛta), 160, 212–213,
228, 366
undiﬀerentiated chaos, 304
undivided reality (bhūtatathatā), 164

480 | i n d e x
uninterruptedness of complete penetration, 274
Upāli, 392
Upamana, Gautama’s son, 282
upāya, 147, 212, 368. See also skillful means
upper hall, 133, 335

V

aidehī, Queen of Magadha, 386
vaipulya (broad), 124; V. scriptures, 208,
390
Vairocana Buddha, 13, 25, 160–161, 181, 185,
195–196, 204, 254, 286, 407; Tower of V.,
196, 286
Vaiśālī, 141, 177, 196
Vajracchedika-prajñā-pāramitā Sutra, 368,
393. See also Jingang jing
varṣa (training season), 326
Vasubandhu (Shiqin 世親 or Tianqin 天
親), 167, 225, 250, 299, 366, 371, 376, 385,
393, 395, 408, 415, 434
vedana (sensation), 268
Vidyāmātrasiddhi-tridasa śāstra, 371
vijñāna (consciousness), 165
Vijñaptimātratā siddhi, 229, 371
Vimalacitra (king of the asuras), 226
Vimalakīrti (Weimojie 維摩詰), 6, 126, 131,
141–142, 187, 196, 221, 272, 274, 292, 416
Vimalakīrti Sutra, 126, 131, 141, 187, 196,
212–213, 217, 219, 222, 231, 244, 272, 275,
285, 291–292, 314, 408, 416, 429
Vimalakīrti-nirdeśa Sutra. See Vimalakīrti
Sutra; Weimo jing
Vimoksaprajñāṛṣi (Pimuzhixian 毘目智
仙), 377
vinaya, 21, 52, 61, 66, 94–95, 97, 114, 194, 217,
235, 274, 297, 332, 341, 373, 382, 385–386,
392, 409, 411, 417, 422; four- and ﬁvepart v., 417; V. school, 114, 382
vipaśyanā, 402, 420–421
virtue, 375, 376; all-embracing meritorious v., 154; buddha-virtue of Vairocana,
407; Marvelous V., 184; meritorious v.,
163, 187; supernatural meritorious v.,
244; ten vs., 174;
vīrya (zeal and devotion), 212
Vulture Peak, 118

Wakayama 和歌山, 88, 113

Wang Changshi 王常侍, 70, 75, 117, 128
Wang Chengzong 王承宗, 97, 152
Wang Chongmin 王重民, 379
Wang Fanzhi shiji 王梵志詩集, 248, 415
Wang Jingchu 王敬初, 97
Wang Rixiu 王日休, 418
Wang Rong 王鎔, 71–72, 98–99
Wang Shaoding 王紹鼎, 70
Wang Shaoyi 王紹懿, 70, 98
Wang Sui 王隨, 371–372, 423
Wang Tingcou 王庭湊, 70
Wang Wei 王維, 108
Wang Xizhi 王羲之, 256
Wang Yinzhi 王引之, 191, 394
Wang Yuankui 王元逵, 70
Wangsheng lun zhu 往生論註, 192, 394,
415, 418
Wanji Xingmi 頑極行彌, 114
Wanling lu 宛陵錄, xxxi, 93, 372, 390, 415;
cited, 156, 179–180, 197, 199, 211, 221, 267,
273, 280
Wansong Xingxiu 萬松行秀, 112
Wanzhuyin 翫珠吟, 258, 376, 405, 416
Warring States period, 69, 96
Watson, Burton, xi, xxi–xxii, xxv, xxix,
130, 271, 284, 381
Watts, Alan, xvii, xx
Wei Gaizhu 惟蓋竺, 401
Wei Ju 韋璩, 81, 107, 109
Weifu 魏府, 75–76
Weimo jing 維摩經, 415–416. See also
Vimalakīrti-nirdeśa Sutra, Vimalakīrti
Sutra
Weimojie suoshuo jing 維摩詰所說經, 126,
416
Weishi lun 唯識論. See Cheng weishi lun
Weishi sanshi lun song 唯識三十論頌. See
Cheng weishi lun
Weizhou gu chan dade Jiang gong tabei 魏
州故禪大德奬公塔碑, 102
Weizhou 魏州, 63, 102–103
Wenshu shuo bore jing 文殊說般若經, 121
Wenxi 文喜, 146
Wenzong 文宗, Emperor, 70
Western Heaven, 49, 334–335
wheel-king. See cakravartin
whisk, 5, 34, 39, 135–136, 177, 233, 291, 305,

i n d e x | 481
327; white yak-hair w., 135
white ox, 38, 302–303
white-haired Chinese child, 7, 151
wild fox-spirits and nature-goblins, 21, 228
wisdom, 9, 21, 137, 149, 160–161, 166, 187,
212–214, 220, 227, 229, 242–243, 263, 313,
394; buddha-w., 303; four ws., 229, 376,
383; Great Intrinsic W., 254; Mañjuśrī’s
fundamental and undiﬀerentiated w.,
147; marvelous w., 169; merciful w., 303;
in mindfulness, 268; of nondiﬀerentiation, 303; perfect w., 49, 332; prājñā w.,
184; of recollection, 249; right w., 263;
surpassing w., 29; sword of w., 18, 219,
279–280, 302; transcendent w., 123, 174;
treasure of all w., 214; undiﬀerentiated
w., 147; w. born of emancipation, 154;
w.-function of Mañjuśrī, 407
wooden puppets, 7, 148
World-Honored One, 103, 127, 130, 154,
186, 224, 236, 280, 287
Wright, Arthur, 89, 436
Wright, Dale, 59, 436
Wu Cheng’en 吳承恩, 421
Wu Yuanji 吳元濟, 152
Wu 武, Emperor (of Jin), 249, 296; Empress, 106. See also Liang Wudi
Wubai dizi shouji pin 五百弟子受記品, 283
Wuban 吳坂, 329
Wubuqian lun 物不遷論, 229, 427
Wudeng huiyuan 五燈會元, xxxi, 64,
416–417; cited, 102, 146, 219, 264, 306,
313, 336
Wufen lü 五分律 (Five-part vinaya), 217,
233, 401, 417
Wufeng Puxiu 五峯普秀, 87, 89, 112
Wugou 無垢, Layman. See Zhang Jiucheng
Wujia yulu 五家語錄, 87, 98, 417, 424
Wujia zhengzong zan 五家正宗贊, xxxii,
417–418; cited, 94, 310
Wuliangshou gongyang yigui 無量壽供養
儀軌. See Fo lin niepan ji fazhu jing
Wuliangshou jing 無量壽經, 244, 384, 386,
415, 418
Wuliangshou jing youpotishe yuansheng
ji zhu 無量壽經優婆提舍願生偈註. See
Wangsheng lun zhu Wuliangshou rulai hui

Wumen guan 無門關, xxxi, 89, 113, 371,
418–419; cited, 104, 118, 238, 271, 290, 323
Wumen Huikai 無門慧開, 113, 380, 419
Wuming Huixing 無明慧性, 114
Wuxie Lingmo 五洩靈默, 330, 402
Wuxing lun 悟性論, 153, 175, 189, 239, 419
Wuxing 五性 (Five-Nature) school. See
Faxiang school
Wuzhong lu 五宗録. See Wujia yulu
Wuzhu 無住, 333, 399
Wuzhun Shifan 無凖師範, 96, 113–114
Wuzhuo 無著, 7, 145–147, 203, 408, 426
Wuzong 武宗, Emperor, 63–64, 68, 91,
93–94, 102, 332. See also suppression of
Buddhism
Wuzu Fayan 五祖法演, 110, 302, 370, 382,
419
Wuzu Fayan Chanshi yulu 五祖法演禪師
語錄, 382, 419

Xian Taiwei Zhong[shu]ling He Gong
先太尉中[書]令何公. See Lord He 何公.

See also He Hongjing
Xiang Tuo 項託, 233
Xiangtian 象田, 49, 334–335
Xiangyan si 香嚴寺, 92
Xiangyan Zhixian 香嚴智閑, 66, 92, 101
Xiangyang(xian) 襄陽(縣), 108, 333
Xiangyu Jiyin 湘雨紀蔭, 432
Xiangzhou 襄州, 49, 97, 333
Xianyu (yinyuan) jing 賢愚(因縁)經,
286–287, 419
Xianzong 憲宗, Emperor, 97, 102, 108, 152
Xianzong ji 顯宗記, 108, 379, 389, 419
Xiao 蕭, Empress, 294
Xiao zhiguan 小止觀. See Xiuxi zhiguan
zuochan fayao
Xiaoming 孝明, Emperor, 329
Xiaopin jing 小品經. See Xiaopin bore jing
Xiaopin bore boluomi jing 小品般若波羅密
經, 195, 419. See Xiaopin bore jing
Xiaopin bore jing 小品般若經, 419
Xiaoshi liumen 小室六門, 199, 365, 380,
419–420, 423
Xiaoyin Daxin 笑隠大訢, 367
Xiaozong 孝宗, Emperor, 111, 375
Xie Liangzuo 謝良佐, 109, 407

482 | i n d e x
Xie Ning 解寧, 412
Xin Huayan jing lun 新華嚴經論, 164, 204,
209, 283, 302, 420
Xin jing song 心經頌, 420
Xin ming 心銘, 171, 185, 405, 420
Xin Tang shu 新唐書, 94, 137, 249, 394, 420
Xin Wudai shi 新五代史, 395
Xing lu 行錄, 65, 101, 291. See also Record
of Pilgrimages
Xingfa zhi 刑法志, 137
Xinghua Cunjiang 興化存奬, 53, 73–78, 87,
101, 102, 149, 341, 344
Xingju 行矩, 408
Xingshan Jianhong 杏山鑑[鑒]洪, 73, 100,
138
Xingshan Weikuan 興善惟寬, 301
Xingyang Rang 興陽讓, 271
Xinjie pin 信解品, 169
Xinjing lu 心鏡錄. See Zongjing lu
Xinwang ming 心王銘, 130, 385, 420
Xinxin ming 信心銘, 180, 184, 192–193,
230, 254–255, 273, 370, 421, 428
Xisou Shaotan 希叟紹曇, 417
Xiuxi zhiguan zuochan fayao 修習止觀坐
禪法要, 248, 414, 419, 421, 432
Xiuxiang Xiaoshuo 繡像小説, 386
Xiuxing benqi jing 修行本起經, 429
Xiuxing daodi jing 修行道地經, 268, 415, 421
Xiyou ji 西遊記, 138, 421
Xizong 僖宗, Emperor, 103, 133
Xu chuandeng lu 續傳燈錄, 104, 421
Xu gaoseng zhuan 續高僧傳, xxxii, 385,
413, 422; cited, 105, 118, 125, 172, 193,
203, 338
Xu guzunsu yuyao 續古尊宿語要, xii, 388,
422
Xu Han shu 続漢書, 390
Xu qingliang zhuan 續清凉傳, 203, 386, 422
Xuancheng 宣城, 111, 297
Xuangao 玄高, 118
Xuansha Shibei 玄沙師備, 315, 321, 422
Xuansha Zongyi 玄沙宗一, 86, 422
Xuansha Zongyi Dashi guanglu 玄沙宗一
大師廣錄, 86, 385, 422
Xuanzang 玄奘, 122, 162, 201, 207, 229,
250, 285, 300, 366, 371, 376–377, 382–383,
393, 395, 408, 416, 421, 426

Xuanzong 宣宗, Emperor, 94, 96, 102, 332,
344
Xue Juzheng 薛居正, 395
Xuedou baize niangu 雪竇百則拈古, 383
Xuedou baize songgu 雪竇百則頌古, 110,
368, 383, 401, 422, 433
Xuedou Chongxian 雪竇重顯, 110, 127, 139,
146, 368, 401, 422
Xuedou heshang baize songgu 雪竇和尚百
則頌古. See Xuedou baize songgu
Xuedou Mingjue Chanshi yulu 雪竇明覺禪
師語錄. See Mingjue Chanshi yulu
Xuefeng Huikong Chanshi yulu 雪峰慧空
禪師語錄, 336, 379, 423
Xuefeng Yicun Chanshi yulu 雪峰義存禪師
語錄, 86, 423, 428
Xuefeng yulu 雪峰語錄, 293, 423. See Xuefeng Yicun Chanshi yulu
Xuefeng Zhenjue Chanshi yulu 雪峰眞覺禪
師語錄. See Xuefeng Yicun Chanshi yulu
Xuemai lun 血脈論, 90, 200, 269, 341, 410,
420, 423
Xuetang Puren 雪堂普仁, 87–89, 112
Xukai guzunsu yuyao 續開古尊宿語要, 86,
88, 422, 423
Xukan guzunsu yuyao 續刊古尊宿語, 422,
423
Xutang ji 虛堂集, 112, 395, 423
Xutang Zhiyu 虚堂智愚, 96

Y

ajñadatta, 10, 173, 175, 193, 266
yakṣas, 286
Yamada Mumon 山田無文, vii, xiii
Yamī, 177
Yampolsky, Philip B., xi–xii, xv, xxi–xxii,
xxvi, xxix, 59, 119, 222, 436
Yan 演, of Yuanjue, 55. See also Yuanjue
Zongyan
Yanagida Seizan 柳田聖山, xi, xv, xxi,
xxiii–xxvi, xxix, 59, 91, 98, 119, 131, 136,
156, 162, 171, 174, 179, 198, 199, 218, 221,
339
Yang 煬, Emperor, 315, 394
Yang Jie 楊傑, 431
Yang Yi 楊億, 383, 394
Yangjuemoluo jing 央掘魔羅經, 279, 424
Yangqi Fanghui 楊岐方會, 78, 87, 104–105

i n d e x | 483
Yangqi 楊岐 school of Linji Chan, 78, 105,
110
Yangshan Huiji 仰山慧寂, 34, 43–47, 51–52,
71, 75, 96–98, 101, 136–138, 146, 223,
266, 290–291, 317–320, 322–326, 328,
338–339, 342, 424
Yangshan Huiji Chanshi yulu 仰山慧寂禪
師語錄, 98, 424, 426
Yanguan Qian 鹽官齊安, 93, 310
Yangzhou 揚州, 90, 392, 404
Yanlao 閻老, Yanmo 閻魔. See Old Yama
Yanshou 延壽, 130, 197, 431
Yantou 巖頭, 326–327
Yanxi Guangwen 偃溪廣聞, 320
Yanyi 延一, 146, 203, 386
Yanyi chao 演義鈔. See Dafangguang fo
huayan jing suishu yanyi chao
Yanzhao of Baoshou. See Baoshou Yanzhao
Yao Xing 姚興, King, 367
Yaoshan Weiyan 藥山惟儼, 207, 241, 261,
313–314, 337
Yasogupta (Yeshe Jueduo 耶舍崛多), 307,
410
Yechengjiu lun 業成就論, 377
Yellow River, 63–65, 74–76, 78, 128, 152,
424
Yexian Guixing 葉縣歸省, 303
Yichuan xiansheng yu 伊川先生語, 109,
424
Yihai baimen 義海百門. See Huayan jing
yihai baimen, 161, 205, 391, 424
Yiji 義寂, 377
Yijing 義淨, 194, 384, 385, 393–394, 401
Yilin zhang. See Dasheng fayuan yilin
zhang
Yingzhou 瀛州, mythical mountain, 332
Yingzong 英宗, Emperor, 430
Yinhua lu 因話錄, 316, 424
Yinyuan Longqi 隱元隆琦, 89, 114–115
Yiru 一如, 407
Yishan Liaowan 一山了萬, 114
Yishan Yining 一山一寧, 88, 114, 188
Yixing 一行, 207, 374
Yizong 懿宗, Emperor, 94, 103
Yogācāra (Weishi 唯識) school, 66, 162,
198, 299, 366, 370–371, 376–377, 381, 383,

393, 395, 407–408, 410, 426, 431; Chinese
Y., 371, 377, 381
Yogācārabhūmi śāstra, 366, 426
Yongjia Xuanjue 永嘉玄覺, 118, 159, 200,
217, 222, 242, 277, 282, 371, 428
Yongming Yanshou 永明延壽, 431
Yōsai. See Myōan Yōsai (Eisai)
Yoshizawa Katsuhiro 芳澤勝弘, xxx
Youxian ku 遊仙窟, 178, 199, 293, 424
Youzhou Yanwang 幽州燕王, 99
Youzhou 幽州, 63, 97–98, 101
Yu Di 于頔, 405
Yuan Shu 袁樞, 414
Yuanchao mishi 元朝密史, 294, 424
Yuanfeng Qingman 元豐淸滿, 110
Yuanji Juding 圓極居頂, 421
Yuanjue jing 圓覺經, 170, 374, 413, 425. See
also Sutra of Perfect Enlightenment
Yuanjue jing dashu shiyi chao 圓覺經大疏
釋義鈔, 121, 245, 253, 425
Yuanjue jing lüeshu chao 圓覺經略疏鈔,
174, 425
Yuanjue Zongyan 圓覺宗演, 83, 110, 134,
289
Yuanqu xuan 元曲選. See Yuanren baizhong qu
Yuanren baizhong qu 元人百種曲, 266, 425
Yuanwu Chanshi xinyao 圜悟禪師心要.
See Foguo Keqin Chanshi xinyao
Yuanwu Chanshi yulu 圜悟禪師語録. See
Yuanwu Foguo Chanshi yulu
Yuanwu Foguo Chanshi yulu 圜悟佛果禪
師語録, 384, 425
Yuanwu Keqin 圜悟克勤, 85, 110–111, 138,
146, 166, 172, 252, 367–368, 370–371, 384,
425
Yuanzhong ming 玄中銘, 370
Yuanzhou 袁州, 104
Yuanzhou Yangshan Huiji Chanshi yulu
袁州仰山慧寂禪師語錄. See Yangshan
Huiji Chanshi yulu
yuben 語本, 109, 400
Yuefu shiji 樂府詩集, 121, 426
Yufeng Yuanxin 語風圓信, 417, 424
yulu 語錄 (recorded sayings) literature,
xxiii; development of, 79–82, 109
Yun 筠, 432

484 | i n d e x
Yunju Xiaoshun 雲居曉舜, 127
Yunjushan Chang 雲居山昌, 261
Yunmen guanglu 雲門廣錄, 86, 111, 426;
cited, 131, 148, 174, 252, 289, 335, 337
Yunmen heshang guanglu 雲門和尚廣錄,426
Yunmen Kuangzhen Chanshi yulu 雲門匡
眞禪師廣錄, xxxii, 426, 433
Yunmen 雲門 school of Chan, vii, 78–79,
105, 110, 127, 148, 372, 406, 417, 422, 426,
433
Yunmen Wenyan 雲門文偃, 131, 148, 185,
252, 273, 293, 323, 335, 337, 372, 406, 417,
422, 426, 433; Three Statements of, 148
Yunwen 蘊聞, 375
Yunyan 雲嵓, 207–208
Yunyan Tansheng 雲巖曇晟, 100, 124,
313–314
Yuqie lun 瑜伽論, 66, 426
Yuqie shidi lun 瑜伽師地論, 366. See Yuqie
lun
Yuqie shidi lun lüezuan 瑜伽師地論略纂,
168–169, 426
Yura, National Teacher. See Shinchi
Kakushin

Za ahan jing 雜阿含經, 127, 268, 365, 407,
427
Zang Jinshu 臧晉叔 (Zang Maoxun 臧懋
循), 425
Zanning 贊寧, 128, 378, 412
Zengyi ahan jing 增一阿含經, 241, 243, 309,
365, 427
Zenrin shōkisen 禪林象器箋, 115, 427
Zetian Dasheng 則天大聖, Empress, 121
Zhang Bai 張伯, 97
Zhang Jiucheng 張九成, 152
Zhang Jun 張浚, 111, 425
Zhang Shangying 張商英, 203, 386
Zhang Wencheng 張文成, 424
Zhang Xiang 張相, 120, 436
Zhang Yunshen 張允伸, 101
Zhang Zhuo 張鷟, 178, 424
Zhantang Wenzhun 湛堂文準, 111
Zhao 趙, 96, 98; man of, 69–70
Zhao Lin 趙璘, 316, 424
Zhao lun 肇論, 118, 147, 186–187, 229, 252,
369, 427

Zhao Wang 趙王, 72, 99
Zhaojue si 昭覺寺, 110
Zhaozhou Congshen 趙州從諗, 39, 69,
73, 81, 99, 101, 140, 145, 157, 162, 188, 220,
230, 233, 238, 295, 297, 303, 305–306, 322,
371, 427
Zhaozhou lu 趙州錄, 99, 145, 295, 305–306,
322, 427
Zhaozhou Zhenji Chanshi yulu 趙州眞際
禪師語録, 99, 427
Zhendingfu 眞定府, 96, 339
Zheng suwen 證俗文, 249, 427
Zheng Yu 鄭愚, 94
Zhengdao ge 證道歌, 118, 159, 413, 428
Zhengfa nianchu jing 正法念處經, 189,
211, 428
Zhengfahua jing 正法華經, 381
Zhengfayan zang 正法眼藏, xxxii, 73, 100,
111, 410, 428; cited, 153
Zhengxinsi rushanzhu qing pushuo 政信寺
如山主請普說, 324
Zhenjue Dashi yulu 眞覺大師語錄. See
Xuefeng Yicun Chanshi yulu
Zhenru yuan 眞如院, 111
Zhenyan 眞言 (Esoteric) school of Buddhism, 61, 135, 207
Zhenzhou 鎮州, v, 3, 46, 52–54, 63, 69–72,
74–76, 84, 96, 98–101, 117, 146, 233, 296,
325, 339, 342, 344
Zhenzong 眞宗, Emperor, 110
Zhichang 智常, 91, 184, 256
Zhidu lun 智度論, 378, 428. See also
Dazhidu lun
Zhigong 誌公, 172, 189, 378. See also
Baozhi
Zhihui zhuangyan jing 智慧莊嚴經, 272,
406
Zhijing 智境, 369
Zhimen Guangzuo 智門光祚, 389
Zhiqian 支謙, 416, 418
Zhishen 智詵, 399
Zhiyan 智巖, 192, 406, 422
Zhiyi 智顗, 159, 169–170, 193–194, 222,
250, 370, 373, 388, 401, 411–412, 421
Zhiyue lu 指月錄, 336, 428
Zhong ahan jing 中阿含經, 365, 428
Zhong benqi jing 中本起經, 130, 428

i n d e x | 485
Zhonghe Zhang 中和璋, 112
Zhonghua chuan xindi chanmen shizi
chengxi tu 中華傳心地禪門師資承襲圖,
246, 429
Zhonglun 中論. See Mūlamadhyamaka
śāstra
Zhongzong 中宗, Emperor, 108
Zhu Bajie 豬八戒, 421
Zhu Changwen 朱長文, 405
Zhu Falan 竺法蘭, 189, 412
Zhu Fonian 竺佛念, 369
Zhu Huayan fajie guanmen 註華嚴法界觀
門, 253, 429
Zhu Shulan 竺叔蘭, 382, 401
Zhu Weimojie jing 注維摩詰經, 222, 429
Zhu Xi 朱熹, 109, 266, 429
Zhu Xi yulu 朱熹語錄 (朱子語錄), 429
Zhu Zhangwen 朱長文, 121
Zhu Zi yulei 朱子語類, 266, 429
Zhu Zi yulu 朱子語錄, 109, 429
Zhuangzi 莊子, 130, 191, 230, 430
Zhufa wuxing jing 諸法無行經, 127, 430
Zhufang guangyu 諸方廣語, 83
Zhufang menren canwen yulu 諸方門人參
問語錄, 179, 379, 430
Zhujia 祝家, 121
Zhuozhou Kefu 涿州剋符, 150–152
Zhuozhou Zhiyi 涿州紙衣, 150
Zhuzi bianlüe 助字辨略, 302, 430
Zihu Lizong 子湖利蹤, 127
zither (qin 琴) houses, 121, 405
Zizhi tongjian 資治通鑑, 70, 98, 249, 414,
430
Zongbenyi 宗本義, 147, 427
Zongjing lu 宗鏡錄, xxxii, 81–83, 89, 420,
431; cited, 130, 153, 155, 159, 160, 164,

166, 172, 179, 197, 199, 239, 245, 262, 266,
273, 395
Zongli zhongjing mulu 綜理衆經目錄, 89,
373
Zongmen liandeng huiyao 宗門聯燈會要,
xxxii, 73, 100, 398, 417, 431–432; cited,
97, 100, 102, 153, 169, 175, 176, 198, 202,
219, 223, 238, 245, 251, 257, 263, 264, 270,
285, 306, 310, 320, 336, 342
Zongmen shigui lun 宗門十規論, 78, 394,
431
Zongmen tongyao ji 宗門統要集, 294, 336,
432
Zongmen za lu 宗門雜錄, 406
Zongshao 宗紹, 418
Zongtong biannian 宗統編年, 96, 432
Zongyong 宗永, 432
Zoroastrianism, 402
Zunsheng tuoluoni. See Foding zunsheng
tuoluoni jing
Zuochan fayao 坐禪法要, 248, 415, 419,
421, 432
Zuqing 祖慶, 375
Zürcher, E., 89–90, 436
Zutang ji 祖堂集, xxxii, 64–69, 72, 74,
77–78, 81–84, 432; cited, 66, 72, 91, 93,
97, 100, 101, 109, 119, 121, 125, 130, 131,
137, 138, 140, 143, 145, 146, 155, 166, 167,
172, 176, 177, 182, 206, 207, 214, 223, 229,
239, 245, 255, 256, 258, 261, 263, 292, 294,
295, 303, 306, 309, 312, 313, 314, 319, 321,
323, 324, 325, 326, 331, 337, 344, 395, 400
Zuting shiyuan 祖庭事苑, 84, 110, 129, 199,
218, 335, 432
Zuyong 祖詠, 375

About the Translator and Editor
Ruth Fuller Sasaki (1892–1967) combined an early interest in
Theravada Buddhism and Indian languages with the practice of yoga and
Zen. After moving to Kyoto in 1949 she devoted herself to helping Westerners interested in Zen and to producing a highly regarded series of books,
including Zen Dust (1966), The Recorded Sayings of Layman P’ang (1970), and
The Record of Lin-chi (1975).
Thomas Yūhō Kirchner is an associate researcher at the International Research Institute for Zen Buddhism at Hanazono University in
Kyoto, Japan. A graduate of Ōtani University, he spent ten years in Japanese
Rinzai Zen monasteries before taking positions at the Nanzan Institute
for Religion and Culture and, later, Hanazono University. His other books
include Entangling Vines: Zen Koans of the Shūmon Kattōshū (2004) and
Zensō ni natta Amerikajin (2006, in Japanese).

