Shobogenzo 



Eihei Dogen 


Shobogenzo 

The Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching 

A Trainees Translation of 
Great Master Dogens Spiritual Masterpiece 


Rev. Hubert Nearman, O.B.C., 
translator 







Shasta Abbey Press 

Mount Shasta, California 





First Edition—2007 
© 2007 Shasta Abbey 


This work is offered for free distribution only. 
You may print and distribute copies of this work 
as long as no changes are made to the original. 
Otherwise, all rights reserved. 

Shasta Abbey 
3724 Summit Drive 
Mt. Shasta, California 96067-9102 
(530) 926-4208 


ISBN: 978-0-930066-27-7 



Offered in memory of 
Reverend Master Jiyu-Kennett 



Acknowledgments 

Considering the scope and length of this work and the demands, both 
monastic and scholarly, that it puts on any translator, a reader may well wonder 
what could possibly motivate anyone to take on such an enormous task. Whatever 
may be the motives for other translators, mine has been quite simple. I had finished 
translating the various texts that were included in Buddhist Writings on Meditation 
and Daily Practice (Shasta Abbey Press, 1994) and asked Rev. Daizui 
MacPhillamy, my editorial consultant at the time, whether Rev. Master Jiyu- 
Kennett had anything else she wanted me to translate for her. He took my question 
to her, and, he said, he was dumbfounded when, without a moment’s pause, she 
replied “The Shobogenzo ,” for such a monumental undertaking would obviously 
take me many years to complete, not only because of its length but also because of 
its reputed obscurity and even incomprehensibility. Simply because she was my 
Master, I agreed to her request, knowing that I would never have taken on such a 
task for any other reason. It has been my monastic offering to the Sangha over 
some fourteen years. During that time I have had the great good fortune to live at 
Shasta Abbey, a traditional Buddhist monastery where the life that Dogen extolled 
is practiced. I wish to express my deep gratitude for all the assistance my fellow 
monks have given me, and in particular: 

—Rev. Master Jiyu-Kennett, Abbess of Shasta Abbey when the initial 
volume of the first eleven of Dogen’s discourses was published. (This has been 
reworked in light of the whole of the present book and is not simply a reprint.) She 
can never be thanked enough for opening the Way of the Buddha, and of Dogen, to 
an immeasurable number of people; 

—Rev. Daizui MacPhillamy, whose sharp intellect and broad experience in 
the Dharma provided me with critical editing and consultation, but who sadly died 
unexpectedly before he could work with me on the last half of the discourses; 

—Rev. Eko Little, successor to Rev. Master Jiyu-Kennett as Abbot of Shasta 
Abbey, who has given me the unflagging support, encouragement, and assistance 
needed to complete the work; 

—Rev. Oswin Hollenbeck of the Eugene Buddhist Priory for help with the 
introduction and who, together with Rev. Meiko Jones of Portland Buddhist Priory 
and Rev. Chosei Swann of Shasta Abbey, read and commented on a number of the 
discourses; 

—Rev. Fidelia Dolan who not only transformed electronic information into 
formats that could be made available to all, but also worked tirelessly as my 
editorial consultant after Rev. Daizui passed on, and helped me find ways to 



Shobogenzo: Acknowledgements 


v 


convey Dogen’s medieval Japanese and Chinese into hopefully comprehensible 
English; 

—Rev. Meian Elbert, Rev. Shiko Rom, and Rev. Veronica Snedaker, who 
brought the book to completion; 

—and to all the monastics, known and unknown, who have kept the 
Buddha’s Transmission of the living Dharma vibrant down the centuries. 

May the merit of this work benefit all beings. 



Contents 


Title Page i 

Copyright ii 

Dedication iii 

Acknowledgments iv 

Translator’s General Introduction xiv 

1. Bendowa 

A Discourse on Doing One’s Utmost in Practicing the Way 

of the Buddha 1 

2. Makahannya-haramitsu 

On the Great Wisdom That Is Beyond Discriminatory Thought 25 

3. Genjo Koan 

On the Spiritual Question as It Manifests Before Your Very Eyes 31 

4. Ikka Mydju 

On ‘The One Bright Pearl’ 36 

5. Juundd-shiki 

On Conduct Appropriate for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall 42 

6. Soku Shin Ze Butsu 

On ‘Your Very Mind Is Buddha’ 46 

7. Senjo 

On Washing Yourself Clean 53 

8. Keisei Sanshoku 

On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream, the Contour of a Mountain’ 65 

9. Shoaku Makusa 

On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever’ 78 


10. Raihai Tokuzui 

On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure for You the Very Marrow 
of the Way’ 


89 



Shobogenzo: Contents 


vii 


11. Uji 

On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While, For the Whole 


of Time is the Whole of Existence’ 106 

12. Den’e 

On the Transmission of the Kesa 119 

13. SansuiKyd 

On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 141 

14. Busso 

On the Buddhas and the Ancestors 156 

15. Shisho 

On the Record of Transmission 159 

16 . Hokke Ten Hokke 

On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma Sets the Dharma’s 

Flowering in Motion’ 172 

17. Shin Fukatoku 

On ‘The Mind Cannot Be Held Onto’ (Oral version) 188 

Translator’s Addendum to Chapter 17 193 

18 . Shin Fukatoku 

On ‘The Mind Cannot Be Grasped’ (Written version) 195 

19 . Kokyd 

On the Ancient Mirror 209 

20. Kankin 

On Reading Scriptures 230 

21. Bussho 

On Buddha Nature 244 

Translator’s Addendum to Chapter 21 279 

22. Gyobutsu Iigi 

On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 280 



Shobogenzo: Contents 


viii 


23. Bukkyo 

On What the Buddha Taught 300 

24. Jinzii 

On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 314 

25. Daigo 

On the Great Realization 327 

26. Zazen Shin 

On Wanshi’s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation’ 335 

27. Butsu Kojo Ji 

On Experiencing That Which Is Above and Beyond Buddhahood 352 

28. Immo 

On That Which Comes Like This 364 

29. Gyoji 

On Ceaseless Practice 374 

30. Kaiin Zammai 

On ‘The Meditative State That Bears the Seal of the Ocean’ 435 

31. Juki 

On Predicting Buddhahood 445 

32. Kannon 

On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 458 

Translator’s Addendum to Chapter 32 466 

33. Arakan 

On Arhats 467 

34. Hakujushi 

On the Cypress Tree 474 

35. Komyo 

On the Brightness of the Light 482 



Shobogenzo: Contents 


IX 


36. Shinjin Gakudo 

On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 491 

37. Muchii Setsumu 

On a Vision Within a Vision and a Dream Within a Dream 501 

38. Dotoku 

On Expressing What One Has Realized 510 

39. Gabyo 

On‘A Picture of a Rice Cake’ 517 

40. Zenki 

On Functioning Fully 525 

41. Sesshin Sessho 

On Expressing One’s True Nature by Expressing One’s Intent 528 

42. Darani 

On Invocations: What We Offer to the Buddhas and Ancestors 538 

43. Tsuki 

On the Moon as One’s Excellent Nature 545 

44. Huge 

On the Flowering of the Unbounded 552 

45. Kobusshin 

On What the Mind of an Old Buddha Is 565 

46. Bodaisatta Shishobo 

On the Four Exemplary Acts of a Bodhisattva 571 

47. Katto 

On The Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace 577 

48. Sangai Yuishin 

On ‘The Threefold World Is Simply Your Mind’ 585 

49. Shoho Jisso 

On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 593 



Shobogenzo: Contents 


x 


50. Bukkyo 

On Buddhist Scriptures 609 

51. Butsudd 

On the Buddha’s Way 622 

52. Mitsugo 

On the Heart-to-Heart Language of Intimacy 641 

53. Hossho 

On the True Nature of All Things 648 

54. Mujo Seppo 

On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 653 

55. Semmen 

On Washing Your Face 666 

56. Zazengi 

On the Model for Doing Meditation 681 

57. Baika 

On the Plum Blossom 683 

58. Jippo 

On the Whole Universe in All Ten Directions 696 

59. Kembutsu 

On Encountering Buddha 703 

60. Henzan 

On S eeking One ’ s Master Far and Wide 718 

61. Ganzei 

On the Eye of a Buddha 727 

62. Kajo 

On Everyday Life 734 

63. Ryiigin 

On the Roar of a Dragon 741 



Shobogenzo: Contents 


xi 


64. Shunju 

On Spring and Autumn: Warming Up and Cooling Down 746 

65. Soshi Seirai I 

On Why Our Ancestral Master Came from the West 755 

66. Udonge 

On the Udumbara Blossom 760 

67. Hotsu Mujo Shin 

On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 765 

68. Nyorai Zenshin 

On the Universal Body of the Tathagata 774 

69. Zammai-d Zammai 

On the Meditative State That Is the Lord of Meditative States 778 

70. Sanjushichihon Bodai Bumpo 

On the Thirty-Seven Methods of Training for 

Realizing Enlightenment 783 

71. Temborin 

On Turning the Wheel of the Dharma 807 

72. Jisho Zammai 

On the Meditative State of One’s True Nature 810 

73. Daishugyo 

On the Great Practice 823 

74. Menju 

On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 834 

75. Koku 

On the Unbounded 846 


76. Hatsu’u 

On a Monk’s Bowl 


851 



Shobogenzo: Contents 


xii 


77. Ango 

On the Summer Retreat 855 

78. Tashintsii 

On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 877 

79. O Saku Sendaba 

On ‘The King Requests Something from Sindh’ 889 

80. Jikuin Mon 

On Instructions for Monks in the Kitchen Hall 895 

81. Shukke 

On Leaving Home Life Behind 898 

82. Shukke Kudoku 

On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 904 

83. Jukai 

On Receiving the Precepts 930 

84. Kesa Kudoku 

On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 937 

85. Hotsu Bodai Shin 

On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 969 

86. Kuyo Shobutsu 

On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 980 

87. Kie Bupposo Ho 

On Taking Refuge in the Treasures of Buddha, 

Dharma, and Sangha 1005 

88. Jinshin Inga 

On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 1019 

89. Sanji Go 

On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 1028 



Shobogenzo: Contents 


xiii 


90. Shime 

On ‘The Four Horses’ 1044 

91. Shizen Biku 

On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 1050 

92. Ippyakuhachi Homyomon 

On the One Hundred and Eight Gates to 

What the Dharma Illumines 1072 

93. Shoji 

On Life and Death 1086 

94. Doshin 

On the Mind’s Search for Truth 1088 

95. Yui ButsuYo Butsu 

On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas’ 1091 

96. Hachi Dainingaku 

On the Eight Realizations of a Great One 1100 

Glossary 1106 

Appendix of Names 1110 

About the Translator 1118 



The Shobogenzo 
A Trainee’s Translation 

of Great Master Dogen’s Spiritual Masterpiece 
Translator’s General Introduction 

The Shobogenzo is the recognized spiritual masterpiece by the thirteenth- 
century Japanese Soto Zen Master Eihei Dogen. It is comprised of discourses that 
he gave to his disciples, in person or in writing, at various times between 1231 and 
his death twenty-two years later at age fifty-three. 1 These discourses cover a wide 
range of topics pertinent to those in monastic life though often also relevant to 
those training in lay life. He discusses matters of daily behavior and religious 
ceremonial as well as issues involving the Master-disciple relationship. He also 
explores the deeper meaning that informs the so-called Zen koan stories, which 
often puzzle readers by their seeming illogicality and contrary nature. 

I have translated the title as The Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching, though a fuller, more comprehensive rendering would be The Treasure 
House for What the Spiritual Eye of Wise Discernment Perceives from the Vantage 
Point of the True Teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha and His Heirs. The term 
‘Teaching’ in the title is synonymous with the Buddhist use of the term ‘Dharma’, 
which refers not only to what the historical Buddha taught to His disciples but also 
to the Truth that flows from the Unborn and which all things give expression to 
when they are functioning directly from their innate True Self. However, it does 
not address what may be a scholar’s particular interest in producing a translation, 
though it is obvious that translating anything from medieval Japanese and Chinese 
requires special academic training: hence the subtitle “A Trainee’s Translation of 
Great Master Dogen’s Spiritual Masterpiece”. That is, it is intended primarily for 
those who practice Zen Buddhism rather than those whose interest is purely 
academic. 

There are various ways in which Dogen’s discourses can be presented, each 
having its particular advantages. The way I have chosen is simply to divide the 
discourses into those that were completed before his death and those that were still 


f The present translation is based primarily on Kawamura Kodo’s edition of Dogen’s complete 
works Dogen Zenji Zenshu (Tokyo: Shunjusha, 1993), in consultation with the editions by 
Tamaki Koshiro, Dogen Shu (Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo, 1969), by Okubo Doshu, Kohon 
Kotei Shobogenzo (Tokyo: Chikuma Shobo, 1971), by Terada Torn and Mizunoya Oko, 
Dogen (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten, 1972), and by Masutani Fumio, Gendaigoshaku 
Shobogenzo (Tokyo: Kadokawa Shoten, 1975). 


xiv 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


xv 


in draft form when he died, ordered where possible chronologically by the date 
when the discourse was given. 

The discourses were originally written out by hand, primarily by his chief 
disciple and amanuensis, the Second Japanese Soto Zen Ancestor, Koun Ejo. Most 
of the discourses have a two-part postscript (printed in italics, usually at the end of 
a discourse). The first half indicates who the recipients of the discourse were, along 
with when and where it was presented. If this is signed, it will customarily be by 
Dogen. The second half supplies a short account of when and where the copy was 
made. These copies are most often signed by Ejo, though three were signed by 
Giun, one of Ejo’s Dharma-heirs who later became the fifth abbot of Dogen’s 
Eihei-ji Monastery. 

The majority of the discourses focus on exploring the spiritual significance 
of some topic drawn from Buddhist Scriptures or Chinese Chan (Zen) texts. 
Dogen’s commentaries on these texts are not lectures as would be understood in 
academic circles, but are talks that arise from a Zen Master’s deepest 
understanding of the spiritual meaning and relevance of his topic to Buddhist 
training and practice. They come out of Dogen’s mind of meditation and are being 
presented to his monastic and lay disciples, who are presumably listening from 
their mind of meditation. • 

The discourses carry a strong flavor of the conversational and the personal, 
and he enriches them with colorful Chinese and Zen phrases, as well as with 
medieval Chinese and Japanese colloquialisms. When translated literally, many of 
these metaphors and figures of speech may well have little meaning for English- 
speaking readers. However, by the thirteenth century they would have been a 
common way for a Buddhist Meditation Master to refer to That which is the True 
Nature of all beings. The function of these metaphors is, to some extent, to 
‘ground’ a Master’s disciples by providing them with a colorful and more easily 
remembered image instead of some more abstract, ‘intellectual’ definition. They 
point to the Great Matter for which one trains in Serene Reflection Meditation, 
which is to awaken to one’s True Nature.* 

Dogen sometimes uses a manner of speaking that closely resembles a 
dialogue. One specific instance occurs in ‘A Discourse on Doing One’s Utmost in 
Practicing the Way of the Buddhas’ ( Bendowa ), his earliest dated text in the 
Shobogenzo. The major part of this particular discourse consists of an imaginary 
dialogue between Dogen and a potential disciple. While it takes the form of 
someone asking questions and Dogen giving answers, it is not a catechism. That is, 
it is not a series of formal questions and answers. Rather, the questions arise from 
an attitude of mind which has misgivings about the efficacy and worth of the type 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


xvi 


of seated meditation that Dogen advocates. Dogen’s responses, by contrast, arise 
from a place that lies beyond the intellective, duality-based mind and are aimed at 
helping the questioner to recognize that duality and to let go of it. Hence, the 
attitude of mind of both the questioner and the Master is as important as the 
specific question being asked. For the translator, one challenge in rendering 
Dogen’s text is to convey to the reader the attitudes implied in the exchanges 
between the two. 

These interchanges between a Master and a potential or real disciple are not 
speculative in nature, but invariably have the purpose of helping disciples find that 
spiritual certainty which is the hallmark of a genuine kensho, ‘the seeing of one’s 
Original Face’, that is, the direct experiencing of one’s innate Buddha Nature. This 
is not the same as having an intellectual understanding or intuition, since the 
experience takes one beyond those functions associated with the so-called rational 
mind, which are the foundation and authority for those who are not dedicated to 
spiritual pursuits. Furthermore, the certainty arising from a kensho is not 
speculative in nature or the product of rational persuasion or a form of blind faith. 

Dogen’s teaching in the Shobogenzo is neither confined to nor limited by 
conventional mental categories, which is why practitioners of Dogen’s type of 
meditation are admonished to be willing to be disturbed by the Truth, that is, to 
have not only their intellectual preconceptions questioned but also to have their 
reliance on solely what makes conventional, worldly sense called into question. 
Despite the view of some that Dogen is therefore ‘anti-intellect’, once the spiritual 
certainty arises in those who are doing the training, the previous need to depend 
solely on the ‘boxes’ fabricated by their intellect disappears. Or as several 
Meditation Masters describe it, once we give up ‘the walls and fences’ that our 
intellect constructs from the bits and pieces of experience, this dependency 
disappears, and we metaphorically ‘drop off our body and mind’ but without 
rejecting the intellect itself or denying its natural and useful functions. 

Conventions 

In the present work, when a common word is used having spiritual 
significance, I have employed initial capitals to signal to the reader that word X is 
not intended literally but is part of a code which Zen Masters have used to convey 
spiritual meaning. Indeed, when people spiritually awaken, this is customarily 
signaled by their expressing their understanding in some unique and personal way. 
When the use of this code is ignored or overlooked by a translator, a koan story 
may well become totally unintelligible and give rise to the erroneous notion that 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


XVII 


Zen promotes the indescribable. To avoid this, I have added some footnotes 
intended to point out places where the code may not have been spotted by readers. 

An example of this may occur in a dialogue in which a Master and his 
disciple use the same words but with a totally different meaning. For example, a 
Master and his disciple are having a discussion, and the Master tests his disciple’s 
understanding of what his True Nature is by asking, “Do you get It?” with the 
disciple answering, “No, I don’t get it.” The Master’s question is a spiritual one: 
“Have you got to the heart of your spiritual question?” to which the disciple’s reply 
reveals that he is still attached to conventional, worldly ways of thinking. 

Elements of Style 

In the present translations, four stylistic elements are used whose purpose 
may not be immediately apparent: 

First is the capitalizing of words that would not usually be proper nouns, 
such as ‘Original Nature’, ‘the Self’, ‘the Truth’, ‘It’, ‘One’s Original Face’. Such 
words refer either to one’s own Buddha Nature or to That which is the spiritual 
source of one’s Buddha Nature. For instance, there is a difference between the term 
‘good friend’ which refers to a Buddhist who has the ability to teach and train 
others in Buddhism (usually synonymous with a Zen Master), and the term ‘Good 
Friend’, which is another name for one’s Buddha Nature. 

Second, a word that is underlined is to be understood as emphatic within the 
context of the particular sentence in which it occurs. Were the text to be read aloud, 
the underlined word would be given emphasis. 

Third, Dogen sometimes abruptly changes his topic within his talks. 
Whereas many of these shifts are signaled by some introductory word, such as 
‘further’ and ‘also’, which appears at the beginning of a new paragraph, in some 
instances this is not the case. Thus it has seemed advisable to aid the reader by 
inserting a plum blossom asterisk (H) between paragraphs where a sudden shift 
might otherwise prove disconcerting. 

Fourth, single quotation marks are often used in the sense of ‘so-called’, 
‘what I (or someone else) would call’, or ‘the term’ or ‘the phrase’, in addition to 
their customary use for marking a quote within a quote. 

Special Terms 

Dogen often alludes to ‘training and practice’. This consistently refers 
specifically to doing seated meditation, applying ‘the mind of meditation’ to all 
one’s daily activities, and attempting to live in accord with the Precepts of 
Mahayana Buddhism, that is, the Precepts as spelled out in Dogen’s Text for a 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


XVlll 


Precepts Master’s Giving the Mahayana Precepts (.Kydjukaimon) and The 
Scripture of Brahma s Net (Bommo Kyd). Similarly, references to ‘studying’ denote 
training under a Zen Master, and do not signify the undertaking of a scholastic 
regimen. 

To render the Japanese word tennin (or ninden) I have used the phrase 
‘ordinary people and those in lofty places’. Some translators render it as ‘gods and 
men’. There is the danger that some readers may therefore assume that it means 
‘immortals and mortals’. However, in a Buddhist context it refers to those who are 
in the celestial and human realms among the six Realms of Existence, the four 
others being those of beasts, those in a hellish state, those who are hungry ghosts, 
and those who are asuras (heaven stormers). Those in the celestial and human 
realms are potentially able to hear the name of Buddha and absorb the Dharma, 
whereas those in the other four are so preoccupied with their suffering that it is 
exceedingly difficult for them to believe that they can transcend their suffering 
long enough to hear the Teaching and thereby free themselves from their spiritual 
obsessions. 

Dogen often uses the terms Mahayana and Hinayana (translated as ‘the 
Greater Course’ and ‘the Lesser Course’). A widely voiced view is that references 
in Mahayana writings to those who follow a Lesser Course denote practitioners of 
the Theravadan Buddhist tradition. The Theravadan tradition, however, was not 
active in medieval Japan during Dogen’s lifetime. Also, the Pali Canon upon which 
the Theravadan tradition is grounded was known to Dogen through Chinese 
translations and was held in great esteem by him. Allusions in Dogen’s writings to 
‘those who follow the Lesser Course’ are clearly to persons whom trainees may 
well encounter in their daily life. Thus it is likely that he is referring to shravakas 
(those who merely seek to gain an intellectual understanding of Buddhism) or to 
pratyekabuddhas (those who undertake some aspects of Buddhist practice but only 
for their own personal benefit). 

The Issue of Gender and Sex 

This issue is sometimes raised in regard to translating medieval Chinese and 
Japanese texts into English. It involves the attitude of Buddhism in general, and 
Dogen in particular, toward women in spiritual life. While it is true that in some 
cultures during some periods negative social attitudes toward women have 
unfortunately colored the practice of Buddhism, Dogen’s view is unequivocal: 
males and females are spiritual and monastic equals, for enlightenment knows no 
such distinction as sex. The English language, however, has not yet developed a 
universally accepted way to express what is gender neutral. When Dogen refers to 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


xix 


monks or laity in general or as ‘someone who’, it should be understood that he is 
including both males and females, even though the English pronominal reference 
is, for brevity’s sake, ‘he’, ‘him’, or ‘his’: I have used ‘she’, ‘her’, and ‘hers’ only 
where the sex of the person is known to be female. 

Appendices 

Two appendices have been added to the book. The first is a listing of the 
Japanese names of the major figures in the various koan stories along with their 
Chinese equivalents. The second is a glossary of words and idiomatic phrases, such 
as hossu and koan, which need some explanation because they do not have an easy 
equivalent in English. 


On Koan Stories 

Dogen makes wide use of stories from Zen koan collections. Since these 
stories may strike some readers as strange or incomprehensible, the following 
observations may prove helpful. 

Originally, the term ‘koan’ meant ‘a public case’, and in Chinese Zen 
referred to a notable, authenticated instance when a disciple came to realize his or 
her True Nature. By Dogen’s time, the term ‘koan’ had become synonymous with 
the spiritual question which epitomizes that which keeps disciples, as well as 
anyone else, from directly experiencing what their Original Nature is. It is the 
spiritual doubt that keeps someone ‘looking down’. The koan stories, then, are 
usually accounts of how a particular trainee’s doubt was resolved. 

In these stories, the spiritual problem of a trainee often involves a habitual 
acting counter to at least one of the ten major Mahayana Buddhist Precepts on 
either a literal or a figurative level. That is, in some way the disciple will have 
persisted in taking the life from someone or something, in taking things that are not 
given, in giving in to covetous feelings, in saying that which is not so, in 
trafficking in something that intoxicates or deludes, in putting oneself up and 
others down, in insulting others, in giving in to anger or resentfulness, in being 
stingy, or in acting in a disrespectful manner toward Buddha, Dharma, or Sangha. 

When reading such dialogues, it is prudent to consider what the mental 
attitude of the questioner is and not just what is being asked. This is important 
because the question asked arises from a particular frame of mind. Determining 
who is asking the question (and sometimes where and when) will help clarify what 
this frame of mind is and, therefore, what is really being asked, since the answer 
given will not be an absolute one, independent of the questioner, but one that 
speaks to the questioner’s mental attitude and perspective. This is sometimes 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


xx 


referred to in Zen writings as ‘two arrows meeting in mid-air’, one meaning of 
which is that the questioner thinks he knows what the target, or goal, is and has 
‘shot his arrow’ of discriminatory thought at that target only to have his ‘arrow’ 
deflected by the Master’s response so that, to mix metaphors, the disciple’s ‘train 
of discriminatory thought’ is derailed. At the same time, the Master’s ‘arrow’ points 
to a way for the disciple to go in his Buddhist training. 

However, in some cases the roles are reversed: the Master asks the disciple a 
question or ‘invites’ him to respond from a perspective beyond the discriminatory 
mind. If the disciple has truly awakened, he will respond appropriately from the 
mind of meditation and not from the discriminatory mind of duality. In such an 
instance, the ‘two arrows meeting in mid-air’ is an expression for their oneness of 
mind. 

The stories may follow any of several different patterns or their combination. 
Almost all will involve at least one of the following three patterns: 

In the first, a disciple will ask the Master a question which arises from a 
reliance on dualistic thinking to comprehend his own spiritual doubt. This 
encounter with the Master will often occur in the context of a formal spiritual 
examination ceremony, but this will not always be made explicit in the text. The 
Master will then do or say something which cuts through the disciple’s confusion 
and points him directly toward ‘seeing’ his Original Nature. What the Master does 
or says arises from a source that transcends the dualistic, intellective mind: it is not 
a philosophical, doctrinal, or ‘rational’ answer to the question. If the disciple is 
‘ripe’—that is, spiritually ready to shift his perspective away from reliance on what 
his intellect is doing so that he can realize That which transcends intellect—he has 
an experience referred to by some such phrase as ‘realizing the Truth’ or 
‘awakening to his True Nature’. In some koan stories, the trigger for this 
experience may not be directly supplied by the Master but by some other external 
condition, such as seeing peach blossoms or hearing a piece of tile strike bamboo. 

In the second, a Meditation Master initiates an exchange with a disciple who 
is still in doubt, and tries through his conversation with the disciple to steer him 
toward facing up to what his spiritual problem is. In such dialogues, the Master’s 
questions may seem upon first reading to be casual ones. In koan stories, when a 
Master asks a question, he is not trying to engage the disciple in some social 
interchange: his question will have a deeper purpose or meaning, which the 
disciple may or may not pick up on. If the disciple fails to ‘get it’, the Master will 
usually persist in his questioning until either the disciple has an awakening or until 
the Master decides that the disciple is still not yet ‘ripe’ enough. 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


xxi 


In the third pattern, a Master-disciple interchange occurs, but with a disciple 
who has already awakened to the Truth. In such an instance, since what the disciple 
is saying or doing no longer arises from the mind of duality, there will be some 
clear indication of the Master’s approval. 

In those cases where the disciple is still in doubt, one useful clue as to what 
his spiritual problem is can be found in how the Master addresses the disciple. For 
instance, in one story, a monk who is given to striving too hard is addressed as 
‘Shibi the Austere Monk’. In another, a monk who has become entangled in 
erudition through his academic pursuit of studying Scriptures is addressed by his 
Master as ‘you who are a learned scholar of considerable intelligence’. 

In identifying the disciple’s spiritual problem, it is helpful to determine what 
the disciple’s attitude of mind is, and not to treat his questions or responses on a 
purely informational level. Once the disciple’s spiritual problem has been 
identified, how he responds to his Master will reflect that problem until he has an 
awakening, at which time he may compose a poem which expresses the change in 
perspective that has emerged. 

Another aspect which may be difficult for the reader to fathom immediately 
is the relevance of the Master’s actions in word or deed to what the disciple’s 
problem is. Since such actions are not ‘pre-planned’ but reflect the on-the-spot 
skillful means of the Master, it can only be said that whatever is done will arise 
from the mind of meditation, will be free of any dualistic tendency, will not break 
any of the Precepts, and will arise out of his compassion for the suffering of the 
disciple. In one famous koan story (Nansen’s cat), the roles are reversed: 
Meditation Master Nansen puts himself in a spiritually unsupportable position by 
trying to teach his monks to keep to the Precepts by seriously breaking one 
himself, and it is his chief disciple who points this out to him. 

Another topic that arises from the koan stories deals with who the 
participants are. The Master is easily identified. On the other hand, the one who 
asks a question is often referred to simply as a monk. In such cases the person is 
most likely a junior monk, one who has not yet been Transmitted and who is asking 
his question at a ceremony called shosan. This is the formal spiritual examination 
ceremony which is customarily held twice a month in Zen monasteries during 
which junior trainees ask a question that reflects their present spiritual state. 

When the monk asking a question is specifically identified, this refers to a 
senior monk, one who is already Transmitted or who will be Transmitted. These are 
monks who will ultimately function as a Master, and often as the founder of a 
temple or a lineage. Whether in the koan story they have already been Transmitted 
or are still juniors can only be determined by the nature of their question. 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


XXII 


Applying the Principles 

To see how the preceding principles apply to an actual koan story, the 
following one, taken from Dogen’s Bendowa, is given with my exegetical remarks 
in square brackets. The koan story itself is given in indented text: 

Long ago, there was a monk in Meditation Master Hogen’s 
monastic community named Gensoku, who was a subordinate under 
the Temple’s administrative director. Master Hogen asked him, 
“Director Gensoku, how long have you been in our community?” 

[Although Gensoku is not the director, he is apparently acting as though he thought 
he was, thus breaking a Precept by ‘putting himself up’. Hogen’s question is not a 
casual but a leading one, arising from his compassionate sensitivity to Gensoku’s 
spiritual suffering from pride.] 

Gensoku replied, “Why, I’ve been in the community for three 
years now.” 

[Gensoku tacitly acknowledges recognition of his importance as self-evident and 
responds in a casual manner. Had he not been absorbed in his pride, he might have 
responded, as would be expected not only from a novice but also from any 
Chinese, by some such statement as “You flatter me by addressing me by too 
exalted a title, considering that I have been training here for only three years now.” 
Had he already had a kensho, his response, though not predictable, would not be 
impolite or disrespectful in tone but, on the other hand, would probably not be a 
conventional, ‘socially correct’ one either.] 

The Master asked, “As you are still a junior monk, why have 
you never asked me about the Buddha Dharma?” 

[Hogen gently corrects Gensoku by now pointing out his actual position as a junior 
monk. He then asks another leading question, which implies that Gensoku thinks 
that he is above all other novices and does not need instruction.] 

Gensoku replied, “I will not lie to Your Reverence. Previously, when I was 
with Meditation Master Seiho, I fully reached the place of joyful ease in the 
Buddha Dharma.” 

[The delusion underlying Gensoku’s pride begins to emerge more clearly, for he 
claims to have attained a spiritual state which he has not yet reached. This is what 
Hogen had probably surmised and which had led him to engage Gensoku in this 
dialogue. Gensoku is now breaking the Precepts by saying that which is not so and 
by having sold himself the wine of delusion.] 

The Master said, “And what was said that gained you entry to 
that place?” 

[Hogen now probes directly into the heart of Gensoku’s problem.] 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


XXlll 


Gensoku said, “I once asked Seiho what the True Self of a 
novice is, and Seiho replied, ‘Here comes the Hearth God looking for 
fire.’ ” 

[The nature of the question and the response suggest that this interchange had 
occurred as part of a shosan ceremony (referred to above) held before the 
assembled monks, during which novices ask a Meditation Master a question which 
presumably reflects their current spiritual understanding. Because at this point 
Gensoku is still operating from the mind of duality, it is likely that the question 
was asked from the intellect rather than from the heart. The significance of Seiho’s 
response will be discussed later.] 

Hogen responded, “Nicely put by Seiho. But I’m afraid you 
may not have understood it.” 

[Gensoku had heard Master Seiho’s words but had not grasped their import. Hogen 
makes a complimentary remark about Seiho’s comment. Had Hogen suspected that 
Gensoku had already had a kensho, it is unlikely that he would have done this, but 
instead might have made some remark that on the surface looked as though he 
were disparaging Seiho, such as “That old rascal! Is he still going around saying 
such things?” but which Gensoku would see as being the way a Master may 
acknowledge another Master whilst avoiding judgmentalism.] 

Gensoku said, “A Hearth God is associated with fire, so I 
understand it to mean that, just as fire is being used to seek for fire, so 
the True Self is what is used to seek for the True Self.” 

[Gensoku has worked out an intellectual interpretation of Seiho’s remark, and 
therefore thinks that this type of understanding is what constitutes awakening to 
one’s True Self. Gensoku’s error is in thinking that there are two True Selves: the 
one that seeks and the one that is sought.] 

The Master said, “Just as I suspected! You have not understood. 

Were the Buddha Dharma like that, it is unlikely that It would have 
continued on, being Transmitted down to the present day.” 

[The Master now sets Gensoku straight as to where he is spiritually, in order to 
shake up his proud complacency and break through his deluded view.] 

Gensoku was so distressed at this that he left the monastery. 

While on the road, he thought to himself, “In this country the Master 
is known as a fine and learned monastic teacher and as a great 
spiritual leader and guide for five hundred monks. Since he has chided 
me for having gone wrong, he must undoubtedly have a point.” So, he 
returned to his Master, respectfully bowed in apology, and said, 

“What is the True Self of a novice?” 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


xxiv 


[Leaving the monastery when asked to confront one’s spiritual problem ‘head on’ 
is not an uncommon occurrence in koan stories. Similarly, the turning about in 
one’s heart by recognizing that it is oneself who may be wrong is a crucial moment 
in the life of a trainee. Here it marks Gensoku’s letting go of his pride, so that he 
now returns with the appropriate attitude of mind for asking his spiritual question, 
which now arises from his heart-felt need to know the truth, and without any 
preconceptions.] 

The Master replied, “Here comes the Hearth God looking for 
The Fire.” Upon hearing these words, Gensoku awoke fully to the 
Buddha Dharma. 

[What a Meditation Master says or does at a formal spiritual examination 
ceremony in response to a spiritual question is often multilayered in meaning and 
application. Since it is not intellectually contrived but arises from the Master’s 
spiritual depths, it may in some way speak not only to the questioner but also to 
others who are present.] 

[In Master Seiho’s original remark to Gensoku several layers of meaning 
were occurring simultaneously. On one level, he was inviting Gensoku to give up 
his attitude of self-importance and ‘play’ with him; hence, the form in which the 
response was given: it forms a first line for a couplet and would have been spoken 
in the equivalent of English doggerel, the translated version read to the rhythmic 
pattern of dum-dum-di-dum-dum dum-di-dum-di-dum. If Gensoku were open 
enough, he would have come up with a second line, such as ‘Burning up his false 
self upon the funeral pyre’.] 

[On another level, Master Seiho was pointing Gensoku toward his spiritual 
problem. A ‘Hearth God’ is the title given to the temple boy whose task it is to 
light the monastery lamps. Thus, Seiho was saying in effect, “You are acting like a 
temple boy, not like a monk, and are seeking for that which you already have—in 
your case, the spiritual flame of your training.”] 

[Hogen uses the same words and intonation as Seiho did, but context brings 
out a third level of meaning, which Gensoku now hears, “Here comes the one most 
innocent of heart whose practice lights the way for all of us, truly seeking That 
which is the True Light (The Fire).” Gensoku, upon hearing this, realized that this 
is what he has been truly seeking—not social position or erudition—and awoke to 
the Truth where the distinction of self and other completely drops away.] 

[In the original Chinese text, as given by Dogen, the words used by Seiho 
and Hogen are the same, but the context indicates that there has been a shift in 
meaning from how Gensoku interpreted these words when spoken by Seiho and 
what they implied to him when reiterated by Hogen. To convey that difference in 



Shobogenzo: Translator s General Introduction 


xxv 


meaning in English, the two quotes are translated in a slightly, but significantly, 
different way. In other koan stories where the same phrase is used in two different 
contexts, the translation will also attempt to convey the shift in meaning, rather 
than leave it to the reader to puzzle out from a mere repetition what that shift may 
be. While footnotes have occasionally been supplied to help readers over such 
difficult points in a koan story, the translator has not attempted to supply full 
explanations of these stories, trusting that the preceding guidelines, plus the 
footnotes, will be sufficient.] 



1 


A Discourse on Doing One’s Utmost 
in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 

(Bendowa) 

Translator’s Introduction: Bendowa, the earliest dated work in the Shobogenzo, begins with a 
long introductory section which places seated meditation (zazen) within the context of what has 
been transmitted through the ages as the practice of Buddhism, as well as giving Dogen’s reasons 
for writing the present discourse. This is followed by an imaginary dialogue between a disciple 
and Dogen as Master, which forms the core of the discourse. While this discourse superficially 
resembles a catechism in that the disciple asks questions to which Dogen supplies answers, the 
nature of the questions and the attitude of the questioner imply that more is transpiring. 
Essentially, the imaginary disciple, filled with mistrust, raises various objections to the method 
of serene reflection meditation which Dogen was engaged in introducing into Japan, and presents 
concerns that Dogen’s actual disciples were probably encountering from others or might even be 
holding in their own minds. The obvious expressions of doubt which the questions voice are 
bypassed by Dogen, who replies from the mind of meditation, and thereby keeps to the task of 
clarifying the misunderstanding that lies at the heart of the questioner’s doubt. Although Dogen’s 
writing style in this work, particularly in his introductory section, is clearly literary, he often 
intersperses this more fonnal manner of communication with conversational expressions and 
colorful figures of speech, which lend a compassionate warmth and gentle humor to his 
discussion. 


All Buddhas, without exception, confirm Their having realized the state of 
enlightenment by demonstrating Their ability to directly Transmit the wondrous 
Dharma . 1 As embodiments of the Truth, They have employed an unsurpassed, 
inconceivably marvelous method which functions effortlessly. It is simply this 
method that Buddhas impart to Buddhas, without deviation or distortion, and Their 
meditative state of delight in the Truth is its standard and measure. As They take 
pleasure wherever They go to spiritually aid others while in such a state, They treat 
this method of Theirs—namely, the practice of seated meditation—as the proper 
and most straightforward Gate for entering the Way. 

People are already abundantly endowed with the Dharma in every part of 
their being, but until they do the training, It will not emerge. And unless they 


1. A reference to the direct, Face-to-Face Transmission between Master and disciple, in 
contrast to the transmission of Dharma through lectures or Scriptural writings. 


1 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


2 


personally confirm It for themselves, there is no way for them to realize what It is. 
But when they give It out to others, It keeps filling their hands to overflowing for, 
indeed, It makes no distinction between ‘for the one’ and ‘for the many’. When 
they give voice to It, It flows forth from their mouths like a tide, limitless in Its 
breadth and depth. All Buddhas continually dwell within this state, with None 
holding onto any of Their thoughts or perceptions, regardless of whatever may 
arise, whereas the great mass of sentient beings perpetually make use of what is 
within this state, but without their being fully awake to any situation. 

As I would now explain it, diligently practicing the Way means letting all 
things be what they are in their Self-nature, as you put your essential oneness into 
operation by following the road away from discriminatory and dualistic thinking. 
When you have abandoned that type of thinking and have thus passed beyond its 
barriers, you will cease to be affected by its explanations, which, like the nodes in 
bamboo, block free passage, or by its theories, which are as convoluted as the 
knots in a piece of pine wood. 

In my own case, shortly after I gave rise to the intention to seek for the 
Dharma, I went searching everywhere throughout our country for a knowledgeable 
spiritual teacher until I chanced to meet Master Myozen of Kennin-ji Temple. The 
autumn frosts and the spring blossoms quickly passed each other for nine cycles, as 
I absorbed from him a bit about the Rinzai tradition. As chief disciple of the 
Ancestral Master Eisai, Master Myozen alone was correctly Transmitting the 
unsurpassed Dharma of the Buddha: among his Japanese contemporaries there was 
definitely no one who was his equal. I next turned towards the land of the great 
Sung dynasty to seek out spiritual teachers on both sides of the Ts’ien-f an River in 
Chekiang Province and to leam about our tradition as propounded through its Five 
Gates. 2 Ultimately I encountered Meditation Master Nyojo on Mount Tendo, and 
the Great Matter* which I had spent my life seeking to understand was resolved 
with him. 

After that, at the beginning of the Chinese Sho-ting era (1228), I returned to 
my native land with the intention of spreading the Dharma and rescuing sentient 
beings. It seemed as if I were shouldering a heavy load, so I decided to bide my 
time until I could vigorously promote the spread of ‘letting go of the 
discriminatory mind’. As a result, I drifted the while like a cloud, finding lodging 


2. An allusion to the five Chinese Zen Buddhist traditions in existence at the time. Dogen will 
identify them later in this discourse. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


3 


as a floating reed does, ready to learn from the customs and habits of those Clear- 
minded Ones of the past. 

However, it occurred to me that there might be some who, by their very 
nature, were genuinely seeking to study the Way with no regard for fame and gain, 
as they tried to treat mindfulness as their prime goal, but perhaps they were 
unfortunately being led astray by some false teacher so that the correct 
understanding of the Truth was needlessly being kept from them. As a result, they 
may have fruitlessly let themselves become stupefied with self-satisfaction, having 
been too long immersed in the realms of self-delusion. And so, I wondered how the 
true seed of spiritual wisdom could sprout and grow in them so that they would 
have the chance to realize the Truth. Though I was still such a poor monk in the 
Way, since I was now devoted to letting myself drift like a cloud and float like a 
reed, on what mountain or by what river could they seek me out? Because of my 
feelings of pity for these persons, I have undertaken here to write down what I saw 
and learned of the customs and practices in Chinese Zen monasteries, as well as to 
preserve the Transmission of what my spiritual teacher understood to be the most 
profound Purpose, and thereby to propagate the true Dharma of Buddhism. I trust 
that what follows is the genuine inner meaning of this. 

As my Master put it, the honored Great Master Shakyamuni, whilst with His 
assembly on India’s Divine Vulture Peak, imparted to Makakasho this Dharma, 
which Ancestor after Ancestor then correctly Transmitted down to the Venerable 
Bodhidharma. This Venerable One proceeded on his own to China where he 
imparted the Dharma to Great Master Eka. This was the first time that the 
Transmission of the Buddha Dharma had come to the Eastern lands. It ultimately 
reached the Sixth Chinese Ancestor, Meditation Master Daikan Eno, by being 
directly Transmitted in this manner. The genuine Dharma of the Buddha then 
flowed out through the land of the Han, Its main purpose being revealed without 
entanglement in sectarian or scholastic concerns. In time, the Sixth Ancestor had 
two spiritual followers: Nangaku Ejo and Seigen Gyoshi. Since they both had the 
Buddha seal* Transmitted to them, they were, alike, spiritual leaders for human 
and celestial beings. With the spreading out of those two branches, the Five 
Instructional Gates opened up. These are, namely, the Hogen, Igyo, Soto, Ummon, 
and Rinzai traditions. In present-day Sung China, only the Rinzai tradition is 
widespread throughout the country. Even though these five monastic families 
differ, they are still the One Seal of the Buddha Mind. 

Also, ever since the latter part of the Han dynasty (ca. 3rd century C.E.), all 
sorts of instructional books were leaving their mark in China; although they 
pervaded the whole country, which ones were preferable had not yet been 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


4 


established. After the Ancestral Master Bodhidharma came from the West, he 
immediately cut off at their roots those tangled vines of verbalized confusion and 
let the genuine, pure Buddha Dharma spread abroad. I earnestly pray that the same 
may happen in our country. 

As my Master also said, all the Buddhas, as well as all the Ancestors, have 
kept to the Buddha Dharma as Their dwelling place. One and All have not only sat 
upright in Their meditative state of delight in the Truth, but They have also put the 
Precepts into practice, and thus They have taken this combination as the precise 
and certain way for awakening to the Truth. Those in India and China who have 
experienced an awakening have likewise conformed to this approach. This is based 
on Master directly passing on to disciple, in private, this wondrous method, and the 
latter preserving its genuine inner meaning. 

When we speak of the correct Transmission in our tradition, the 
straightforward Buddha Teaching of direct Transmission is ‘the best of the best’. 
From the very moment when a disciple comes to meet face-to-face with the one 
who is to be his spiritual friend and knowing teacher, there is no need to have the 
disciple offer incense, make prostrations, chant the names of the Buddhas, do 
ascetic practices and penances, or recite Scriptures: the Master just has the disciple 
do pure meditation until he lets his body and mind drop off. 

Even though it may be merely for a moment, when someone, whilst sitting 
upright in meditation, puts the mark of the Buddha seal upon his three types of 
volitional actions—namely, those of body, speech and thought—the whole physical 
universe and everything in it becomes and is the Buddha seal; all of space, 
throughout, becomes and is enlightenment. As a result, all Buddhas, as 
embodiments of Truth, experience a compounding of Their delight in the Dharma 
of Their own Original Nature, and the awesome splendor of Their realization of the 
Way is refreshed for Them. In addition, all sentient beings everywhere throughout 
the physical universe—and in whichever of the six worlds* of existence they may 
be, including the three lower ones—are, in that instant, bright and pure in body and 
mind, as they confirm the Foundation of their great liberation and reveal their 
Original Face. At that moment, all things realize what confirmation of the Truth 
really is. Everything, all together, employs its body as a Buddha does, quickly 
leaping in one bound beyond the limits of any ‘correct’ understanding to sit erect 
like the Lord Buddha beneath His Bodhi tree. In an instant, everything turns the 
unparalleled Great Wheel of the Dharma as It opens up and gives expression to the 
profound Wisdom that is of the Ultimate, of the Uncreated. 

Moreover, these equally fully-enlightened Ones turn back to the six worlds 
of existence in order to personally travel the path of giving help in unseen ways. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


5 


Consequently, those who sit in meditation will, beyond doubt, drop off body and 
mind, and cut themselves free from their previous confused and defiling thoughts 
and opinions in order to personally realize what the innate Dharma of the Buddha 
is. That is, in each training ground of every Buddha as the embodiment of Truth, 
the work of Buddhas finds expression and is put into practice down to the smallest 
detail, as They create for others far and wide the circumstances that help them go 
beyond the notion of ‘being a Buddha’, through Their vigorous promotion of the 
Teaching that one goes on, always becoming Buddha. At this very moment, the 
lands of the earth with their trees and grasses, as well as the walls and fences with 
their tiles and stones, are all seen to be performing the work of Buddhas. As a 
consequence, all who make profitable spiritual use of whatever storms and floods 
may arise will be receiving guidance and assistance in unseen ways from the 
profound and inscrutable instructions of Buddhas, and they will give expression to 

■j 

their innate Understanding, which is ever intimate with the Truth. Because 
persons who accept and make profitable spiritual use of such floods and firestorms 
all gladly receive from the Buddhas instruction and guidance on their innate 
Understanding, those who reside with such persons and are spiritually conversant 
with them, in turn, mutually provide each other with the unbounded, endless 
virtues of Buddhas and cause the unceasing, wondrous, immeasurable Dharma of 
Buddhas to roll forth far and wide until It spreads throughout the whole universe, 
both within and without. However, these persons of whom I speak are not kept in 
the dark by being wedded to their senses, for they straightaway realize the Truth by 
not fabricating anything within the hush of their meditation. If, as ordinary people 
believe, spiritual practice and personal realization are two different sorts of things, 
then each could be seen and recognized separately from the other. Should someone 
become all involved with his sensory perceptions and intellectual understanding, 
he will not be in ‘the realm of enlightenment’ because the realm of enlightenment 
is beyond the reach of delusory, discriminatory thinking. 

Furthermore, even though, amidst the stillness of meditation, someone 
experiences—not only subjectively within heart and mind, but also objectively 
within outer conditions—an ‘entering into realization’ and a ‘going beyond 
awakening to Truth’, because he is in the realm of delight in the Truth, he does not 
disturb a single dust mote or shatter the aspect of ‘oneness with all things’. 
Simultaneously, the far-reaching works of a Buddha create a Buddha’s profound 


3. ‘Storms and floods’ refer to whatever befalls us physically, psychologically, or spiritually 
which threatens to ‘blow us over’ or overwhelm us. Yet, as Dogen comments, even these 
seemingly negative and destructive occurrences can have spiritual benefits when examined 
from the mind of meditation. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


6 


and wondrous instructions and guidance. At no time does the vegetation or the 
earth from which it springs—which are the very places that this instructional path 
reaches—cease to send forth great luminosity as they give expression to the 
profoundly subtle Dharma. Both ‘vegetation’ and ‘walls’ clearly and effectively let 
the Dharma be known in the world for the sake of all forms of sentient beings, be 
they of ordinary minds or of awakened ones. 4 All forms of sentient beings, 
awakened or not, are ever giving expression to It for the sake of ‘vegetation’ and 
‘walls’. In the realm where one’s own awakening awakens others, from the very 
moment that you are provided with personal certainty, there is no hanging onto it, 
and , once your personal certainty begins to function, you must see to it that it never 
ceases. 5 

This is why even the meditating of just one person at one time harmonizes 
with, and is at one with, all forms of being, as it tranquilly permeates all times. 
Thus, within the inexhaustible phenomenal world, across past, present, and future, 
the meditator does the unending work of instructing and guiding others in the Way 
of Buddhas. It is the same practice, in no way different for all, just as it is the same 
realization and personal certifying by all. Not only is it the practice of simply 
sitting: it is ‘striking unbounded space and hearing It reverberate’, which is Its 
continuous, wonderful voice before and after the mallet has struck the bell. But do 
not limit the matter to this! Everyone has his own Original Face, as well as his own 
training and practice to do, all of which are beyond the fathoming of human 
speculations. You must realize that even if all the Buddhas, who are as 
immeasurable as the sands of the Ganges, were to exercise Their spiritual strengths 
and attempt to gauge the meditation of a single person by means of Their 
awakened Buddha Wisdom, They would be unable to reach its boundaries, try as 
They might to fathom them. 

djb 


You have now heard just how great and vast the virtues and spiritual merits 
of this seated meditation are. However, someone who is befuddled by doubts may 


4. Here, ‘vegetation’ refers to all things (physical or non-physical) that are organic or growing, 
and ‘walls’ to all things that are inorganic or fabricated. 

5. The ‘personal certainty’ of which Dogen speaks should not be confused with any rigid and 
intractable ‘certitude’ that may arise from intellectual speculation, insistence on ‘logical 
necessity’, religious dogma, personal delusion, etc. Unlike Dogen’s personal certainty, 
which arises from direct, honest, and self-less spiritual experience, such rigid ‘certitude’ is 
the hallmark of the realm where one’s deluded thinking attempts to coerce others into 
accepting that which is deluded. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


7 


ask, “Since there are many gates into the Buddha’s Teachings, why bother to do 
just seated meditation?” 

I would point out in response, “Because it is the proper and most 
straightforward entryway into what the Buddha taught.” 

He may then ask, “Why is this the one and only proper and straightforward 
entryway?” 

I would then point out, “Undoubtedly, the Venerable Great Master 
Shakyamuni Transmitted it directly as the most excellent method for realizing the 
Way, and Those who embody the Truth in the three temporal worlds, alike, have 
realized, do realize, and will realize the Way by doing seated meditation. 
Therefore, They pass it on generation after generation as the proper and most 
straightforward gate to the Dharma. Not only that, the Indian and Chinese 
Ancestors all realized the Way by doing seated meditation, which is why I have 
now indicated it to be the proper gate for those in both human and celestial 
worlds.” 

He may then ask, “Since this depends on someone’s receiving the correct 
Transmission, or on his inquiring into the evidence left by the Ancestors, truly 
these are beyond the reach of ordinary people like me. However, reading Scriptures 
and reciting the names of the Buddhas, by themselves, can certainly be the cause 
for one’s spiritually awakening. I fail to see the point in merely sitting idly and 
doing nothing, so how can such a method be relied on for achieving a spiritual 
awakening?” 

I would point out, “That you should now regard the deep meditative state of 
all the Buddhas and the peerless Great Dharma to be a pointless ‘sitting idly and 
doing nothing’ makes you one who is slandering the Greater Course.* Your 
delusion is as profound as one who says, ‘There is no water,’ whilst he is sinking 
down in a vast sea. Thankfully, all the Buddhas are already sitting sedately in the 
meditative state that is the consummate delight in the Truth. Is this not creating 
vast spiritual merits? Alas, your Eye is not yet open and your mind is still in a 
stupor, as though you were drunk. 

“True, the realm of Buddhas is marvelous and beyond the power of the 
intellect to comprehend, to say nothing of what one who is lacking in faith and 
scant in spiritual understanding can grasp! Only the one whose readiness for 
genuine faith is great is able to easily enter the Way. He whose faith is nil, even 
though he is given teaching, finds it hard to accept. On the Divine Vulture Peak, 
there were those whom Shakyamuni said might depart if they so wished whilst He 
was giving voice to the Dharma. Broadly speaking, if genuine faith arises in your 
heart, you will need to train and practice, as well as seek out a Master to study 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


8 


with. Otherwise, this faith of yours will fade away before long and, sad to say, the 
Dharma from the past will cease to enrich you. 

“Furthermore, I am not certain whether you really know what the virtue is in 
performing such services as reciting Scriptures and chanting the names of the 
Buddhas. Merely to move your tongue about and let your voice roll forth, thinking 
that this will have the merit and virtue of the work of a Buddha, is utterly pitiful. 
Compared to a Buddha’s Dharma, it is far afield and will take you ever farther in 
the wrong direction. 

“In addition, ‘to open a Scriptural text’ means that you clarify for yourself 
what the Buddha taught as the principles for training and practice in both the 
‘sudden approach’ and the ‘gradual approach’. 6 When you do your training and 
practice as He taught, without doubt it will help you realize spiritual certainty. 
Compared with the merit of actually realizing enlightenment now, expending 
mental effort in pondering upon matters is nothing. Foolishly using your mouth to 
repeatedly chant something thousands upon thousands of times in an attempt to 
arrive at the Way of Buddhas is like believing you can reach the south by driving 
your cart northward. It is also like someone trying to put a square peg in a round 
hole. Someone who reads passages in religious works while remaining in the dark 
about the path of spiritual training is someone who would pay a visit to a doctor 
and leave behind what the doctor has prescribed. What is to be gained from that? 
Keeping sound flowing incessantly from the mouth is like the springtime day-and- 
night croaking of a frog in a rice paddy: ultimately, this too produces no benefit. 
How much more does this apply to those who are deeply committed to their 
delusions and go wandering off after fame and gain. Such things are difficult to 
abandon since the inclination of such persons towards success and greed goes deep 
indeed! Since people of this sort existed in the past, it is certainly likely that they 
exist in the world today, so very sad to say! 

“What you must grasp is that when a trainee who has committed both heart 
and mind to personally confirming the Truth is in accord with a Master in our 
tradition—that is, with one who has realized the Way and is clear-minded—on how 
to practice, and has received Transmission of the wonderful Dharma of the Seven 
Buddhas,* the true meaning and purpose of this Dharma comes forth and will be 
preserved. This is beyond what Scriptural scholars who study only the words know 


6. The sudden and gradual ‘approaches’ are not the same as sudden versus gradual 
enlightenment. The ‘sudden approach’ is the awakening to Truth through the practice of 
serene reflection meditation, which is the letting go of everything and sitting in pure faith 
and trust in the Eternal. With the ‘gradual approach’, the trainee works to cleanse his karma 
and clarify matters by application of the Precepts to all his actions. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


9 


about. So, quit your doubts and delusions, and do your utmost to practice the Way 
by doing seated meditation in accordance with a genuine Master’s instructions, so 
that you may realize for yourself the meditative state of all the Buddhas, which is 
Their delight in the Truth.” 

He may then ask, “Both the Tendai tradition, which is based on the Lotus 
Scripture, and the Kegon tradition, which is based on the Avatamsaka Scripture, as 
they have been transmitted to our country, are considered to be the fundamental 
traditions in Mahay an a 5 " Buddhism, to say nothing of traditions such as that of 
Shingon, which was personally transmitted to Kongosatta by the Tathagata 
Vairochana* and has been passed generation after generation from Master to 
disciple in an orderly manner. The main thrust of what these traditions talk about is 
that ‘Our very mind is Buddha’ and that ‘This mind of ours creates Buddhahood’, 
and they set forth the correct perception of the Five Dhyani Buddhas, 7 which is 
realized in a single sitting without spending many eons in training. Surely, these 
should be considered the most sublime of the Buddha’s Teachings. So, what is so 
superior about the training and practice which you are going on about, that you 
disregard those Teachings in pursuit of your own method alone?” 

I would point out, “You should understand that within the Buddha’s family 
there is no arguing over ‘superior’ or ‘inferior’ Teachings, and no singling out of 
some Dharma as being more shallow or profound. You should simply try to 
recognize the genuine from the false in training and practice. Some, attracted by a 
natural setting of mountains and water with its plants and flowers, have flowed 
from there into the Way of Buddhas. Others, whilst gathering up in their hands the 
soil with its sand and pebbles, have preserved the Buddha seal. How much more 
are the myriad images which fill the universe surpassed by the far-reaching words 
of a Buddha—which are all the more rich!— and the turning of the Great Wheel of 
the Dharma is contained within each single dust mote. This is why a phrase like 
‘Your very mind is Buddha Itself’ is as the moon within water, and why the import 
of ‘Sitting in meditation is itself becoming Buddha’ is as a reflection in a mirror. 
Do not get tangled up or taken in by a clever use of words. In order that you may 
now push on in your training to realize enlightenment in an instant, I show you the 
marvelous path which the Buddhas and Ancestors have directly Transmitted, and I 
do this that you may become a genuine follower of the Way. 


7. The ‘Five Dhyani Buddhas’ are the five Great Buddhas of Wisdom, each of whom 
represents a particular aspect of the Cosmic Buddha. These Buddhas are: Vairochana, the 
Eternal Buddha; Akshobya, the Immovable Buddha; Ratnasambhava, the Jewel-Born 
Buddha; Amitabha, the Buddha of Immeasurable Light; and Amoghasiddhi, the Fearless 
Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


10 


“Furthermore, the Transmitting of the Buddha Dharma must be done by a 
Master of our tradition whose personal awakening has been certified. Scholars who 
go about counting up words are not adequate to serve as teachers and guides: they 
would be like the blind trying to lead the blind. All who are now within our 
tradition’s Gate, where the proper Transmission of the Buddhas and Ancestors is 
done, esteem and revere the expert guide whose realization of the Way has been 
attested to, and place their trust in him as an upholder of the Buddha Dharma. 
Because of this, when non-human beings—both visible and invisible—come to 
him to take refuge, or when arhats,* though already enjoying the fruits of realizing 
enlightenment, come to ask him about the Dharma, this Master never fails to give 
them a helping hand in clarifying what lies at the bottom of their hearts. As this is 
something unheard of in the gateways offered by other religions, disciples of the 
Buddha should just study the Buddha Dharma. 

“Also, you should keep in mind that even though, from the first, we are in no 
way lacking in unsurpassed enlightenment and ever have it available to us for our 
delight and use, we cannot believe this, and so we become habituated to needlessly 
giving rise to discriminatory thoughts and personal opinions, chasing after these as 
if they were something real and, stumbling, we sadly fall off the Great Path. By our 
relying on these thoughts and opinions, many and varied are the illusory ‘flowers 
in the sky’ that we create. Do not immerse yourself in or get stuck on pondering 
over the twelvefold stages of Dependent Origination or the twenty-five types of 
existence within the worlds of desire, form, and beyond form, or speculating on the 
Three Vehicles or the Five Vehicles, or on whether Buddha has existence or not. By 
following thoughts and opinions like these, you will be unable to consider the 
correct pathway for training in and practicing the Buddha Dharma. Even so, when, 
at this very moment, in compliance with the Buddha seal, you let go of everything 
and earnestly sit in meditation, you will go beyond the boundaries set by any 
concern that you may have had over being deluded or enlightened. Uninvolved 
with whether the path is mundane or sanctified, you will at once be strolling about 
in realms beyond ordinary thinking, as you delight in the Great Enlightenment. 
How can those who are caught in the nets and snares of words possibly be equal to 
such a one as this?” 

He may then ask, “Among the three traditional ways of spiritual learning, 
there is the study of meditative concentration, and among the six bodhisattvic 
practices, there is the perfecting of meditation. Because both of these have been 
studied by all bodhisattvas* from the moment their hearts first opened to a desire to 
realize enlightenment, they have been part of training and practice for everyone, 
bright or dull, without exception. This seated meditation that you are now talking 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


11 


about can possibly be included as one form of them, but what leads you to contend 
that all the genuine Teachings of the Tathagata are brought together within it?” 

I would point out, “This question of yours has come about because this 
peerless Great Teaching of the Tathagata, which is the Treasure House of the Eye 
of the True Teaching on the One Great Matter for which we train, has been given 

o 

the name of ‘the Zen School’. However, you must realize that this name first arose 
in China and then spread eastwards; it was unknown in India. It began while Great 
Master Bodhidharma was spending nine years ‘facing the wall’ at Shorin-ji Temple 
on Mount Suzan. Neither monks nor laity had yet learned of the Buddha’s True 
Dharma, so they called him the Brahman who makes seated meditation (zazen) his 
main focus. Later, all his descendants over the generations continually devoted 
themselves to seated meditation. Lay people, baffled when they saw this, did not 
understand what was actually going on, and spoke of it in general as ‘the Zazen 
(Seated Meditation) School’. Nowadays, the za is dropped, and it is referred to 
simply as ‘the Zen School’. But its heart and spirit is made clear through the vast 
sayings of the Ancestors. It is not something to be compared or grouped with the 
contemplative concentration or the meditation alluded to in the Six Bodhisattva 
Practices or the Three Ways of Learning. 

“That this Buddha Dharma has been authentically Transmitted from Master 
to disciple has not been a secret to any generation. Long ago, at the assembly on 
the Divine Vulture Peak, it was only to the Venerable Makakasho that the Tathagata 
entrusted this Dharma—which is the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching and the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana—as His peerless Great Teaching. As 
this ceremony was personally witnessed by the host of celestial beings who are at 
present residing in heavenly worlds, it is not something that one need mistrust. 
Since Buddha Dharma, in general, is something that the host of celestial beings 
ever and ever looks after and protects, the merit of their actions has still not died 
away. Beyond doubt, you should recognize that this practice is the complete and 
whole Way of the Buddha Dharma: there is nothing to compare it to.” 


8. Zenshu, rendered here as ‘the Zen School’, has a significance in Dogen’s text that is not 
apparent in translation. Rendering shu as ‘school’ may be somewhat misleading if it 
suggests to the reader something academic or philosophical. On the other hand, to use the 
tenn ‘sect’ might invite associations with Christian sectarianism. In some other places, I 
have used the word ‘tradition’ in order to avoid either misunderstanding. However, Dogen 
specifically reveals a few sentences further along that he understands the word to be 
synonymous with mune, ‘the main point or focus’; that is, zenshu refers to those who make 
zen (meditation) the focus of their training, just as those of the Kegonshu make the Kegon 
Sutra (Avatamsaka Scripture) the focus of their training. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


12 


He may then ask, “Of the four manners of bodily carriage in the Buddha’s 
family—namely, standing, walking, sitting, and reclining—why is it that you lay 
the full burden of practice merely on sitting, and talk of attaining certainty and 
entering Buddhahood by promoting meditative contemplation?” 

I would point out, “The ways in which all the Buddhas from the ages past, 
one after the other, trained and practiced, and by which They arrived at certainty 
and entered Buddhahood, are impossible to know in full detail. If you are asking 
what the authority for this is, you should understand that what Those in the family 
of Buddhas made use of is the authority. You need not seek for an authority beyond 
this. To put it simply, in praise of the practice, Ancestors and Masters have said that 
seated meditation is the gateway to ease and joy. From this we can surmise that, 
among the four manners of bodily carriage, it is the easiest and most joyful. And 
even further, it has not been the way of practice for just one or two Buddhas: this 
has been the way for all Buddhas and all Ancestors.” 

He may then ask, “Granted that someone who has not yet clearly understood 
what Buddha Dharma is may possibly secure certainty by diligently doing seated 
meditation. But what about those who are already clear as to what the Buddha’s 
True Teaching is? What could they possibly expect from doing seated meditation?” 

I would point out, “Since it is said that we should not discuss our dreams in 
front of those who are befuddled, or uselessly put oars into the hands of a 
woodcutter, 9 I am disinclined to answer your question directly. Still there is some 
teaching that I can give you. 

“Now then, to think that practice and realization are separate from each other 
is a non-Buddhist view, or a misunderstanding of the Way. In Buddhism, practice 
and realization are completely one and the same. Because it is a practice based on 
being spiritually awake at this very moment, the diligent training which springs 
forth from our initial resolve to seek the Way is, in itself, the whole of one’s innate 
certainty. For this reason, we teach that you should not hold in mind any 


9. Dogen’s first analogy derives from the Chinese saying, “Do not share your dreams with a 
fool,” but has been modified to refer here to discussing experiences which are as yet beyond 
the questioner’s present level of direct understanding. The second analogy makes this more 
explicit: one does not discuss such matters because it is like giving tools to someone who 
cannot make use of them. Further, a ‘woodcutter’ is a Zen tenn applied to a monk who has 
not yet had a kensho (that is, the experiencing of his own Buddha Nature) and is still 
working on cutting his karmic tendencies off at the roots, whereas ‘oars’ is an allusion to the 
tools needed by one who has awakened to his True Nature to help him ferry others to the 
Other Shore. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


13 


expectation of being enlightened as something outside of, or apart from, practice, 
since this practice directly points you towards your own original, innate certainty. 

“Since this certainty is a spiritually awakened one that already exists within 
the practice, your certainty will know no limits: since the practice already exists 
within spiritually awakened certainty, your practice will know no beginning. This 
is why the Tathagata Shakyamuni and the Venerable Makakasho were both 
governed by Their practice, which was based on being spiritually awake. Great 
Master Bodhidharma and the exalted Ancestor Daikan Eno, likewise, were ‘hauled 
and tumbled about’ by their practice based on being spiritually awake. Such are the 
signs of one who resides in, and keeps to, the Buddha Dharma. 

“A practice that is not separate from being spiritually awake already exists. It 
is our good fortune to have had this wondrous practice Transmitted to us 
individually, and to diligently pursue it with the attitude of mind which first 
awakened in us the desire to seek the Truth is, in itself, to arrive at that original, 
spiritually awakened state which is our innate, ‘uncreated’ Foundation. Be aware 
that the Buddhas and Ancestors repeatedly taught that we must not be slack in our 
training and practice, so that we do not stain or tarnish our innate enlightenment, 
which is inseparable from our practice. If you let go of any thought of ‘I am doing 
a marvelous practice,’ your innate enlightenment will fill your hands to 
overflowing. If you purge yourself of any thought of ‘being enlightened’, this 
wondrous practice will operate throughout your whole being. 

“Further, when I was in the land of the great Sung dynasty, what I saw with 
my own eyes, in all the Zen monasteries everywhere, was a Meditation Hall with 
anywhere from five or six hundred to one or two thousand monks peacefully 
continuing to do seated meditation day and night. When I asked those Masters of 
our tradition—namely, those who had had the Buddha Mind seal Transmitted to 
them and were serving as Abbots of these monasteries—what Buddhism is in sum 
and substance, I was instructed that it was the principle that ‘Training and being 
spiritually awake are not two separate things.’ Therefore, not only for the sake of 
those trainees within the gates of our temple, but also for those who, distinguished 
by their seeking for the Dharma, yearn for the Truth within the Buddha’s 
Teachings, I have followed the path of the skillful teachers of our tradition. And in 
accordance with what these Buddhas and Ancestors have taught, I have put forth 
that one must diligently practice the Way by doing seated meditation. I have done 
so without distinguishing between those with the attitudes of a novice or of a 
senior, and without concerning myself with whether those being instructed are 
ordinary people or saintly ones. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


14 


“Surely you have heard what Masters have said: ‘It is not that practice and 
enlightenment do not exist. It is just that they cannot be taken hold of and defiled,’ 
and ‘The one who clearly sees what the Way is, is the one who practices the Way.’ 
Understand that you must do your training and practice amidst the realizing of the 
Way.” 

He may then ask, “What about those Japanese teachers of earlier generations 
who spread Scriptural teachings throughout our country? At the time when they 
crossed over to China during the T’ang dynasty and brought the Dharma back with 
them, why did they ignore this principle of seated meditation and just pass on 
Scriptural teachings?” 

I would point out, “The reason why those human teachers of the past did not 
pass on this Teaching was that the time was not yet ripe for It.” 

He may then ask, “Did the teachers of those earlier times understand this 
Dharma?” 

I would point out, “Had they understood It, they would have communicated 
It.” 

He may then respond, “There are some who say: 

Do not grieve over birth and death, since there is an extremely 
quick method for freeing yourself from them, namely, by 
understanding the principle that it is the innate nature of one’s mind to 
be ever-abiding, to persist without change. This means that, because 
this physical body has been bom, it will inevitably come to perish, but 
even so, this innate nature of the mind will never perish. When 
someone fully comprehends that the innate nature of his mind—which 
is never swept away by birth and death—is in his body, he sees it to be 
his tme and genuine nature. Thus, his body is but a temporary form, 
being bom here and dying there, ever subject to change, whilst his 
mind is ever-abiding, so there is no reason to expect it to vary over 
past, present, and future. To understand the matter in this way is what 
is meant by being free from birth and death. For the one who 
understands this principle, his future births and deaths will come to an 
end, so that when his body expires, he will enter the ocean of real 
existence. When he flows into this ocean of being, he will 
undoubtedly possess wonderful virtues, just as all the Buddhas and 
Tathagatas have done. Even though he may realize this in his present 
life, he will not be exactly the same as those Holy Ones, since he has a 
bodily existence which was brought about through deluded actions in 
past lives. The person who does not yet understand this principle will 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


15 


be ever spun about through successive births and deaths. Therefore, 
we should just make haste and fully comprehend the principle of the 
innate nature of the mind being ever-abiding and persisting without 
change. To pass one’s life just sitting around idly, what can be gained 
by that? 

Such a statement as this truly corresponds to the Way of all the Buddhas and all the 
Ancestors, don’t you think?” 

I would point out, “The view that you have just expressed is in no way 
Buddhism, but rather the non-Buddhist view of the Shrenikans. 10 This erroneous 
view of theirs may be stated as follows: 

In our bodies there is a soul-like intelligence. When this 
intelligence, or intellect, encounters conditions, it makes distinctions 
between good and bad as well as discriminating right from wrong. It is 
conscious of what is painful or itches from desire, and is awake to 
what is hard to bear or easy. All such responses are within the capacity 
of this intelligence. However, when this body of ours perishes, this 
soul-like nature sloughs it off and is reborn somewhere else. As a 
result, even though it appears to perish in the here and now, it will 
have its rebirth in another place, never perishing, but always abiding 
unchanged. 

“So this erroneous view goes. Be that as it may, your modeling yourself 
upon this view and regarding it as the Buddha’s Teaching is more foolish than 
clutching onto a roof tile or a pebble in the belief that it is gold or some precious 
jewel. The shamefulness of such befuddled ignorance and delusion beggars 
comparison. National Teacher Echu in Great Sung China has strongly warned us 
about such a view. For you to now equate the wondrous Dharma of all the Buddhas 
with the mistaken notion that your mind will abide whilst your physical features 
perish, and to imagine that the very thing which gives rise to the cause of birth and 
death has freed you from birth and death—is this not being foolish? And how 
deeply pitiable! Be aware that this is the mistaken view of one who is outside the 
Way, and do not lend an ear to it. 

“Because I now feel even greater pity for you, I cannot leave the matter here, 
but will try to rescue you from your erroneous view. You should understand that, in 


10. The Shrenikans were a group of non-Buddhists who are thought to have followed the 
teachings of Shrenika, a contemporary of Shakyamuni Buddha. On occasion, they used 
terms similar to those in Buddhism, but with different meanings. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


16 


Buddhism, we have always spoken not only of body and mind as being 
inseparable, but also of the nature of something and the form it takes as not being 
two different things. As this Teaching was likewise well known in both India and 
China, we dare not deviate from It. Even more, in Buddhist instruction that speaks 
of what is persistent, all things are said to have persistence without their ever being 
separated into categories of ‘body’ and ‘mind’. 11 In instruction that talks about 
cessation, all things are said to be subject to cessation without differentiating 
whether they are of some particular nature or have some particular form. So why 
do you risk contradicting the correct principle by saying that the body ceases whilst 
the mind permanently abides? Not only that, you must fully understand that ‘birth 
and death’ is nirvana: there has never been any talk of a nirvana outside of birth 
and death. Moreover, even though you may erroneously reckon that there is a 
Buddha Wisdom that is separate from birth and death because you have worked it 
out that the mind permanently abides apart from the body, this ‘mind’ of yours— 
which understands, and works matters out, and perceives things, and knows what 
they are—is still something that arises and disappears, and is in no way ‘ever- 
abiding’. Surely, this ‘mind’ of yours is something completely transitory! 

“You will see, if you give it a taste, that the principle of the oneness of body 
and mind is something constantly being talked about in Buddhism. So, how does 
the mind, on its own, apart from the body, keep from arising and disappearing as 
this body of yours arises and perishes? Furthermore, were they inseparable at one 
time and not inseparable at another, then what the Buddha said would, naturally, be 
false and deceiving. 

“In addition, should you suddenly get the notion that eradicating birth and 
death is what the Dharma is really about, it would lead you to sullying the Precept 
against despising the Buddha Dharma. Do watch out for this! 

“You must also understand that what is spoken of in the Buddha’s Teachings 
as ‘the Gate to the Teaching on the vast characteristics common to the nature of all 
minds’ takes in the whole universe, without dividing it into innate natures and their 
forms or ever referring to things as ‘coming into existence’ or ‘perishing’. Nothing, 
up to and including realizing enlightenment and nirvana, is excluded from the 
innate nature of your mind. Each and every thing throughout the whole of the 
universe is simply ‘the One Mind’ from which nothing whatsoever is excluded. All 


11. Dogen makes a distinction between the Buddhist concept of persistence and the Shrenikan 
concept of abiding. With the former, all phenomena, physical and non-physical, arise and 
continue on (‘persist’) for an unspecified period before disintegrating and disappearing, 
whereas with the latter, the mind is thought to remain (‘abide’) unchanged and unchanging 
forever. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


17 


Gates to the Teaching are equally of this One Mind. To assert that there are no 
differences whatsoever is the way the Buddhist family understands the nature of 
Mind. So, within this one all-inclusive Dharma, how can you separate body from 
mind or split ‘birth and death’ off from ‘nirvana’? You are already a disciple of the 
Buddha, so do not give ear to the clatter of a lunatic’s tongue as he utters views that 
are off the True Track.” 

He may then ask, “Do those who devotedly do seated meditation have to 
stringently observe the Precepts and monastic rules?” 

I would point out, “Keeping to the Precepts and leading a pure life are 
standard customs in the Zen tradition and are the habitual conduct of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors. However, for those who have not yet formally taken the Precepts, or 
who have broken them, we cannot say that their seated meditation is without value 
or merit.” 

He may then ask, “Surely, someone who is endeavoring to do seated 
meditation can also do practices like the Shingon mantra chanting or like the 
Tendai form of introspection, wherein you try to stop thinking evil thoughts and 
contemplate what Truth is. Right?” 

I would point out, “When I was in China, I asked Masters of our tradition 
about the genuine keys to successful training. None of them said that they had 
heard of any of our Ancestors to whom the Buddha seal had been properly 
Transmitted—either in India and China, now or in the past—ever having done 
practices such as those two. Truly, if you do not make the One Matter for which 
you train the thing that you focus on, you will never make it to the Unique 
Wisdom.” 

He may then ask, “Can this practice be done by men and women in lay life, 
or is it only suitable for monks?” 

I would point out, “The Ancestors have said in their Teaching, ‘When it 
comes to realizing the Buddha Dharma, make no distinction between male and 
female, or between the exalted and the lowly. ’ ” 

He may then ask, “By leaving home life behind, monks are quickly 
separated from all their various ties so that they have no impediments to diligently 
practicing seated meditation. But how can those of us involved in the daily 
pressures of lay life turn to doing training and practice so that we may realize the 
Way of the Buddhas, which is unconcerned with worldly affairs?” 

I would point out, “The Buddhas and Ancestors, out of Their overflowing 
sympathy, have opened the great, wide Gates of Their compassion. They have done 
this so that They might help all sentient beings realize the Truth and enter the Way. 
Who amongst those in the worlds of either the mundane or the saintly could 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


18 


possibly be excluded from entering? Because of this, should you seek examples 
from the past up to the present, authenticated instances of it are many indeed. 

“For instance, the T’ang Chinese emperors T’ai-tsung and Shun-tsung were 
deeply involved with myriad matters of state, yet by diligently practicing seated 
meditation, they succeeded in traversing the Great Way of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors. The ministers Li and Fang, while councilors, served as right-hand men 
to their emperor, yet by diligently doing their seated meditation, they also realized 
the Truth and entered the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors. It simply 
depends on whether you have the determination or not: it has nothing to do with 
being a householder or a monk. In addition, those who can deeply discern the 
difference between what is excellent and what is mediocre will naturally give rise 
to faith and trust. How much more evident it is that those who regard worldly 
affairs as an impediment to the Buddha Dharma are only inferring that Buddha 
Dharma does not exist within the mundane world, and they do so because they 
have not yet recognized that, within Buddha Dharma, there are no ‘worldly ways’. 

“More recently, there was a minister in Great Sung China named Councilor 
Feng. He was a high official who was extremely mature in the Way of the 
Ancestors. Later, he composed a poem about himself: 

When free from official duties, 

I am fond of doing my meditation. 

Rarely do I ever lie down 

or go sleep in my bed. 

Though l bear the semblance 
of a minister of state, 

‘The old Buddhist monk’is what they call me 
from sea to sea. 

This poem is saying that, even though he had a position that left him little free time 
from his duties, his determination towards the path of the Buddhas was so deep 
that he realized the Way. With him in mind, we should reflect upon ourselves and 
see how our present condition looks in the mirror of his former times. In Great 
Sung China, I never heard it said that present-day rulers and their ministers, gentry 
and commoners, men and women, had not fixed their hearts on the Way of the 
Ancestors. Both those in the military and those in civil service were intent on 
seeking training in meditation and studying the Way. Among those who were 
intent, many undoubtedly illumined That which is the Foundation of their hearts 
and minds. This should let you know that worldly duties do not, in and of 
themselves, impede the Buddha Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


19 


“If the authentic Buddha Dharma spreads throughout a country, all the 
Buddhas and all the celestial beings will continually offer Their protection and, as 
a result, the ruler will transform his nation into a peaceful one. Since it is the wise 
and saintly who bring about peacefulness, the Buddha Dharma becomes ever 
stronger. 

“Furthermore, when the Venerable Shakyamuni was in the world, even those 
who were perverse in their actions or twisted in their views found the Way. In the 
assemblies of Ancestors and Masters, both the ‘young hunters’ and the ‘old 
woodcutters’ alike experienced a spiritual awakening. 12 So it is certainly possible 
for people other than these! Simply seek out the instructive path of a genuine 
Master.” 

He may then ask, “If I decide to do this practice, can I realize the Truth even 
in this present-day world, which is in the final, degenerate stage of the Buddha’s 
Teachings?” 

I would point out, “Although those who devote themselves to the study of 
Scriptures make a big thing out of various terms and aspects, in the genuine 
Teachings of the Greater Course no distinction is made about a true, a superficial, 
or a final period of the Dharma, and it is said that everyone will realize the Way if 
they do the training. Not only that, with this Genuine Dharma that is directly 
Transmitted, once you have entered the practice and left your ‘self’ behind, you 
will likewise enjoy making use of the wondrous treasures within yourself. Whether 
or not someone has personally realized the Truth is something that those who have 
done the training will naturally know, just as those who drink water discern 
whether it is cool or warm.” 

He may then ask, “There are some who say that, according to the Buddha 
Dharma, if I fully comprehend the import of ‘Our very mind is Buddha,’ then, even 
though I do not chant the Scriptures or physically put the Buddha’s Way into 
practice, I do not lack for Buddha Dharma. Simply knowing that the Buddha 
Dharma has always existed within me is what the whole of realizing the Way 
comes down to. Apart from this, there is no need to turn to others to seek anything. 
So why should I become all involved in diligently practicing seated meditation?” 

I would point out, “This statement of yours is hopelessly unreliable. If the 


12. The ‘young hunters’ is an allusion to those new to training who, having given rise to the 
intention of realizing Buddhahood, are eagerly seeking it. The ‘old woodcutters’ are those 
who have been long in training, but who remain preoccupied with cutting the roots of their 
past karmic tendencies. These two types are hindering themselves from awakening, the 
former by overzealousness, and the latter by clinging to a notion of “I still have so very far 
to go in training.” 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


20 


matter were as you have put it, then anyone with a conscious mind could explain 
the principle of the Buddha Dharma without having to realize anything. 

“You must understand that Buddha Dharma is to be investigated without 
holding onto any notion of ‘self’ or ‘other’. If knowing that ‘You yourself are 
Buddha’ were what realization of the Way is, the Venerable Shakyamuni, in the 
long past, would not have gone to all the trouble He did to try and help others 
realize the Way. 

“Let me take a moment to substantiate this with a wonderful case concerning 
an ancient one of great virtue: 

Long ago, there was a monk in Meditation Master Hogen’s 
monastic community named Gensoku who was a subordinate under 
the Temple’s administrative director. Master Hogen asked him, 
“Director Gensoku, how long have you been in our community?” 

Gensoku replied, “Why, I’ve been in the community for three 
years now.” 

The Master asked, “As you are still a junior monk, why have 
you never asked me about the Buddha Dharma?” 

Gensoku replied, “I will not lie to Your Reverence. Previously, 
when I was with Meditation Master Seiho, I fully reached the place of 
joyful ease in the Buddha Dharma.” 

The Master said, “And what was said that gained you entry to 
this place?” 

Gensoku said, “I once asked Seiho what the True Self of a 
novice is, and Seiho replied, ‘Here comes the Hearth God looking for 
fire.’” 13 

Hogen responded, “Nicely put. But I’m afraid you may not 
have understood it.” 

Gensoku said, “A Hearth God is associated with fire, so I 
understand it to mean that, just as fire is being used to seek for fire, so 
the True Self is what is used to seek for the True Self.” 

The Master said, “Just as I suspected! You have not understood. 

If this is what the Buddha Dharma was like, it is unlikely that It would 
have continued on, being Transmitted down to the present day.” 


13. The Hearth God was a nickname for the temple boy who attended to lighting the lamps. 
Temple boys, who ranged in age from seven to fifteen, had not yet taken the Precepts and 
were not monks. The relevance of this reference is discussed in the Translator’s General 
Introduction. 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


21 


Gensoku was so distressed at this that he left the monastery. 

While on the road, he thought to himself, “In this country, the Master 
is known as a fine and learned monastic teacher and as a great 
spiritual leader and guide for five hundred monks. Since he has chided 
me for having gone wrong, he must undoubtedly have a point.” So, he 
returned to his Master, respectfully bowed in apology, and said, “What 
is the True Self of a novice?” 

The Master replied, “Here comes the Hearth God looking for 
The Fire.” Upon hearing these words, Gensoku awoke fully to the 
Buddha Dharma. 

“It is quite clear from this that an intellectual understanding of ‘One’s very 
Self is Buddha’ is insufficient grounds for saying that you have understood the 
Buddha Dharma. If an intellectual understanding of ‘One’s very Self is Buddha’ 
were what Buddha Dharma is, the Master, based on what had previously been said, 
would not have had to offer guidance or admonish his disciple in the manner that 
he did. From the moment you meet a good spiritual friend, undoubtedly you should 
straightaway inquire into the procedures and principles of training and practice, as 
well as unswervingly do your utmost to practice seated meditation and keep to the 
Way, without ever letting your mind be content with any partial understanding. The 
wonderful technique of the Buddha Dharma will then not prove fruitless.” 

He may then ask, “I have heard that in India and China in the present day, as 
well as in the past, there have been those who have awakened to the Way by 
hearing the sound of bamboo being struck, and others who, upon seeing the color 
of a flower, have clarified what their mind is, to say nothing of Great Master 
Shakyamuni who realized the Way upon seeing the morning star, or the Venerable 
Ananda who, upon the occasion of the debater’s flagpole toppling, became clear as 
to what Dharma is. In addition, from the time of the Sixth Chinese Ancestor on, 
there have been many within the five families of our tradition who have clarified 
what the foundation of mind is through encountering a single word or half a verse 
of Scripture. Surely, not all these were people who were always diligently 
practicing the Way by just doing seated meditation, were they?” 

I would point out, “What you need to know is that neither of those particular 
persons—the one who, upon seeing a color, clarified what Mind is and the one who 
was awakened to the Way by a resonating sound—spent time in speculation and 
critical assessment whilst diligently practicing the Way, nor did they create a 
second ‘person’—be it a ‘self’ or an ‘other’—while they were directly engaged in 
that practice.” 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


22 


He may then ask, “People in India and China have always been basically 
honest and straightforward. Because both countries have been centers of culture, 
their people, once instructed in the Buddha Dharma, have succeeded in entering the 
Way ever so quickly. Our country, from ancient times, has been extremely short on 
benevolence and wise discernment, so that it has been hard for us to accumulate 
genuine spiritual seeds. Because we have been a land of savage barbarians, such 
seeds are, alas, not to be seen. Furthermore, the monks in our country are inferior 
even to the householders in those great nations. Our people are foolish, narrow¬ 
minded, and petty. They cling tightly to transitory successes and delight in surface 
virtues. Will such a people, even if they do sit in meditation, succeed in quickly 
realizing the Buddha Dharma?” 

I would point out, “As you say, people in our country are not yet universally 
benevolent and wise in their discemings, and are also given to laziness and 
prejudice. Were they given the Dharma straight on, Its Sweet Dew would turn sour 
and become a poison to them. A taste for fame and gain comes easily, whilst 
delusion and grasping are hard to let go of. Even so, it does not necessarily require 
the worldly wisdom of either the mundane or the saintly for people to recognize 
and enter the Buddha Dharma so that they may serve as a ferry to carry others 
beyond the mundane. While the Buddha was in the world, a certain man came to 
experience all four fruits leading to arhathood when he was hit in the head with a 
handball. And a certain woman came to understand what the Great Way is due to 
her playfully dressing up in a monk’s kesa* in a previous life. These frivolous and 
dense persons were both like foolish and confused animals. Nevertheless, when 
their genuine faith and trust rescued them, they were provided with a path which 
led them out of their delusions. Also, upon seeing an ignorant old monk dumbly 
sitting, a faithful lay woman who had brought him food opened up and was 
awakened. Her experience did not depend on ‘enlightened wisdom’ or on Scripture, 
nor did she rely on words or explanations: she was rescued simply by her genuine 
faith and trust. 

“Also, Shakyamuni’s instructions have been spreading through the three 
thousand worlds for something like two thousand years. The countries within these 
worlds are of all kinds and are not necessarily lands of benevolence and wisdom, 
nor are their people necessarily always astute or intellectually brilliant! Even so, 
the true Dharma of the Tathagata has always possessed a marvelous, unimaginably 
great, meritorious strength so that, when the time is ripe, It spreads throughout 
those lands. When people duly train and practice with genuine faith and trust—be 
they bright or dull—all alike will realize the Way. Do not give way to thoughts that 
our country is not a land of benevolence and wise discernment, and that its people 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


23 


are too foolish or stupid to be able to understand what Buddha Dharma is. 
Moreover, the people are all well endowed with the genuine seed of spiritual 
Wisdom. Simply, it is rare for them to be in exact harmony with It, and, as a result, 
they do not yet completely accept and enjoy It.” 


The preceding exchange of questions and responses may prove confusing 
due to my shifting back and forth between the perspectives of guest and host. 14 To 
some extent, I may have made illusory flowers appear in an empty sky. Be that as it 
may, since our tradition’s principle of diligent practice of the Way by doing seated 
meditation has not yet been brought into this country, how sad for those with 
spiritual intentions! It is for this reason that I have brought together a bit of what I 
saw and heard whilst in China, contenting myself with setting down the genuine 
keys of clear-eyed Masters, so that those desirous of training in the practice can 
leam about them. Apart from this, I do not have sufficient time, at present, to set 
down the rules and regulations of Zen monasteries, or the rankings, standards, and 
ceremonies for temples. Besides, such a task must not be done in haste. 

Even though our country lies east of the Dragon Sea separating it from 
China, which lies far beyond the clouds and mist, around the time of the Japanese 
emperors Kimmei and Yomei in the sixth century, the Buddha’s Teachings from the 
western lands gradually moved eastwards, to the good fortune of our people. 
However, Their terms and subtleties, as well as the ritual formalities associated 
with Them, have often become entangled, so that doubts of how to do the practice 
have weighed heavily. But now, if you make your tattered robe and your patched- 
up alms bowl your lifetime career, setting up a thatched hut near to where the white 
rock protrudes from the moss-covered cliffs, whilst sitting upright and polishing 
your training, in a twinkling you will be one who ‘goes beyond being Buddha’, and 
you will quickly bring to a conclusion the Great Matter for which you have trained 
and studied your whole life. 15 These are precisely the friendly admonitions of 


14. That is, between the attitude of a questioning disciple and of a responding Master. 

15. In this sentence, the description of a trainee is not simply an idyllic portrait of a hermit- 
monk but also gives a concise metaphoric description of how someone is to train, employing 
traditional Chinese Zen Buddhist imagery. The robe, or kesa, is associated here with the 
Precepts; its tatters arise from one’s breakage of those Precepts, and its repair results from 
one’s true resolve to do better. The alms bowl suggests one’s willingness to train by being 
all-accepting; its patches are the signs of one’s attempt to repair Teaks’ in that willingness. 
Despite the less than ‘perfect’ condition of these two aspects of training, the trainee is still 
willing to continue on, while recognizing that there are still things he needs to do and that he 



Shobogenzo: On Doing One s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 


24 


Master Kodon of Dragon’s Fang Mountain and the legacy in how to train 
bequeathed by Makakasho on Cock’s Foot Mountain. As to the procedures for 
doing seated meditation, you should follow what is in my Rules for Meditation , 16 
which I compiled during the recent Kanroku period (1225-1227). 

Although one should have a ruler’s permission before spreading Buddhism 
throughout a country, if we think once again of the legacy from the Divine Vulture 
Peak, then all the rulers, lords, ministers, and generals who have appeared in the 
hundreds of thousands of millions of lands are persons who had graciously 
accepted the Buddha’s decrees, and now, due to their past lives, live on without 
losing sight of their cherished desire to protect the Buddha Dharma. Those regions 
in which spiritual help is spread, wherever they may be, need not be strictly 
Buddhist countries. Therefore, in letting the Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors 
flow forth, you need not necessarily wait for all conditions to be perfect. Just think 
of today as the day to begin! 

Thus, I leave what I have assembled here for those who are concentrating 
upon their desire for the Buddha’s Teachings, as well as for any within the genuine 
stream of students who, in search of the Way, drift as a cloud and lodge as a 
floating reed. 

Written down on the mid-autumn day in the third year of the Kanki era (September 12, 1231) by 
me, the mendicant monk Dogen, who went to Sung China that I might receive and bring 
back the Transmission of the Dharma. 


need not be ‘perfect’ in order to keep going onwards. The hut often refers to one’s ‘pl ace °f 
training’—namely, one’s body and mind—which is kept ‘thatched’ so that the trainee 
protects himself from the karmic and emotional storms that may assail him either physically 
‘outside himself’ or mentally ‘within himself’. While his seat is within the mundane world 
with all its surrounding growth, he chooses to sit before the white rock, Bodhidharma’s 
‘wall’, which is not only a physical place of meditation, but a mental one as well. If he then 
sits upright—doing his meditation, acknowledging the tatters he has made of the Precepts 
and the leaks from his lapses in being all-accepting, and attempting to repair them—he will 
quickly be able to let go of any thoughts of arriving at Buddhahood and will resolve his 
spiritual question. 

16. Fukan Zazengi. A translation of this work by Rev. Master P.T.N.H. Jiyu-Kennett appears in 
Serene Reflection Meditation, 6th ed. revised (Mount Shasta, California: Shasta Abbey 
Press, 1996), pp. 1-3. 



2 


On the Great Wisdom 
That Is Beyond Discriminatory Thought 

(Makahannya-haramitsu) 

Translator’s Introduction: Makahannya-haramitsu, the earliest dated Dharma talk in the 
Shobogenzo, was given by Dogen to his monks in his renovated monastery, which he had 
renamed Kannondori. The discourse consists largely of paraphrases from the Scripture Which Is 
the Heart of the Prajhaparamita, also called the Heart Scripture (J. Hannya Shin Gyo), and 
lengthy quotations from the Larger Scripture on Spiritual Wisdom (J. Dai Hannya Gyo), plus a 
poem by his Chinese Master Tendo Nyojo, to all of which he has added comments. 

There is an allusion in the discourse that may not be as obvious in the translation as it is in 
the original. In passages from the Larger Scripture on Spiritual Wisdom, the questioner is 
identified as Tentaishaku, ‘the Lord of the Heavens’, a common epithet for Indra. Thus, at first 
glance, the ensuing dialogue would appear to be between a divine personage from the Hindu 
pantheon and Subhuti, one of the Buddha’s chief disciples who was known for his understanding 
of the Buddha’s Teachings on the Immaculacy of Emptiness. However, in the original text the 
reader is given a subtle hint as to the questioner’s real identity when Subhuti addresses him as 
Kaushika (‘He Whose Eyes Look Askance at Things’), an epithet applied to Indra when taking 
human form. In other words, the questioner is a human who, from haughtiness, considers himself 
the equal of the Lord of the Heavens, as he looks askance at the Buddha’s Teachings. 

When Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva* was at one with the 
deepest Wisdom of the Heart which is beyond discriminatory thought, 

He saw with utmost clarity that the five skandhas which comprise 
one’s whole being were as space. 

The five skandhas are our physical form, our sensory perceptions, our 
mental conceptions and ideas, our volition, and our consciousness: they are a 
fivefold manifestation of Wisdom. ‘To see with utmost clarity’ is what is meant by 
Wisdom. To clarify what the meaning and import of this is, He said, “Our physical 
form is as pure and unbounded as space,” and “The Unbounded is what our 
physical form is.” Our physical forms are forms: the Unbounded is what is 
unbounded. The former are ‘the hundreds of individual sproutings ’: 1 the Latter is 
the multiplicity of form. 


* See Glossary. 

1. ‘The hundreds of individual sproutings’, an expression often used by Dogen, refers to the 


25 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Wisdom That Is Beyond Discriminatory Thought 26 


When the Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought manifests in twelvefold 
form, It is the twelve sensory fields—that is, the six sensory faculties along with 
what they perceive to be the properties of all thoughts and things. And this Wisdom 
has an eighteenfold manifestation, comprised of the six sensory faculties of eyes, 
ears, nose, tongue, tactile body, and mind plus their six perceived properties, 
respectively, color, sound, odor, taste, feel, and mental contents, along with the six 
forms of consciousness associated with eyes, ears, nose, tongue, tactile body, and 
mind. And this Wisdom has a fourfold manifestation: the arising of suffering, its 
cause, its ultimate extinguishing, and the method whereby it is extinguished. And 
this Wisdom has a sixfold manifestation, consisting of almsgiving, keeping to the 
Pure Precepts, practicing patience, making diligent effort, doing serene reflection 
meditation, and applying wise discernment. And the Wisdom Beyond 
Discriminatory Thought has a singular expression, which is constantly manifesting 
before our very eyes here and now: It is total and absolute enlightenment. And the 
Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought has a threefold manifestation as past, 
present, and future. And this Wisdom has a sixfold manifestation as earth, water, 
fire, wind, space, and consciousness. And this Wisdom has a fourfold 
manifestation which occurs in daily life as moving, standing, sitting, and reclining. 

There was once a mendicant monk in the assembly of the 
Tathagata Shakyamuni who was thinking to himself, “I bow in deepest 
respect to the profound Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought. And 
well I should, for even though within this Wisdom there is nothing 
that gets born or becomes extinct, nevertheless You have been able to 
establish that by following the Precepts, our physical skandha will be 
beyond dualistic morality; that by meditative contemplation, our 
sensory skandha will be tranquil and freed from all false ideas; that by 
practicing wise discernment, our consciousness skandha will be wise 
in what it sees; that by practicing non-attachment, our volitional 
skandha will be fully liberated from defiling passions; and that by 
practicing all-acceptance, our thought skandha will have complete 
comprehension of this liberated state. You have also been able to 
establish that the fruits of entering the stream of training, the fruits of 
returning but once more to the world of desire, the fruits of not 
returning to that world, and the fruits of arhathood* truly exist. You 
have been able to establish that there is the enlightenment solely 
realized by oneself, as well as the supreme awakening wherein all 


manifold fonns that arise or ‘sprout up’ because of a set of conditions, persist for a while, 
then disappear when the conditions that brought them about change. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Wisdom That Is Beyond Discriminatory Thought 27 


things are viewed alike as enlightened . 2 3 You have been able to 
establish that there are the Treasures of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, 
as well as to establish that there is a turning of the Wheel of the 
Dharma and a ferrying of all manner of sentient beings to the Other 
Shore.” 

The Buddha, aware of these thoughts, addressed the monk, saying, 

“It is just as you have been thinking, just as you have thought: the 
profound Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought is subtle and difficult 
for the intellect to fathom.” 

In regard to the private thoughts of this monk, whenever someone bows down 
in respect to all things, the wisdom that prompted this monk to say, “even though 
there is no being bom or becoming extinct, nevertheless...,” expresses a ‘bowing 
down in respect’. When there is this moment of ‘being duly respectful’, the 
wisdom of what the Buddha was able to establish in this connection is right before 
your very eyes and encompasses everything the monk had in mind, from the 
practicing of Precepts, meditation, and wise discernment up through the ferrying of 
sentient beings to the Other Shore. It is this that we mean when we speak of ‘Mu ’. 
What this expedient term ‘Mu ’ refers to can be realized through the practices just 
outlined, for this ‘Mu ’ is the profound, subtle, and inscmtable Wisdom Beyond 
Discriminatory Thought. 

Someone present, a veritable Indra, Lord of the Heavens, asked 
the Buddha’s long-standing senior disciple Subhuti, “O great virtuous 
one, if some bodhisattva or mahasattva* were desirous of studying this 
‘Profound Wisdom That is Beyond Discriminatory Thought’, just how, 
precisely, should he go about studying such a thing?” 

Subhuti replied, “O you who look with doubting eyes, if a 
bodhisattva or mahasattva is desirous of learning about the Profound 
Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought, he should study It with a mind 
as completely open as open space, with no preconceptions to hamper 
him.” 

Thus, Teaming what Wisdom is’ means ‘to be free of preconceptions’: ‘being free 
of preconceptions’ is what ‘studying Wisdom’ is. 


2. A reference to Shakyamuni’s awakening on His own, without the aid of a master, and His 
realizing as part of that enlightenment experience that all things are simultaneously 
enlightened just as they are. 

3. ‘Mu ’ is the Japanese reading of the Chinese character that is sometimes used in Zen texts to 
represent That which ‘is beyond’ the ability of any words or descriptions to encompass. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Wisdom That Is Beyond Discriminatory Thought 28 


This Indra Lord of the Heavens then addressed the Buddha, 
saying, “World-honored One, if virtuous men and women were to 
receive this teaching on Your purported ‘Wisdom That is Beyond 
Discriminatory Thought’, hold to it, and recite it to others chapter and 
verse, were they to explore its implications and then lecture upon it to 
others, what could they possibly do to defend it from critical attack? All I 
am really asking, O World-honored One, is that You, out of Your 
compassion, give us instruction.” 

This time, the Buddha’s senior monk Subhuti responded to this 
lordly Indra by saying, “O you with the doubting eyes, do you see any 
way in which this Teaching can be defended?” 

The lordly one replied, “No, O great virtuous one, 1 do not see any 
way in which this teaching can be defended.” 

Subhuti then said, “O you with the doubting eyes, if virtuous men 
and women explain the matter as the Buddha has, the profound Wisdom 
Beyond Discriminatory Thought will, in fact, be Its own defense. If 
virtuous men and women put forth the matter in this way, they will never 
be far from the profound Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought. You 
need to understand that, as long as any being—human or non-human— 
seeks to be told what It means while acting from a desire to do harm or 
mischief, that being will ultimately not be able to realize It. O you with 
the doubting eyes, if your motive is to defend and protect It, you should 
act in accordance with what has been said here. All bodhisattvas and the 
Deepest Wisdom That is Beyond Discriminatory Thought are in no way 
different from the desire to defend and protect That which is like the 
clear and empty sky.” 

Understand that to receive this Teaching, keep to It, accurately recite It to others, 
and explore Its implications is precisely what ‘defending and protecting Wisdom’ 
means. To desire to defend and protect It means that you receive the Teaching, 
keep to It, accurately recite It to others, and so forth. 

My former Master, a Buddha of old, once said in verse: 

My whole being is like the mouth of a bell suspended in 
empty space: 

It does not ask whether the wind blows east or west, 
north or south. 

Impartial to all, it sounds the Wisdom for the sake of 
others: 

“Bong bong bong, ” says the wind bell, “bong bong 
bong. ” 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Wisdom That Is Beyond Discriminatory Thought 29 


This is the sounding of Wisdom, which is the right Transmission of Buddhas and 
Ancestors. His whole being is this Wisdom, the whole of others is this Wisdom, the 
whole of oneself is this Wisdom, the whole of east and west, north and south is this 
Wisdom. 

Shakyamuni Buddha then said, “Shariputra, 4 when it comes to the 
matter of the Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought, all sentient 
beings, of whatever sort they may be, are to be offered spiritual 
provisions and respectfully bowed to, each treated as a place where a 
Buddha dwells. Your exploration of the Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory 
Thought should be done as though you were making spiritual offerings 
and respectfully bowing to the Buddha as the Awakened and Revered 
One. 

“And why so? Because the Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory 
Thought is not something different from the Buddha as the Awakened 
and Revered One, nor is the Buddha as the Awakened and Revered One 
something different from what the Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory 
Thought is. The Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought is, in fact, the 
Buddha as the Awakened and Revered One, just as the Buddha as the 
Awakened and Revered One is, in fact, the Wisdom Beyond 
Discriminatory Thought. 

“And how so? Because, Shariputra, all Tathagatas as arhats and 
Fully Awakened Ones have, without exception, been able to appear in 
the world by virtue of the Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought. And 
because, Shariputra, all bodhisattvas, mahasattvas, pratyekabuddhas*, 
arhats, non-retumers, once-returners, and stream-enterers have, without 
exception, been able to appear in the world by virtue of the Wisdom 
Beyond Discriminatory Thought. 5 And because, Shariputra, in all the 
worlds, the ten ways of doing good, the four meditations leading to 
heavenly states, the four meditative states beyond the world of form, and 
the five wondrous faculties have, without exception, been able to appear 
in the world by virtue of the Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought.” 

Thus it is that the Buddha as the Awakened and Revered One is the Wisdom 
Beyond Discriminatory Thought: the Wisdom Beyond Discriminatory Thought is 


4. Shariputra was one of the chief disciples of the Buddha. He was renowned for his spiritual 
Wisdom. 

5. These four terms, from arhat through stream-enterers, are the ‘four stages of arhathood’ and 
are explained briefly in the Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Wisdom That Is Beyond Discriminatory Thought 30 


all the various thoughts and things. All these various things are as empty space: 
they are neither born nor do they wholly die, they are not stained nor yet 
immaculate, increasing not, decreasing not. When this Wisdom Beyond 
Discriminatory Thought is manifesting before our very eyes, It is the Buddha as the 
Awakened and Revered One manifesting before our very eyes. Inquire into this; 
keep it in mind. To make offerings and bow respectfully is, indeed, to look with 
reverence to, trust in, and faithfully follow the Buddha as the Awakened and 
Revered One: to look with reverence to, trust in, and faithfully follow Him is to be 
the Buddha as the Awakened and Revered One. 

This was delivered to the monastic assembly at Kannonddri during the summer retreat in the first 
year of the Tempuku era (1233). 

On the twenty-first day of the third lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (April 29, 
1244), this was copied out by Ejd, while in the chief disciple’s quarters at Kippo-ji 
Temple in Echizen Province. 



3 


On the Spiritual Question 
as It Manifests Before Your Very Eyes 

(Genjo Koan) 

Translator’s Introduction: Genjo Koan, composed by Dogen for a lay disciple, resembles in 
form and style a type of essay popular in medieval Japan. Highly evocative, often seemingly 
ambiguous, rich with imagery, resonant in tone, heavily endowed with phrases and sentences 
based on Chinese syntax, this discourse is akin to a prose poem. In content, however, it is clearly 
Buddhist in intent. That is, the focus is not on intellectual constructs and logical progressions of 
thought, but on lived experiences and what our relationship is to them. For instance, his remarks 
about time are not intended to be studied as if they were part of some philosophical or scientific 
discourse, but to be viewed as a way of talking about how we experience time while we train 
upon the path to Buddhahood. This can be seen, for instance, in the opening paragraph of 
Dogen’s discourse, where the first sentence refers to the span of time which a trainee perceives 
as a period of ‘undergoing training’, and the second to the span during which this trainee 
experiences his ‘being enlightened’. 


In that period of time when Buddhas give voice to the Teachings on 
existence in all its variety, there is talk of ‘delusion and enlightenment’, of 
‘practice and training’, of ‘birth’, of ‘death’, of ‘Buddhas’, of ‘ordinary beings’. In 
that period of time when it is no longer relevant to speak of an ‘I’ along with its 
‘whole universe’, there is no delusion or enlightenment, no Buddhas or ordinary 
beings, no being bom, no extinction. 1 

Because the path to Buddhahood naturally springs forth from a feeling that 
there is ‘too much’ of one thing or ‘not enough’ of another, there is ‘birth and 


1. This opening paragraph is an allusion to the two ‘states’ of ‘being engaged with doing one’s 
training’ and ‘experiencing the realization of Truth’. While someone is consciously engaged 
in the former, talk employing tenns which the intellect can grasp is common and helpful, but 
when someone is living in the direct experience of one’s True Nature, all such terms lose 
their relevance. Dogen’s statement here and in later, similar passages may suggest that when 
someone realizes enlightenment, training stops. He clarifies the error of such an 
interpretation in Discourse 11: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While, for the Whole 
of Time is the Whole of Existence’ (Uji). Prior to delivering the present talk, he had already 
taken up the question of the relationship between training and enlightenment with his monks 
in his work, “Rules for Meditation” (Fukan Zazengi), written in 1233. 


31 



Shobogenzo: On The Spiritual Question as It Manifests Before Your Very Eyes 32 


extinction’, there is ‘delusion and enlightenment’, there are ‘ordinary beings and 
Buddhas’. Yet, even though this is the way things are, still, we feel regret at a 
blossom’s falling and we loathe seeing the weeds envelop everything. 

To undertake enlightening the whole universe through one’s training while 
carrying the burden of a self is a delusion: to enlighten oneself through training 
while urging all things onward is an awakening from delusion. To have a great 
awakening to one’s delusion is to be as all Buddhas are: to be greatly deluded 
within one’s enlightenment is to be as ordinary people are. Moreover, there are 
those folks who realize enlightenment on top of their enlightenment: there are 
those folks who are deluded within their delusion. 

When Buddhas are truly Buddhas, They need not perceive that They 
Themselves are Buddha. Even so, having awakened to Their Buddha Nature, They 
will carry along with Themselves Their confirmation of Their Buddha Nature. 

Since we are provided with both a body and a mind, we grasp onto the 
physical forms we see: since we are provided with both a body and a mind, we 
cling to the sounds we hear. As a consequence, we make ourselves inseparable 
from all things, yet we are not like some shadowy figure ‘lodging’ in a mirror or 
like the moon in water. Whenever we witness what is on the one side, its opposite 
side will be in darkness. 2 3 

To learn what the path to Buddhahood is, is to learn what the True Self is. To 
learn what the True Self is, is to forget about the self. To forget about the self is to 
become one with the whole universe. To become one with the whole universe is to 
be shed of ‘my body and mind’ and ‘their bodies and minds’. The traces from this 
experience of awakening to one’s enlightenment will quiet down and cease to show 
themselves, but it takes quite some time for all outer signs of being awake to 
disappear. 

When someone first begins to search for the Dharma, he is very far from the 
realm of the Dharma: once he has had the Dharma passed on to him, he will 
quickly become one who abides in his Original State. 4 


2. Here, Dogen uses the image of ‘the moon in water’ to refer to something that is only a 
reflection of the actual object; the phrase is not used in the sense of the common Buddhist 
metaphor for the Buddha Nature reflected in all things. 

3. That is, when we are still clinging to things, we do not see the duality inherent within our 
own thinking and thus we perceive only one side of the duality. 

4. Dogen’s point is that not knowing the Dharma impedes one’s arriving at Truth. That is, the 
passing on of the Dharma helps the trainee to realize his Original State, but it does not 
necessarily cause him to realize It simply upon hearing the Teachings. 



Shobogenzo: On The Spiritual Question as It Manifests Before Your Very Eyes 33 


When someone riding in a boat turns his gaze towards the shore, he 
misjudges the shore to be moving: when he fixes his eye firmly upon the boat, he 
will recognize that the boat is plowing on. Likewise, should you let your mind and 
body run riot, going along with what you perceive the world to be, you will make 
the mistake of thinking that you have a permanently abiding self-nature within 
your body and mind. If you commit yourself fully to traveling the Way and you 
then return to that Place within, the reason why there is no personal ‘self’ within 
the whole universe will become clear. 

A stick of firewood, once reduced to ashes, cannot once again revert to being 
a stick of firewood. Nevertheless, you should not hold onto the opinion that the 
ashes are the future of that which the stick was the past. What you need to 
understand is that, when firewood is persisting in the physical state of being 
firewood, there will be a before and there will be an after. Although there is a 
before and an after, there is a now which is cut off from ‘before’ and ‘after’. While 
ashes persist in the physical state of being ashes, they will have their ‘after’ and 
their ‘before’. 

After a stick of firewood has turned to ashes, just as it does not once again 
become firewood, so after someone dies, he does not come back to life again. Even 
so, as was the customary way the Buddha taught, we do not speak of life becoming 
death, which is why He spoke of things ‘not arising’. The Buddha also passed on 
through His turning of the Wheel of the Dharma that death does not become life, 
which is why He spoke of things ‘not perishing’. Life is the situation at one time, 
and death is the situation at another. For example, it is like winter and spring: do 
not imagine that winter ‘becomes’ spring, or speak of spring ‘becoming’ summer. 

When someone has spiritually awakened, he resembles the moon’s ‘residing’ 
in water: the moon does not get wet nor is the water shattered. Although the moon 
is a great, broad light, it lodges in the tiniest bit of water. The moon at its fullest, as 
well as the whole of the heavens, lodges within the dewdrop poised on a blade of 
grass, just as it lodges in any single bit of water. Spiritual awakening does not tear 
a person asunder; thus, it is like the moon’s not making a dent in the water. A 
person no more impedes his spiritual awakening than a dewdrop impedes the moon 
in the heavens. The deeper the reflection, the higher the light: how long the period 
of your spiritual awakening will last depends on how large your drop of water is 
and how full your moon is seen to be. 

When the Truth has not yet completely filled someone’s body and mind, he 
is apt to think that his knowledge of the Dharma is already sufficient. When the 
Truth sufficiently fills his body and mind, he feels sure that some aspect is still 
lacking. By way of analogy, when you go out in a boat to the middle of the ocean, 
beyond the sight of any land or mountain, and look around you, all you see is the 



Shobogenzo: On The Spiritual Question as It Manifests Before Your Very Eyes 34 


vast encircling water. Or, as another might put it, there is nothing to be seen. Be 
that as it may, this great Ocean is not a vast circle, and how we perceive It does not 
depend on what direction we look in. It is simply that we cannot exhaust what the 
rest of this Ocean’s nature is, though some have likened it to a dragon’s splendid 
palace or its jeweled necklace. Although this Ocean extends as far as our eye can 
see, after a while It will seem to be simply ‘a vast encircling’—indeed, even the 
whole universe will seem to be just the same. 

Whether we are caught up in the dust of the world or have removed 
ourselves from it, we are involved with many doings, yet we only realize what our 
eyes can see through practicing meditation and studying the Way, for we are 
limited by what we can see and comprehend at the present moment. Taking our 
spiritual tradition’s viewpoint of the universe as your model, you will realize that, 
apart from appearing angular or round, the remaining attributes of the ocean and 
the mountains are vast and limitless, and that the world exists on all sides of us. 
But it is not only as if It were just on all sides. You must realize that It is what is 
beneath your very feet and within every drop of water. 

A fish in the ocean, wherever it swims, finds the water limitless; a bird in the 
sky, wherever it flies, finds the air unbounded. Nevertheless, fish and birds, from 
the very beginning, have always been one, respectively, with the water and the sky. 
To put it simply, when their need is great, their use is great; when their need is 
small, their use is small. Acting in this manner, they never fail to make the fullest 
use of their environs at all times, nor do they ever reject what they may find there. 
Even so, if a bird is pulled out of the air, in short order it will perish; if a fish is 
pulled out of the water, it will quickly die. You must have realized by now that ‘the 
water’ signifies ‘life’, just as ‘the sky’ signifies ‘life’. ‘A bird’ refers to ‘a life’, just 
as ‘a fish’ refers to ‘a life’. ‘Being alive’ should be taken to mean ‘the bird’, as well 
as ‘the fish’. Moreover, this should be taken one step further, since the situation is 
no different for spiritual practice and realization, or with the flow of life and the 
life in that flow. Nevertheless, after someone has thoroughly explored what ‘water’ 
is and what ‘sky’ is, if ‘the bird’ or ‘the fish’ should remain so that they stand in 
contrast to ‘water’ or ‘sky’, then he will not find his way in either Ocean or in 
Space: he will not arrive at the Place. 

When you arrive at this Place, you will have been spiritually questioning 
what is before your very eyes by traveling the Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 
When you locate the path you have been following, you will discover that it is the 
spiritual question that has been before your very eyes as you have traveled the 
Way. This path and this Place are neither large nor small, neither ‘self’ nor ‘other’, 
nor something from the past, nor something revealed in the now: It is just as It is. 
Thus, when someone spiritually practices and realizes the Way of the Buddhas, it is 



Shobogenzo: On The Spiritual Question as It Manifests Before Your Very Eyes 35 


a matter of his having received some Teaching and penetrated into that Teaching, a 
matter of his having received some sentence of instruction and put into practice 
what that sentence says. Here is where the Place is. Accordingly, as we penetrate 
deeper and deeper into the Way, our spiritual surroundings, which we should have 
known, we clearly do not know, but because we are living together with our ever- 
deepening investigation of Buddha Dharma and training with It, we have what we 
need. 

To be sure, having once realized the Place, you must not analyze It in order 
to understand It through discriminatory thought and, thereby, reduce It to fit your 
own opinions. When you have bored through to certainty, It all at once manifests 
before your very eyes, yet That which is the most intimate will not necessarily take 
some visible form. ‘Manifesting before your very eyes’ may or may not have a 
literal meaning. 

Meditation Master Mayoku Hotetsu, one summer day, sat 
fanning himself when a monk came up to him and said, “It is said that 
the nature of the wind always abides and that there is no place where 
it does not circulate, so why does my reverend monk fan himself?” 

The Master replied, “You are merely aware that the Nature of 
the Wind always abides, but you have not yet grasped the principle 
that there is no place where It is not present and active.” 

When the monk then asked, “What is this underlying principle 
of Its being universally present?” the Master simply continued to fan 
himself. The monk respectfully bowed to the Master. 

Unequivocal and genuine experiences of the Buddha’s Dharma, which is the living 
Path of the genuine Transmission, are just like this. Since It always abides, the 
Master did not need to use a fan; yet, even when it is not used, the Sound of the 
Wind—that is, the voicing of the Dharma—can be heard. Not to know That which 
is ever-abiding is not to know the Nature of the Wind. Because the Nature of the 
Wind is always abiding, the winds of training for our Buddhist family bring about 
the manifesting before one’s very eyes of That which is the True Gold of the Great 
Earth, and bring to maturity the nourishing waters of the Greatest River. 

This was written around mid-autumn—that is, the fifteenth day of the eighth lunar month—in the 
first year of the Tempuku era (September 20, 1233), and given to my lay disciple Yanagi 
Koshu of Kyushu. 


Included in 1252. 



4 

On ‘The One Bright Pearl’ 

(Ikka Myoju) 


Translator’s Introduction: Ikka Myoju follows a form that Dogen later uses in many of his 
discourses of the Shobogenzo. Namely, he relates, often in his own words, one of the classic 
koan stories found in Chinese Zen literature. During the telling, he inserts his own commentary 
to clarify or underscore points which are relevant to monastic training and perspectives. 


In this world of ours, there once was a Great Master named Soitsu, who 
lived in the monastery on Gensha Mountain in Fukien Province, in the great 
kingdom of China. His religious name was Shibi and his family name was Sha. 
While still in lay life, he was fond of fishing and would sail his boat out on the 
Nant’ai River, as was the habit with all sorts of fishermen. However, he had not the 
slightest hint that the Golden Fish would, of Its own accord, leap up into his boat, 
without Its even being hooked. 

Near the beginning of the Chinese Kan-t’ong era of the T’ang dynasty (ca. 
865), he suddenly aspired to leave the dust of secular life behind him; so, in his 
thirtieth year, he abandoned his boat so as to dwell on a mountain. 1 Having 
awakened to the ceaseless fluctuations of the floating world, he had come to 
recognize the great worth of the Buddha’s Way. In time, he went to Seppo 
Mountain to seek spiritual instruction under Great Master Seppo Shinkaku and to 
practice the Way day and night. 

One day, with his travel bag upon his back, he set out from the mountain top, 
intending to deepen his practice by studying with other Masters elsewhere. Just as 
he was climbing down, he stubbed his toe on a rock, and it began to bleed and 
smart terribly. Suddenly he had a deep realization. 

Thereupon, he said, “This body has no independent existence, 
so where is the pain coming from?” He then returned to Seppo and 
told him what had happened. 

Seppo asked him, “Is this Shibi the Austere Monk?” 


1. ‘To dwell on a mountain’ is a common Buddhist metaphor for entering monastic life and 
doing one’s meditation as part of that life. ‘Abandoning his boat’ refers not only to Shibi’s 
giving up his attachment to a beloved object in his lay life but also to his giving up his 
simply drifting along on the river of life. 


36 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The One Bright Pearl ’ 


37 


Shibi responded, “I have never dared to deceive anyone about 

that!” 

Delighted by this response, Seppo said, “Who could fail to 
cherish this response? Who could have expressed the Matter* more 
fully?” 

On another occasion, Seppo called out to him, “O Shibi, my 
austere monk, why haven’t you gone out on a pilgrimage to seek a 
Master to train with?” 

When Shibi answered, “Bodhidharma did not come east to 
China for that, nor did the Second Ancestor go west to India for that!” 

Seppo highly praised what he had said. 

Shibi had been devoted to fishing for so much of his life that he had never 
set eyes on the voluminous body of Buddhist Scriptures and spiritual writings, 
even in his dreams. Nevertheless, when he put the depth of his resolve to realize 
the Truth above all else, a spirit of determination emerged, which surpassed that of 
the other monks around him. Seppo realized that Shibi excelled all others within 
the assembly and praised him as towering above Seppo’s other disciples. 

For his robe, Shibi used a coarse hemp cloth, and, since he had no other 
change of clothing, it was filled with hundreds of patches. Against his skin, he 
wore an undergarment made from paper, and for a lining between the two, he used 
mugwort leaves kneaded until they were pliant. Apart from working under Seppo, 
he did not seek out any other Master to train with. Even though he kept to just one 

Master, he certainly found within himself the spiritual strength to become the heir 

2 

to his Master’s Dharma. 

In time, he realized the Way and, afterwards, in pointing It out to people, he 
would say, “The whole universe throughout all its ten directions is the One Bright 


One time a monk inquired of him, “Reverend Monk, I have 
heard you say that the whole universe throughout all its ten directions 
is one bright pearl. How am I, as a trainee, to understand the meaning 
of this?” 


* See Glossary. 

2. Since making pilgrimages to spiritually call on other Zen Masters was still a widespread 
tradition among Chinese Zen trainees of his day, Dogen is pointing out that this is not an 
essential practice, and that what is truly essential is for each trainee to find within himself 
the spiritual strength to be a Dharma heir of their Master. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The One Bright Pearl ’ 


38 


Shibi answered, “Since the whole universe throughout all its ten 
directions is the One Bright Pearl, what use is there in trying to 
understand this with the intellect?” 

However, the next day the Master asked this monk, “The whole 
universe throughout all its ten directions is the One Bright Pearl, so 
what do you think this means?” 

The monk responded, “Since the whole universe throughout all 
its ten directions is the one bright pearl, what use is there in my trying 
to understand this with my intellect?” 

Shibi replied, “It is indeed clear to me that, even though you are 
blindly looking into the demon’s cave within the pitch black 
mountains of ignorance, you are doing your training.” 

Shibi was the first to voice the statement, “The whole universe throughout 
all its ten directions is the One Bright Pearl.” Its basic idea is that the whole 
universe throughout all its ten directions is not to be thought of as vast and grand 
or minute and insignificant, nor as made up of angles and curves, nor as the center 
or core of something else, nor does it act like some lively fish darting about in a sea 
of space or like dewdrops brightly whirling in the wind. Moreover, because it is not 
something that was bom and will die, not something that is coming or going, it is 
being bom and dying, coming and going all the time. Because of its being just 
what it is, it is from here that the days of yore have forever departed and from here 
that the present arises. By thoroughly doing one’s training, who will say, once he 
has looked deeply, that the universe is just something fluttering about. Or who will 
say, once he has fully investigated the matter, that the universe is merely a 
motionless thing? 

In speaking of ‘throughout all its ten directions’, Shibi was referring to our 
ceaselessly creating a ‘self’ by chasing after things or creating ‘things’ through our 
pursuit of a self. In response to a disciple’s statement, “When we give rise to 
delusory feelings, we alienate ourselves from Wisdom,” Shibi affirmed that there 
was such a separation by a turn of his head or a change of expression on his face. 
This was his hitting the nail on the head through word or gesture; it was the trainee 
presenting his understanding and the Master agreeing with it. Because we create 
‘things’ through the pursuit of a self, the universe is ever restless throughout all its 
ten directions, unceasing in its arising, but since this causal principle is one that 
exists prior to the arising of anything, its operation is beyond our intellect to 
control. 

This ‘One Pearl’ is still not Its name, but It can be expressed so, and this has 
come to be regarded as Its name. The ‘One Pearl’ is what refers directly to That 
which is beyond the measurement of years, for in Its extending endlessly over the 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The One Bright Pearl ’ 


39 


past, It also extends over the present and into the future. Even though we have a 
body and mind at this very moment, they are the Bright Pearl. They are not some 
vegetation sprouting up here or there, nor are they ‘mountains and rivers that arise 
from a duality like that of Heaven and Earth’. They are the Bright Pearl. 

By his question, “How am I, as a trainee, to understand the meaning of 
this?” the monk seems to be operating from his delusory karmic* consciousness, 
yet, as a manifestation of the functioning of That Which Is Reality, this 
consciousness is the Absolute Principle of Reality. Further, you need a foot of 
water to make a one-foot wave rise up, which is to say that a ten-foot high pearl 
will give off a ten-foot high light. 

Shibi’s way of stating this was to say, “Since the whole universe throughout 
all its ten directions is the One Bright Pearl, what use is there in trying to 
understand this with the intellect?” This saying is the way of speaking which 
Buddhas inherit from Buddhas, Ancestors inherit from Ancestors, and Shibi 
inherited from Shibi. Even if you were to try to evade being Their heir to this way 
of speaking, there is ultimately no place where you can go to completely evade It. 
Even were you able to evade the obvious for a while, sooner or later there will be 
some remark that will occasion Its manifesting before your very eyes. 

However, the next day the Master asked this monk, “The whole 
universe throughout all its ten directions is the One Bright Pearl, so 
what do you think this means?” 

On the previous day Shibi had given voice to the Dharma of Certainty; now he was 
giving voice to the Dharma of Uncertainty. By voicing the Dharma of Uncertainty 
on this day, he was saying just the reverse of what he had said the previous day, as 
he smiled and nodded his head approvingly. 

The monk, parroting Shibi, responded, “Since the whole 
universe throughout all its ten directions is the one bright pearl, what 
use is there in my trying to understand this with my intellect?” 

One could say that the monk was riding the robber’s own horse in pursuit of the 
robber. Shibi has taken a completely different approach, whereby the Old Buddha 
explains the Matter for you. Just turn your light around and return to That which 
shines within, for how much use is there in trying to understand This through the 
intellect? When someone gives voice to It, it will be a matter of ‘seven sweet 
dumplings and five savory dumplings’; 3 even so, it will be instructive guidance 


3. Sweet dumplings are associated with Southern Chinese cuisine, and savory ones with the 
cuisine of the Northern Chinese. Like many other references to food in Zen texts, 
‘dumplings’ serves as a metaphor for the Dharma, which spiritually nourishes the trainee. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The One Bright Pearl ’ 


40 


that is ‘south of the Hsiang River and north of the Liu’, that is, two different ways 
of designating the same area. 

Shibi said, “It is certainly clear to me that, even though you are 
blindly looking into the demon’s cave within the pitch black 
mountains of ignorance, you are doing your training.” 

You must realize that the faces of the sun and the moon have never yet at any time 
changed places. The face of the sun always rises as the sun’s face; the face of the 
moon always rises as the moon’s face. Therefore, even if we say that the season 
right now is mid-summer, we should not say that it is our Original Nature that is 
sweltering. This is why this Bright Pearl exists not only without a beginning but 
also without an end. It is ‘ One Bright Pearl as the whole universe throughout all its 
ten directions’: It is not said to be two or three. Your whole being is your pair of 
eyes of the True Dharma; your whole being is the embodiment of Truth; your 
whole being is a single line of Scripture; your whole being is luminosity; your 
whole being is your whole heart and mind. When your whole being exists, your 
whole being has no impediments: it is perfect in its completeness and is ever- 
turning, like the rumbling on of cart wheels. Because the merit of the One Bright 
Pearl takes some ‘visible’ form like those stated above, Avalokiteshvara* and 
Maitreya* exist right now, seeing Its forms and hearing Its sounds. And there are 
old Buddhas and there will be new Buddhas who manifest in bodily form in order 
to give voice to the Dharma. 

When the time is right, you will find the Dharma enfolded in empty space or 
enfolded within the lining of that which clothes you; or you will find It stored in 
the folds of the dragon’s chin or stored in the folds of the king’s headdress, and all 
are the One Bright Pearl that is the universe throughout all the ten directions. 
Keeping It enfolded beneath your robes is proper deportment: do not talk about 
displaying It on the outside. Enfolding It in your headdress or underneath your chin 
is proper deportment: do not imitate those who would playfully display It upon 
their headdresses or around their necks. Whenever you are drunk on delusion, there 
will be a Close Friend who will present you with this Jewel, and you must, without 
fail, present this Jewel to your Close Friend. Come a time when you take to 
hanging the Jewel around your own neck, you are, beyond doubt, drunk with 
delusion. Because this is the way things are, the world in its entirety is the One 
Bright Pearl. 


Dogen’s point is that even though the flavor and size of the servings of Dhanna may differ 
among Buddhists because of such things as local customs and habits, the Dharma Itself is 
fundamentally the same in Its capacity to sustain those who ingest It. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The One Bright Pearl ’ 


41 


This is why, even though it seems that, on the surface, things are either 
fluctuating or still, everything is the Bright Pearl. To know that this is precisely 
how the Jewel is, is what the Bright Pearl is. In this manner we can perceive the 
sounds and forms of the Bright Pearl. Because this is the way things can be, even 
though you may be uncertain about whether or not something is the Bright Pearl, 
you should have no doubt about whether or not there is the Jewel. Whether you 
actively pursue your doubts, cling to them, or let them go, they are simply 
momentary observations of little significance, fleeting images of small weight. 

Do we not cherish the Bright Pearl with Its infinite variety of shades and 
hues like this? Its multifaceted, brilliantly hued sparkling is the merit of the 
universe throughout all its ten quarters; who can take this from you by force? After 
all, there is no one in any of the market places of this world who throws away a 
roof tile, so do not worry about which of the six worlds* of existence you will fall 
into due to causality. 4 Never hidden, It is, from the first, synonymous with always 
doing one’s training, and doing it consistently as well as thoroughly. The Bright 
Pearl is your Original Face: the Bright Pearl is your very Eye in all Its brightness. 

Nevertheless, neither you nor I know precisely what this Bright Pearl is and 
precisely what It is not, but hundreds of notions and opinions about this subject all 
too obviously have become associated with ‘food for thought’. Now, through 
Shibi’s voicing of the Dharma, we have learned and had clarified for us the point 
that what appears as our body and mind is, and always has been, the Bright Pearl. 
Hence, the conscious mind is not what we are, so who is it that arises and passes 
away? Why worry yourself over whether or not something is the Bright Pearl? 
Even if you are perplexed as you grope along, do not think that this is not the 
Bright Pearl. Since there is no action or thought that can be generated that is not of 
the Bright Pearl, even your going back and forth, in and out of the demon’s cave 
within the black mountains is nothing other than the One Bright Pearl. 

This was delivered to the monks at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple, Uji Prefecture, 
Yamashiro Province, on the eighteenth day of the fourth lunar month in the fourth year of 
the Katei era (June 2, 1238). 

It was transcribed by me, while in my quarters in Kippo-ji Temple, Shibi Manor, Yoshida County, 
Echizen Province, on the twenty-third day of the seventh lunar month in the first year of 
the Kangen era (August 10, 1243). 

The monk Ejd, 
Abbot s Assistant 


4. That is, just as those in the marketplace can recognize the value of a mere roof tile, so even 
someone’s being reborn in some hell, for instance, will have its spiritual value. 



5 


On Conduct Appropriate 
for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall 

(Juundd-shiki) 

Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen presents an outline of how trainees should 
behave in the auxiliary Meditation Hall, which was annexed to the main Monks’ Hall. This 
newly built hall would have been used primarily by novice monks. The tone of the original is 
somewhat infonnal, for the text was written not in Chinese, which was the customary language 
used for setting down monastic regulations, but in colloquial Japanese. In the discourse, Dogen 
is not putting forth a series of impersonal, formalized rules and regulations so much as giving 
helpful instructions to those new to the etiquette of Buddhist monastic life, particularly as it 
would have been carried out in the Chinese monastery where Dogen had trained. Some points 
which may strike a present-day reader as obvious were apparently not so obvious for Zen 
trainees in Dogen’s day. 


Those who earnestly desire to seek the Way and to cast off fame and gain 
may enter: those who are aimless and lack sincerity should not. Should you have 
entered for the wrong reasons, once you have determined that you have made a 
mistake, you should depart. Understand that when the desire to seek the Way arises 
in your heart, you are someone who has, then and there, discarded fame and gain. 
In the billions of worlds that comprise the universe, it is quite rare to be affiliated 
with the rightful heirs of the Buddha. Even though our country, from ancient times 
until now, has treated this connection with Buddhism as something fundamental to 
it and has been keenly concerned for what the future may hold, what is right now 
before you should be what you focus on. 

The community in the Hall should be in accord with one another, like milk 
mixing with water, and should encourage each other in practicing the Way. Though 
we are now, for a short while, as guest and host, 1 later we will forever be Ancestors 
of the Buddha. Because this is so, do not lose sight of your sincere belief that each 
and every one of you has encountered something which is hard to encounter, and 
practices something which is difficult to practice. This is called the true heart of the 
Buddha’s Teachings: without doubt you will become a Buddha; you will become 


1. ‘Guest’ refers to a Meditation Hall trainee and ‘host’ to the monk responsible for 
overseeing his or her training. 


42 



Shobogenzo: On Conduct Appropriate for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall 


43 


an Ancestor. You have already left your home and departed from your native 
village. You have asked to be as clouds: you have asked to be as water.” In aiding 
yourself, you aid the Way. And, as a consequence, the gratitude this community has 
for you surpasses even that which we have for our parents. Father and mother are 
your intimates for only a short while within the passage of birth and death: this 
community will be together with you on the Buddha’s Path at all times. 

You should not become fond of going outside the monastery. Once a month, 
for instance, is tolerable for something essential. Those of old lived on remote 
mountains and trained in isolated forests; not only was their involvement with 
worldly affairs rare, they also severed all their other worldly ties. You should train 
yourself in an attitude which conceals Its light and covers Its traces, for now is the 
time to train as though your hair were on fire. Were you to waste this time by 
surrounding yourself with worldly entanglements, how lamentable that would be! 
Alas, the impermanent cannot be relied on, for who knows on what blade of 
roadside grass our dew-like life will fall? 

Whilst in the Hall, you should not read books, even though it may be a book 
on meditation, nor should you bring in personal correspondence. Since it is a 
Meditation Hall, you should pursue the Truth through diligently practicing the Way 
and relegate to the well-lit Monks’ Common Room the illumining of your mind 
through study of the ancient writings on the Teachings. Do not waste even a 
moment, for you should devote yourself exclusively to your training. 

You should keep the monk in charge of the Meditation Hall informed of 
what you are up to, day and night. Do not indulge in diversions as it pleases you to 
do, for this will take its toll on the monastic discipline of the community. Though 
we know not when this life will end, it will end. Doubtless, it will later be 
regretted, should you end your life amidst idle amusements. 

You should not lend support to the misconduct of others, nor should you 
look upon the human errors of others with a hateful heart. There is an old saying, 
“Not to see the faults of others is what is natural for me.” Also, you should not 
make comparisons of the faults of one trainee with those of another, but should just 
put into practice your own virtues. Even though the Buddha had brought His own 
faults under control. He had no feeling of loathing for those who had not. 

You should, by all means, let the monk in charge of the Meditation Hall 
know what you are going to do before doing it, no matter whether it is an important 
or a small undertaking. Someone who is given to doing things without mentioning 


2. A common Japanese term for one who has entered monastic life is unsui, ‘clouds and 
water’, a metaphor for one who asks for no fixed abode and desires to live free of 
preconceptions and entanglements. 



Shobogenzo: On Conduct Appropriate for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall 


44 


them to the Meditation Hall Monk should depart. When the courtesies between 
guest and host become confused, it is difficult for the trainee to distinguish what is 
true from what is merely superficial. 

When in the Hall or in its vicinity, you should not speak in a loud voice or 
loiter about, conversing. And the monk in charge of the Meditation Hall will see to 
this. 

3 

You should not do kinhin in the Hall to keep yourself awake. 

You should not hold onto your rosary whilst in the Hall, nor should you 
recite the names of the Buddhas or chant Scriptures aloud in the Hall on your own. 
But it is all right to do so were a donor to request a Scriptural recitation for a 
ceremony. 

You should not blow your nose noisily or loudly cough up phlegm whilst in 
the Hall. You should not laugh aloud. You should grieve that the proper ways have 
not yet fully permeated your training. You should regret that time, in unseen ways, 
is depriving you of your life of training in the Way. Thereby, you may naturally 
have a feeling of being a fish in a small puddle. 3 4 

When together in the Hall with the community, you should not wear richly 
brocaded robes, but just a simple one made from waste cloth. From ancient times, 
those who awakened to the Way all dressed like this. 

You should not enter the Hall in a drunken state. Should you make such a 
mistake out of a lack of mindfulness, you should bow down and do sange. 5 Also, 
you should not bring rice wine in with you, nor should you enter the Hall reeking 
of strong pickles. 

If two monks start quarreling, both should retire to the Common Room 
because they are not only hindering their own practice, they are also disturbing the 
practice of others. Someone who sees a quarrel breaking out and does not stop it is 
just as much at fault. 

All who refuse to involve themselves in keeping these instructions will be 
expelled from the Hall. 6 Those who are amused by, or are in sympathy with, such 
behavior by trainees are also at fault. 


3. A form of walking meditation which all monks do together between periods of seated 
meditation, but which is not to be done individually during general meditation periods or 
when other monks are sleeping. 

4. That is, be aware of how limited one’s life really is. 

5. ‘To do sange’ is to recognize that what one has done is counter to the Precepts and to 
ensure that it is accompanied by true remorse and repentance. 

6. Having been deprived of a place to sleep and eat within the monastery, the monk may then 



Shobogenzo: On Conduct Appropriate for the Auxiliary Cloud Hall 


45 


You should not invite visiting monks or laity into the Hall and thereby 
disturb those trainees already assembled there. When conversing with a privileged 
guest within even the vicinity of the Hall, you should not speak in a loud voice, to 
say nothing of bragging about yourself as a trainee out of greed for the patron’s 
offerings. 

Those with a long-standing determination to train and, obviously, those who 
are sincerely on a pilgrimage may enter, but even at such a time, you should not 
fail to let the monk in charge of the Meditation Hall know of their presence. 

Seated meditation should be done as it is done in the Monks’ Hall. Never 
neglect to attend morning meditation and services, or evening instruction periods. 

In accordance with monastic etiquette, someone who spills the contents of 
his alms bowl onto the floor during the morning or noon meal should ‘see to the 
oil’. 7 

Beyond question, you should adhere to the Precepts as set down by the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. You should impress the monastery’s regulations into your 
bones and engrave them onto your heart. 

You should pray that you may live your life tranquilly and do your training 
in the Way free of attachment to any preconceptions. 

The preceding items are the body and mind of former Buddhas: follow them 
with reverence. 

The twenty-fifth day of the fourth lunar month in the first year of the En o era (May 29, 1239). 


choose either to leave the monastery or to turn his heart around (that is, do ‘sange’) by 
giving up his intransigence and asking to be reinstated. 

7. A standard practice for someone committing a light breach of monastic etiquette through 
carelessness, in which the monk is personally and/or financially responsible for seeing that 
the oil lamp in front of the Hall’s main statue is provided with sufficient fuel, so that it may 
keep burning over the next twenty-four hours. 



6 

On 6 Your Very Mind Is Buddha’ 

(Soku Shin Ze Butsu) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen makes clear that the saying “Your very 
mind is Buddha” is to be understood in a particular way: it is a remark addressed to one who has 
already given rise to the intention to train and realize Buddhahood. Those who have not yet done 
so are apt to think of ‘mind’ as referring to intellective, perceptual, and cognitive functions, 
which are viewed as constituting a personal ‘self’, a misconception akin to the Shrenikan view 
that such functions constitute an immortal soul. Because of this danger, Dogen gives a detailed 
presentation of this Shrenikan view, which he immediately refutes through quoting the koan 
story alluded to in Discourse 1: A Discourse on Doing One’s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the 
Buddhas (Bendowa). He then goes on to show how the meaning of the saying “Your very mind is 
Buddha” can be explored more deeply and what some of its implications are. 


What the Buddhas and Ancestors, without exception, have traditionally 
maintained and entrusted to us is, simply, that this very mind of ours is Buddha. 
Even so, the statement “Your very mind is Buddha” did not come from India, but 
was first heard in China. Many trainees have misunderstood what it means, but 
have failed to explore their misunderstanding to their advantage. Because many 
have not seen their misunderstanding through to its obviously erroneous 
conclusion, they have wandered off onto non-Buddhist paths. 

Hearing talk of ‘your very mind’, those befuddled by doubts speculate that 
the intellective, cognitive, and perceptual functions of sentient beings are 
synonymous with ‘the Mind of enlightenment before someone has awakened to If, 
and accordingly fancy themselves to be a Buddha. This is due to their never having 
encountered a genuine Teacher of Buddhism. 1 

The sort of non-Buddhist view I am referring to existed in India under the 
name of the Shrenikan view. The following is in accord with that viewpoint: 


1. That is, had they met such a Teacher, he would never have permitted such folly. The original 
text carries no implication that anyone who encounters a genuine Teacher of Buddhism will 
automatically and instantaneously be freed from all delusions, or that, if a disciple is 
deluded, it is inevitably because his or her teacher is inadequate. Even the Buddha could not 
help those who would not take His Teachings to heart. 


46 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Your Very Mind h Buddha ’ 


47 


A Great Principle resides in our present body whose presence 
can readily be discerned. Specifically, it discriminates between 
suffering and pleasure, knows what is cold or hot, and perceives the 
misery of pain and the itch of desire. It is not limited by any physical 
thing or affected by any surrounding conditions. Although physical 
things come and go, and conditions arise and disappear, this Spiritual 
Intelligence forever exists, unchanging. 

This Spiritual Intelligence permeates all living beings far and 
wide. The mundane and the saintly alike harbor this spirit, without 
any difference between them. Even though the illusory flowerings of 
false teachings may exist in humans temporarily, once they become 
aware of this wise discernment through its accord with a particular 
thought, physical ‘things’ fall away and conditions disappear; 
thereupon, the Spiritual Intelligence alone remains in its original 
nature, ever clear and bright. Even though the bodily aspect ultimately 
breaks down, the Spiritual Intelligence comes out intact, just as when 
a house is being completely destroyed by a fire, the householder 
emerges and escapes. 

This Intelligence, which is clear in its functions yet whose 
substance is mysterious and beyond our grasp, is referred to as the 
nature of those who are spiritually awakened and wise. We also call it 
‘Buddha’, as well as ‘enlightenment’. We ourselves, as well as all 
others, are equally endowed with it; the deluded and the enlightened 
are both permeated with it. Whatever myriad things and conditions 
may exist, this Spiritual Intelligence is neither linked to these 
conditions nor the same as these things, but abides forever throughout 
the eons. Since all conditions existing in the present are dependent on 
the Spiritual Intelligence, they can be regarded as being real. Because 
they are innately conditioned to arise, they actually exist. Even so, 
they do not abide forever, as does the Spiritual Intelligence, since they 
only exist for a while before they disappear. 

Because this Intelligence understands things in mysterious 
ways, without depending on light or darkness, it is called ‘that which 
knows what the spirit is’. It is also referred to as ‘the True Self’, ‘the 
Source of Enlightenment’, ‘One’s Original Nature’, and ‘One’s 
Fundamental Substance’. One who awakens to this Original Nature is 
said to return to the Ever-abiding and is called a Mahasattva, that is, ‘a 
Great Being who has returned to the True’. After this, he does not 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Your Very Mind h Buddha ’ 


48 


transmigrate through the cycle of birth and death, but comes to realize 
the non-arising, non-perishing ‘Ocean of his Original Nature’, and 
enters therein. 

Apart from this Intelligence, there is no reality or truth. To the 
extent that someone is unaware of this Nature of his, the three 
temporal worlds and the six worlds* of existence compete to arise. 

Such is the view of the non-Buddhist Shrenikans. 


The fully awakened Chinese National Teacher Echu of the great 
T’ang dynasty once asked a monk, “Where do you come from?” 

The monk replied, “1 come from the South.” 

The Master asked, “Do you have good spiritual friends in the 
South?” 

The monk replied, “We have quite a few.” 

The Master asked, “What do they point out to people?” 

The monk said, “Spiritual friends there point out to trainees, 
right from the start, that their own minds are Buddha. ‘Buddha’ means 
‘enlightenment’, and we are all, right now, fully equipped with a 
Nature that experiences and knows through what It sees and hears. 
This Nature is innately good, and has the capacity to raise the 
eyebrows and make the eyes twinkle. Since It exists throughout the 
whole body, when It rustles through the head, the head ‘knows’, and 
when It rustles through the foot, the foot ‘knows’. This is why it is 
called samyak-sambuddha, ‘the One Who Knows Everything 
Perfectly’. No other Buddha exists apart from this. This body of ours 
experiences birth and extinction, but the Nature of our mind, from 
time without beginning, has never yet arisen or perished. The body’s 
arising and perishing is like a dragon’s changing his bones for lighter 
ones, a snake’s shedding its skin, or someone moving from a former 
residence—that is, the physical aspect is transient, but this Nature is 
permanent. This is roughly what is taught in the South.” 


* See Glossary. 

2. A reference to the Chinese folk belief that fossil bones belonged to dragons who had left 
them behind in order to live and fly about in the sky. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Your Very Mind h Buddha ’ 


49 


The Master said, “If this is so, then there is no difference 
between their teaching and the non-Buddhist view of the Shrenikans. 

The latter view states that there is a sort of ‘Divine Nature’ in this 
body of ours, which has the capacity to know pain and itch, and that, 
when the body disintegrates, this divine aspect departs from it, like a 
householder fleeing when his house is on fire—the dwelling is 
impermanent whilst its householder is forever. Were the matter like 
this, there would be no way, upon examination, to distinguish right 
from wrong, so how can we accept it as correct? 

“When I used to go on pilgrimages, I would often encounter 
this sort of thing. In recent times it has flourished even more widely. 

These ‘good friends’ would gather together an assembly of some three 
to five hundred and, seeing stars in their listeners’ eyes, would say 
that this is our Buddhist tradition’s Teachings in the South. Taking up 
the Sixth Ancestor’s Platform Scripture, they would alter what It says 
by garnishing It with vulgar and rude comments and stories, whilst 
adulterating or deleting the wise and saintly intentions of the 
Ancestor, thereby deluding and confusing their followers. How can 
this be considered the uttering of our Teachings? How painful! It will 
be the death of our tradition. Were we intended to take our perceptual 
and cognitive functions to be our Buddha Nature, Vimalakirti* would 
certainly not have said that the Dharma is apart from our perceptual 
and cognitive functions, and that, when we are occupied with these 
functions, then this is being engaged in perceiving and cognizing, and 
is not a seeking of the Dharma.” 

The National Teacher was a leading disciple of the former Buddha Daikan 
Eno and was the outstanding good spiritual friend of celestial and human beings. 
Grasping the spiritual import of what the National Teacher has pointed out, you 
should take it as the model for your training and study. When you detect the 
discriminatory view of the non-Buddhist Shrenikans, do not follow it. 

In more recent times, of all our colleagues who are Abbots or Masters in the 
various monasteries of Great Sung China, none compares with the National 
Teacher. From ancient times, a spiritual friend who could equal the National 
Teacher has still not entered this world. And yet, ordinary, worldly people 
mistakenly hold the opinion that Zen Masters like Rinzai and Tokusan are the 
equals of the National Teacher. Fellows who hold such a view are all too many. 
These people, alas, are not clear-eyed teachers. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Your Very Mind h Buddha ’ 


50 


The saying “Your very mind is Buddha,” which Buddhas and Ancestors have 
assured us is so, is something not even dreamed of by non-Buddhists or by 
followers of the two Lesser Courses.* Only Buddhas and Ancestors—and They 
alone—pass on that one’s mind is Buddha, and only They experience its meaning 
to the fullest. Having heard of it, They have put it into practice and have come to 
realize it for Themselves. 

The term Buddha implies that the hundreds of karmic seedlings from 
defiling passions have been weeded out and discarded. However, I am not speaking 
of this term as it is applied to a sixteen-foot tall golden statue. 

The term soku (‘that which is immediate’) refers to one’s spiritual question 
before one deals with what is right before one’s eyes, and before one leams to 
avoid the blunders that may arise from not dealing with that question. 

The term ze (‘is’) refers to the three temporal worlds of ‘was’, ‘is’, and ‘will 
be’, from which there is no retreating or escaping, and which are not merely a 
figment of the mind. 

The term shin (‘mind’) implies the walls and fences of discernment before 
they have been mudded fast with mortar, and before one has fabricated anything or 
added fixtures. 

We may thoroughly examine these terms in the form, for instance, of “Your 
very mind is Buddha,” or in the form of “Your mind, at this very moment, is 
Buddha,” or “Buddha, right now, is your mind,” or “Your very mind is what 
‘Buddha’ is,” or “This ‘Buddha’ is your mind right now.” To thoroughly explore 
the meaning in this manner is precisely an instance of one’s very mind being 
Buddha. In promoting the meaning, the Ancestors passed it on in a straightforward 
manner as “Your very mind is Buddha,” and it has come down to us today, 
accurately transmitted in this form. 

The so-called ‘mind which has been correctly Transmitted’ refers to the 
whole mind being synonymous with ‘all thoughts and things’, and all thoughts and 
things are what constitute ‘the whole mind’. This is why someone in the past once 
said, “When a person fully realizes what his mind really is, not an inch of solid 
ground will exist upon the earth.” You must understand that when you fully realize 
what your mind is, the whole canopy of the heavens is knocked down and the 
spinning earth is completely tom asunder. On the other hand, when you come to 
see what your mind really is, the earth becomes three inches thicker. 

An ancient one of great virtue once said, “And just what is this wondrously 
pure, bright mind? It is the great earth with its mountains and rivers, along with the 
sun, the moon, and all the stars.” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Your Very Mind h Buddha ’ 


51 


Now you know clearly: what is called ‘mind’ is the great earth with its 
mountains and rivers; it is the sun, the moon, and the stars. Even so, when you take 
what is being expressed here one step further, something is lacking; when you 
draw back from what it is saying, something has gone too far. The mind that is the 
great earth with its mountains and rivers is simply the great earth with its 
mountains and rivers: there are no surging waves nor is there any wind-driven 
spindrift to disturb or upset it. The mind that is sun, moon, and stars is simply sun, 
moon, and stars: there is no fog nor is there any mist to obscure its clarity. The 
mind that is the coming and going of birth and death is simply the coming and 
going of birth and death: there is no ‘being deluded’ nor is there any ‘realizing 
enlightenment’. The mind that is the tiles* and stones for walls and fences is 
simply the tiles and stones for walls and fences: there is no mud nor is there any 
water to make a binding mortar. The mind that is the four elements* and the five 
skandhas* is simply the four elements and the five skandhas: there are no wild 
horses of unbridled willfulness nor any monkeys with insatiable desires. The mind 
that is the Master’s Dharma seat and his ceremonial hossu* is simply the Master’s 
seat and hossu: there is no bamboo whose joints block clear passage nor is there 
any wood twisted up with knots. Since this is the way things are, “Your very mind 
is Buddha” means, pure and simply, that your very mind is Buddha; all Buddhas 
are, pure and simply, all Buddhas. 

Thus, “Your very mind is Buddha” refers to all Buddhas, that is, to Those 
who have given rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood by practicing and 
training until They awaken to Their enlightenment and realize nirvana. Those who 
have not given rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood by practicing and 
training until they awaken to their enlightenment and realize nirvana are not those 
whose very mind is Buddha. Even if, for a fraction of an instant, you give rise to 
the intention to train and realize the Truth for yourself, your very mind will be 
Buddha. Even if, for the tiniest, imperceptible moment, you give rise to the 
intention to train and realize the Truth for yourself, your very mind will be Buddha. 
Even if, for immeasurable eons, you give rise to the intention to train and realize 
the Truth for yourself, your very mind will be Buddha. Even if, for the length of 
only one single thought, you give rise to the intention to train and realize the Truth 
for yourself, your very mind will be Buddha. Even if, half-heartedly, you give rise 
to the intention to train and realize the Truth for yourself, your very mind will be 
Buddha. Nevertheless, were you to say of someone who is taking ever so long to 
train to become a Buddha that his mind is not Buddha, you have not yet seen your 
mind to be Buddha, nor do you yet know what the saying means, nor are you yet 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Your Very Mind h Buddha ’ 


52 


truly training in the Way. You have not met a genuine Teacher of Buddhism who 
knows how to open up your very mind to be Buddha. 

The term ‘all Buddhas’ means Shakyamuni Buddha: Shakyamuni Buddha is 
synonymous with one’s very mind being Buddha. At that very moment when all 
the Buddhas of past, present, and future have become, do become, and will become 
Buddha, without fail. They become Shakyamuni Buddha. This is what “Your very 
mind is Buddha” means. 

This was delivered to the monastic assembly at Kannonddri in Kdshohdrin-ji Temple, Uji County, 
Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-fifth day of the fifth lunar month in the first year of the 
En ’o era (June 28, 1239). 

It was written down by me on the twelfth day of the seventh lunar month in the third year of the 
Kangen era (August 5, 1245), while in the chaplain s quarters at Daibutsu-ji Temple, 
Yoshida Prefecture, Echizen Province. 

Ejo 



7 

On Washing Yourself Clean 

(Senjo) 


Translator’s Introduction: On the surface, Senjo contains Dogen’s instructions to his monks on 
the monastic procedures for dealing with the act of relieving nature. On a deeper level, it is a 
detailed analysis of how a monk is to practice mindfulness at every stage in the process of 
handling that most physical and mundane of activities, one that humans too often treat with 
disgust or think of as not having any spiritual relevance. On a deeper level still, it reveals how 
attending to the mundane can function as a spiritual cleansing. 

The tone of the original is difficult to reproduce in English without misleading the reader. 
Much of it is written in what might be called Japanese cookbook style. That is, the instructions 
are often expressed as though addressed impersonally. For example, a rather literal rendering of a 
particular phrase would be “Next, one washes one’s hands,” which in English cookbook style 
would appear as “Next, wash your hands.” The latter, however, may sound in the present context 
like an injunction or rigid command, a laying down of the rules. In this translation, I have tried to 
find a middle path between the rather stilted, impersonal ‘one’ and the raw command of the 
imperative, and have therefore chosen the simple instructional style, “Next, you wash your 
hands.” Only on occasion does Dogen use a form that is herein rendered as “You should,” and 
even more rarely one that is a negative command, “Do not.” 

In historical tenns, Dogen’s instructions represent the most advanced ideas of personal 
hygiene for his times, even though today some of them might be considered unsanitary. Had he 
lived in the present, undoubtedly his instructions would take into account the principles of 
modern-day hygiene. It is quite likely that his views were influenced by his Chinese Master 
Tendo Nyojo, who, as a novice, had requested to be appointed as Head of Purification (that is, 
the monk in charge of the lavatories) for his monastery, and he was later allowed to take on this 
responsibility. 

The realization of enlightenment through practice, which the Buddhas and 
Ancestors have protected and preserved, has been described by Them as ‘being 
freed from stain’. 

The Sixth Ancestor Eno once asked his disciple Nangaku Ejo of 
Kannon-in Temple, “Looking back, do you think that what we do has 
always been based on realizing enlightenment through practice?” 


53 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


54 


Nangaku responded, “It is not that realizing enlightenment by 
means of practice has not existed in the past, but should someone act 
in a way that is stained, then he will not realize it.” 

Eno said, “It is this ‘being freed from stain’ that all Buddhas 
have preserved in Their hearts and kept in mind. You have done this, 
as have I, as have our Indian Ancestral Masters.” 


It says the following in the Great Scripture on the Three Thousand Forms of 
Everyday Behavior for Monks, “Purifying the body refers to cleansing yourself of 
its excretions and keeping your nails clipped.” Therefore, even though our bodies 
and minds are unstained, there is a method for cleansing the body, which is also a 
method for cleansing the mind. Not only will it purify body and mind, it will also 
purify those in our nation and those who train ‘under a tree’. Even though no one 
in our nation has ever yet been sullied by the dust of existence, purifying is what 
all Buddhas keep in mind. Upon reaching the fruits of Buddhahood, They do not 
neglect or discontinue Their cleansing. The meaning of this is impossible to fully 
fathom. Proper decorum is one thing that is meant by it, and realizing the Way 
through ordination is one form of proper decorum. 


A verse in the “Pure Deeds” chapter of the Avatamsaka Scripture says: 

Whilst relieving nature, 

By all means pray that all sentient beings 
Will eliminate their impurities 

By completely ridding themselves of lust, anger, and 
delusion. 

Whilst washing up afterwards, 

By all means pray that all sentient beings 
May turn towards the Peerless Way 
And leave worldly things behind them. 

Whilst cleaning off the soil with water, 

By all means pray that all sentient beings 
Will avail themselves of purifying patience, 

That they may, after all, be free from any defdement. 

Water is not necessarily ‘fundamentally pure’ nor is it ‘fundamentally impure’: the 
body is not necessarily ‘fundamentally pure’ nor is it ‘fundamentally impure’—so 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


55 


it is with all things. This does not mean that water is or is not something sentient; it 
does not mean that the body is or is not something sentient—again, so it is with all 
things. This is what the World-honored Buddha gave voice to. Even so, it is not 
water that makes our bodies clean: relying on the Buddha’s Dharma and keeping to 
the Buddha’s Dharma is what ‘washing yourself clean’ really means. This Dharma 
is the very being and spirit of what the Buddhas and Ancestors have personally and 
correctly Transmitted; It is the very words and phrases used to describe That which 
the Buddhas and Ancestors directly experienced; It is the very Light in which the 
Buddhas and Ancestors clearly abide and to which They hold. In sum, It is an 
immeasurable, unbounded, meritorious virtue which They make manifest before 
our very eyes. When, at the right moment, They supply the forms for training body 
and mind, They fully provide the basic elements of conduct, which are timeless. As 
a result, what we call ‘the mind and body of one who is training’ naturally 
manifests. 

djb 

CX) 


You should keep the nails on your ten fingers clipped. Whereas ‘ten fingers’ 
is a reference to the fingernails of both your hands, right and left, you should 
likewise clip your toenails. It says in the Scriptures that we are doing wrong if we 
let our nails be longer than an eighth of an inch . 1 2 So, you should not let your nails 
grow long like non-Buddhist old-timers do, and you should take care to clip your 
nails. In present-day Sung China, there were those fellows within our monastic 
family who lacked an eye for the way to train and let their nails grow very long. On 
some, they were one or two inches long, and on some, even as long as three or four 
inches. This is counter to the Teachings and is neither the flesh nor the spirit of the 
Buddha’s Dharma. They acted like this because they did not maintain the customs 
or practice of the Buddha’s family. Among the venerable Elders who have held to 
the Way, such behavior is not to be found. 

Similarly, there were some of my fellow monks who let their hair grow. This 
is also counter to the Teachings. Do not make the mistake of thinking that this may 
be in accord with the True Teaching just because some say that monks in a great 
and powerful country do it. 


1. The inch referred to here is about forty percent longer than an English inch. Hence, the 
recommended length, in Western terms, would be just under three-sixteenths of an inch. 
Similar computations should be made for later references to lengths in inches or feet. 

2. It was a long-established custom in China, particularly among the Confucianist public 
officials, to let their nails grow as long as possible as a sign that they did not engage in 
menial labor, which they considered demeaning. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


56 


My former Master, a venerable Buddha, had the following words of 
instruction for any monks in the Greater Sangha who sported long hair or nails, “It 
is neither lay folk nor monks who do not understand the practice of our shaving our 
heads—it is animals. Who among the Buddhas and Ancestors of the past failed to 
shave Their heads? If any of you fail to grasp why you should shave your head, 
you are truly an animal through and through.” After instructing his community in 
this way, many of my fellow monks who had not shaved their heads for years did 
so. Whether giving a Dharma talk in the Meditation Hall or speaking informally to 
his monks, he would snap his fingers loudly while pointing in rebuke, saying 
something to the effect of: 

For what reason I know not, you have rashly let your hair and 
nails grow long. How pitiful that you have let the human body and 
mind which you have received fall into aimless ways. For the past two 
or three hundred years, the Way of the Ancestors has been in decline, 
so that fellows like you are many indeed. Such persons have 
sometimes become heads of temples, and have even received titles of 
respect from emperors, whilst making a pretense of spiritually leading 
others—what a misfortune for both human and celestial beings alike! 

Now, in all the mountain temples here in China, people with hearts 
intent on the Way are all disappearing, and those who would gain the 
Path have long been dying out. Only hooligans remain! 

When my Master spoke in this manner, those from various places who had 
imprudently been given the title of Elder did not grumble about this, nor did they 
offer any defense either . 3 4 

You should realize that long hair on a monk is something that the Buddhas 
and Ancestors remonstrated against and that growing long nails was something that 
non-Buddhists practiced. The descendants of Buddhas and Ancestors should not 
take delight in these sorts of practices, which are contrary to the Dharma. You 
should keep yourself pure in body and mind, and keep yourself clean by seeing that 
you trim your nails and shave the hair off your head. 


Do not neglect to wash after relieving nature. Shariputra once brought about 
the conversion of a non-Buddhist by means of this Teaching. Although it was not 

3. ‘The Greater Sangha’ refers here not only to the monks in Tendo Nyojo’s monastery but also 
to any other monks who might come to visit. 

4. The term ‘Elder’ generally refers to someone who has been a monk for ten years or more. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


57 


something that the non-Buddhist originally expected, nor was it something that 
Shariputra had consciously intended, even so, when the forms of dignified 
behavior of the Buddhas and Ancestors are kept before one’s eyes, false teachings 
are spontaneously humbled. ? 

When doing your training under a tree in the forest or out in the open, you 
will not find a privy already built. So, using water from some convenient valley 
stream or river, clean yourself off with sand. Since you do not have any ashes at 
this time to cleanse yourself with, simply use two sets of seven balls of sandy soil. 
The way to use these fourteen balls is as follows: after having removed your robe, 
folded it, and put it aside, you take soil that is sandy [rather than dark earth], shape 
it into balls about the size of a large soybean, and place these atop a stone or some 
other convenient place, with two rows of seven balls each. Then, provide yourself 
with some pebbles that can be used for scouring your hands. After that, you relieve 
yourself. After you have finished relieving yourself, use a wooden or bamboo toilet 
spatula, or some paper, to clean yourself off. You then go to the edge of the water 
to wash. Make sure to take three of the balls with you to clean yourself. Put one of 
the balls in the palm of your hand, add just a little water, mix the ingredients 
together until their consistency is thinner than mud and quite soupy, and begin by 
cleaning off your genitals. Then take another sand ball and, preparing it as before, 
clean off your buttocks. Again, prepare a sand ball as before and, in the same 
manner, clean off your hands . 5 6 

djb 

After monks began to reside in temple quarters, they constructed a building 
that they referred to as ‘the Eastern Quarters’. Sometimes it was called a water 
closet and at other times a lavatory. It is absolutely essential to have a lavatory in a 
place where a family of monks resides. 

When going to the Eastern Quarters, you should be sure to take a hand towel 
with you. The way to do this is to fold the hand towel in half and put it over your 
left shoulder, letting it hang down over the sleeve of your gown. When you have 


5. The reference to Shariputra and the non-Buddhist may be to an incident recorded in the 
Code of Behavior for Members of the Greater Sangha, where a non-Buddhist was converted 
to Buddhism out of admiration and respect for Shariputra’s scrupulous observance of the 
code of monastic decorum, which the man had observed whilst the monk was on his alms 
rounds. Shariputra was one of the two chief disciples of Shakyamuni Buddha. 

6. Dogen does not specifically indicate how the remaining eleven balls are to be used, but 
considering how he uses numbers in other discourses, it is likely that he means, “If you need 
more than three, well, you have them right at hand.” 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


58 


arrived at the Eastern Quarters, you should hang your towel over the clean-clothes 
pole. Hang it in the same way it was when it was hanging on your shoulder. If you 
come wearing a nine- or seven-striped kesa,* you should be sure to hang it next to 
your towel. You should hang it so that it will not fall off. Do not hastily toss it over 
the pole. 

You should be sure to pay particular attention to the name marker. The name 
marker is for putting your name on the pole. Write your name on a piece of white 
paper in the shape of a full moon and then align this marker on the rack. We use a 
name marker so that we will not forget where we have put our robe. When our 
monks come in numbers, we must be sure not to confuse our place on the rack with 
that of others. 

If a number of monks come and line up at this time, make shashu and bow 
in greeting to the others. When bowing in greeting, you need not bow deeply: 
simply hold your hands in shashu before your chest and bow in recognition of the 
others. When in the Eastern Quarters, we acknowledge the monks assembled by 
bowing to them even when we are not in our robes. If your two hands are not 
occupied or you are not carrying something in them, you should keep them in 
shashu and bow. 

If one of your hands is already occupied, or when you are carrying 
something in one hand, you should make your bow with a one-handed gassho.* In 
bowing with a one-handed gassho, the hand is raised, with the fingers slightly 
cupped as if you were going to use the hand to scoop up water; the head is lowered 
slightly, as in greeting. When another monk behaves in this way towards us, we 
should behave similarly: when we behave in this way, the other monk should do 
likewise. 

The procedure for taking off your undershirt and outer robe is to remove 
your robe along with the undershirt by bringing the two sleeves together in back, 
putting the two arm holes together, and lifting up the sleeves. You then fold the two 
sleeves, one atop the other, over the garment. Next, with the left hand, grasp the 
back of the collars and, with the right hand, draw up the robe and fold it down the 
middle of the sleeve bags 7 and the two collars. Having folded over the two sleeves 
and collars, you again fold the robe in two, lengthwise, and drape it over the pole 
with the collars on the far side; the skirt of the robe and the sleeve cuffs hang on 
the near side of the pole. That is to say, the robe hangs at the waist over the pole. 


* See Glossary. 

7. On some monastic robes, the sleeves are quite full, forming a bag-like appendage. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


59 


Next, avoid mistaking whose towel is whose when there are two poles and 
two towels are hanging one in front of the other. So that your towel does not get 
separated from your robe or get taken by someone who has not hung up a towel, tie 
it down by wrapping it around your robe two or three times and tying it, without 
letting your robe fall onto the ground. Then, facing your robe, you make gassho. 

Next, you take a sash cord and hang it over your shoulders . 8 Then go to the 
wash stand and fill a clean bucket with water; carrying the bucket with your right 
hand, go into a toilet stall. In putting water in the bucket, do not fill it to the brim, 
but fill it up nine-tenths of the way. 

When you reach the lavatory door, you should change your slippers. Put on a 
pair of rush slippers, leaving your own slippers by the front of the lavatory door. 
This is what is meant by ‘changing slippers’. 


It says in the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple, “When you need 
to go to the Eastern Quarters, by all means anticipate this need. Deal with it in 
time, so that you do not hurry from urgency. Give yourself time to fold your kesa, 
and leave it on your table in the Monks’ Quarters or on the clean pole in the 
lavatory.” 

Upon entering the toilet stall, close the door with your left hand. You next 
pour just a little water from your bucket into the toilet basin. Next, put the bucket 
in front of you in the place provided for it. Then, while standing, face the basin and 
snap your fingers three times. Whilst snapping your fingers, your left hand is held 
in a fist at your left side at waist level. Next, you lift and gather up your under-skirt 
by its comers, face the door and, straddling the basin between your feet, squat 
down and relieve yourself. Do not soil either side of your garments; do not let them 
get stained front or back. During this time, you should remain silent. Do not talk or 
joke with the person in the next stall, chant, sing, or recite anything aloud. Do not 
spit or blow mucus from your nose onto the area around you. Do not strain or make 
gmnting sounds excessively. You should not write on the walls. Do not dig at or 
draw on the ground with your toilet spatula; it should be used for cleaning yourself 
after you have evacuated your bowels. Also, if you use paper, you should not use 
old paper or paper with characters written on it. 

You should keep in mind the difference between a clean spatula and a soiled 
one. The spatula is eight inches long, triangular in shape. In thickness, it is the 
width of one’s thumb. Some are lacquered, others are not. Put your soiled spatula 


8. A sash cord is used to tie clothes out of the way. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


60 


in the used spatula box. Clean ones will already be in the spatula stand. The spatula 
stand is kept near the sign in front of the toilet basin. 

After using a spatula or paper, the way you clean yourself is as follows: hold 
the bucket in your right hand and moisten your left hand well. Then, cupping some 
water in your left hand, you first clean off your genitals three times. Then, you 
wash your buttocks. This is the way you should clean yourself. 

Do not tip the bucket roughly, spilling the water into your hand and quickly 
using it all up. 

After you have finished cleaning yourself, put the bucket down in its proper 
place; then, take the used spatula and wipe it clean and dry with paper. You should 
wipe your genitals and buttocks dry. Next, adjust your under-skirt and robe with 
your right hand, and, also with your right hand, pick up the bucket. Then go out the 
door, take off the rush slippers, and put on your own. Next, you return to the wash 
stand and put the bucket in its original place. 

Next, you should wash your hands. With your right hand you take a spoonful 
of ashes, place it atop some pebbles, drip some water on them, and wash your 
contacting hand with your right hand , 9 using the pebbles to scour it, just as though 
you were cleaning rust off a sword. You should wash with ashes in this manner 
three times. Then, you should take some sand, add some water, and wash three 
times. Next, take some cleansing powder made from ground orange seeds in your 
right hand, moisten it with water from the small bucket, and wash by rubbing your 
hands together. The washing should be done thoroughly, even up your forearms. 
You should wholeheartedly devote your attention to washing in a conscientious 
manner. Ashes thrice, sand thrice, and cleansing powder once—all together seven 
times, an appropriate number. Next, you wash in a large bucket. This time, you 
simply wash in cold or warm water, without using any cleanser, sand, or ashes. 
After washing once, transfer that water into the small bucket, put in fresh water, 
and rinse both hands. In the Avatamsaka Scripture, a verse says: 

When washing your hands, 

By all means pray that all sentient beings 

May acquire the finest hands 

With which to receive the Buddha s Teachings. 

When you use a water ladle, you should, of course, hold it with your right hand. 
When using it, do so quietly, without making a great noise with bucket or ladle. 


9. In India, China, and Japan, it was customary to use the left hand to clean oneself after 
relieving oneself. As this hand might well become soiled through this contact, it was called, 
literally, ‘the contacting hand’. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


61 


Do not splash water about, scatter the cleansing powder, or get the area 
around the water stand wet. That is to say, do not be hasty or careless: do not be 
disorderly with things or treat them roughly. 

Next, you dry your hands with the towel for general use or dry them with 
your own towel. Once you have finished drying your hands, go to where your robe 
is hanging over the pole, undo the sash cord, and hang the cord over the pole. Next, 
hang your towel over your left shoulder and rub some incense on yourself. There is 
rubbing incense for general use. It is made of fragrant wood in the shape of small 
vials. The size of each is about the thickness of a thumb and four times that amount 
in length. You take a piece of string about a foot long and thread it through the 
holes that are bored in each end of the incense stick. This is hung over the pole. 
When you rub it between the palms of your hands, the fragrance of this incense 
will naturally impregnate your hands. 

When you hang your sash cord over the pole, do not hang it over another 
one so that they become entangled, and do not leave it in a disorderly fashion. 


When matters are handled in this way, everything will be a purified Buddha 
Land, a Buddha World well adorned. You should do everything with care, without 
a lapse: you should not act from haste, as though in a dither. Do not entertain the 
thought, “If I hurry, I can get back to what I was doing.” You should keep in mind 
the principle that, when you go to the Eastern Quarters, the Buddha’s Dharma is 
not something to be talked about, but lived. 


Do not stare at the faces of monks coming and going. 


In cleansing yourself whilst in the lavatory, it is fine to use cool water, since 
it is said that hot water may cause diarrhea. Using warm water to wash your hands 
will not prove disturbing to your health. A kettle has been provided for heating 
water to wash your hands with. 

Concerning the duties of the monk in charge of the lavatory, it says in the 
Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple, “Later in the evening, see that water is 
heated and oil is put out for the night lamp. Always make sure that there is 
someone to take over the boiling of the water, and do not let the community do it 
with a discriminatory attitude.” From this it is clear that both hot and cold water are 
used. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


62 


If the interior of the lavatory becomes dirty, you should screen off the entry 
door and hang the sign that says ‘Dirty’ on it. If a bucket is accidentally knocked 
over, you should screen off the entry door and hang up the ‘Spilled Bucket’ sign. 
Do not enter the building when such signs have been put up. 

Even though you may have already entered a stall, if there is someone else 
who snaps his fingers to let you know of his presence, you should leave shortly. 


In the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple it says, “If you do not 
wash yourself clean, you cannot truly take a seat in the Meditation Hall or bow to 
the Triple Treasure. Also, you cannot accept bows from others.” And in the Great 
Scripture on the Three Thousand Forms of Everyday Behavior for Monks it says, 
“If you do not clean yourself after relieving nature, you are committing an 
offensive act . 10 You cannot truly sit upon a monk’s pure cushion, nor can you truly 
pay homage to the Triple Treasure. Although you may bow, you will have neither 
happiness nor merit from doing so.” 

On the basis of these quotations, you should put this matter foremost when 
you are training in the temple. How can we possibly not want to pay homage to the 
Triple Treasure, nor to accept the respectful bows of others, nor to bow to them in 
return? The training halls of the Buddhas and Ancestors undoubtedly had these 
forms for dignified behavior. Those in the training halls of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors undoubtedly implemented these forms for dignified behavior. These are 
not things we force ourselves to do, for they are the words and deeds that arise 
naturally from the forms of dignified behavior. They are the constant conduct of all 
Buddhas and the everyday behavior of all Ancestors. And such forms are not 
limited just to the Buddhas of this world: they are the conduct of Buddhas in all ten 
directions. They are the conduct of Buddhas in both the Pure Lands and in the 
besmirched realms of existence. Those folks who are poorly informed fancy that 
the Buddhas have no forms of dignified behavior for using the lavatory, or they 
imagine that the forms of dignified behavior for the Buddhas in this world of 
ordinary beings are not the same as those for the Buddhas in the Pure Lands, but 
this is not what ‘learning the Way of the Buddhas’ means. You should realize that 
‘purity and stain’ is clotted blood that has trickled from a corpse: one minute warm, 
the next minute horribly cold . 11 


10. An ‘offensive act’ is a technical term that refers to the category of least serious breaches of 
monastic conduct. 

11. This is Dogen’s image for a distinction that once was considered the lifeblood of practice 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


63 


In the fourteenth section of the Ten Procedures to Be Recited it says: 

When Rahula, the Buddha’s son, was a novice, he took to 
spending his nights in the Buddha’s lavatory. The Buddha, fully aware 
of what His son was doing, patted Rahula on the head with His right 
hand and recited this verse: 

My son, it was not to be poor or in want, 

Nor to rid yourself of fortune or position, 

But simply to seek the Way that you left home, 

Which will surely bring hardships enough to bear 

So, you see, the Buddha’s temple had its lavatory too. The form for dignified 
behavior in the Buddha’s lavatory was to wash oneself clean, and the Ancestors, in 
turn, passed this on to us. The conduct of the Buddhas has still been preserved: to 
follow the ancient ways is a great joy and something indeed hard to come by. 
Further, thankfully, the Tathagata gave voice to the Dharma for Rahula whilst in 
the lavatory. The lavatory was a place fit for the Buddha to turn the Wheel of the 
Dharma. How to conduct oneself in that training place of the Way is what the 
Buddhas and Ancestors truly Transmitted. 


In the thirty-fourth chapter of the Code of Behavior for Members of the 
Greater Sangha it says, “The lavatory is not to be placed in the east or the north; it 
should be situated in the south or the west. Urinals should also be located in this 
manner.” We should go by the directions given here as the proper ones. This is the 
plan for all the training halls in both China and India, and was actually the way the 
Tathagata erected them. You should realize that this was not just this one Buddha’s 
way of doing things. It applied to the temples and training halls of the Seven 
Buddhas,* as well as to the temples and training halls of all the Buddhas. 
Shakyamuni was not the first to do this; it has been the dignified conduct of all 
Buddhas. Mistakes will be many, should someone set up a temple or monastery 
without first understanding this and then attempt to do the practice and training. 
Such a person will not have prepared for a Buddha’s dignified conduct, and the 
enlightenment of Buddha will not yet have manifested before his very eyes. If you 
would construct a training hall and establish a temple or a monastery, you will have 
to do it in accordance with the methods and procedures directly passed on by the 


but which has become frozen and dead through viewing the matter from a discriminatory 
and judgmental perspective. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Yourself Clean 


64 


Buddhas and Ancestors. Because this is the true Transmission of true heirs, merit 
and virtues will more and more accumulate. If you are not an heir to the true 
Transmission of the Buddhas and Ancestors, you do not yet know the Body and 
Mind of the Buddha’s Teachings. If you do not know the Body and Mind of the 
Buddha’s Teachings, you will be unable to clarify what a monk’s Buddhist 
activities are. Now, ‘the Great Teacher Shakyamuni Buddha’s Teachings being 
Transmitted throughout the ten quarters’ means the Buddha’s Body and Mind being 
made manifest before our very eyes. A proper time for manifesting the Buddha’s 
Body and Mind is when we act in accordance with what has been said here. 

This was delivered to the monks at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple, Uji Prefecture, 
Yamashiro Province, on the twenty-third day of the tenth lunar month in the first year of 
the En ’o era (November 21, 1239). 



8 


On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream, 

The Contour of a Mountain’ 

(Keisei Sanshoku) 

Translator’s Introduction: Dogen’s discourse on “The Rippling of a Valley Stream, the 
Contour of a Mountain” is centered on the nature of a kensho, that is, the experiencing of one’s 
Buddha Nature. In the first half of his discourse, he focuses on the topic of the external condition 
which serves as a trigger or catalyst for this experience when the disciple is spiritually open and 
ready for the kensho to occur. This trigger may be something heard (a valley stream) or seen 
(springtime blossoms) or felt (the stubbing of a toe). It may be some event occurring in nature, or 
it may be some gesture or remark that a Master may make upon sensing the ‘ripeness’ of his 
disciple. Such a trigger is not the cause of the kensho occurring, but it is an integral part of the 
kensho process. This trigger is a requisite form of external conditions in which someone or 
something gives voice to the Dharma—that is, gives expression (as, in reality, all things are 
always doing) to That which is beyond duality—and the trainee, ‘hearing’ this, makes the 
connection between the Source of this voicing and his own Original Nature. 

The second half of the talk examines various obstacles that may interfere with the kensho 
occurring, with emphasis given to the pursuit of personal fame and gain. 

The Buddhas and Ancestors have been many indeed. Their deeds are 
instructive for teaching others the Way to supreme enlightenment. Among those 
deeds are not a few examples of ‘bone-crushing’ diligence. For instance, you can 
draw instruction from the Second Ancestor Eka’s ‘severing of his arm ’. 1 And do 
not miss the meaning behind the Buddha’s action in a previous life when He 
covered the mud with His long hair . 2 Once each of you has succeeded in ‘removing 
your husk ’, 3 and you are no longer attached to any prior intellectual 


1. ‘Cutting off one’s arm’ is being used metaphorically to refer to giving up one’s willfulness 
at all costs. Such a ‘severing’ is done by applying Manjushri’s Sword of Wise Discernment. 
Dogen is not recommending self-mutilation. 

2. Shakyamuni Buddha was an ascetic monk then. He spread his long hair over a mud puddle 
so that the Buddha of that time could cross the mud without staining Himself. This serves as 
an allusion to the willingness to go to whatever lengths are necessary, however humbling, so 
that one’s Buddha Nature may traverse the Path unsullied. As with the previous example, 
Dogen is not encouraging blind imitation of a physical act, but pointing to an understanding 
of the intention behind the action. 

3. Or, in idiomatic English, ‘taking your blinders off ’. 


65 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


66 


understanding, the Matter* which had been unclear to you for ever so long will 
immediately emerge before you. The very ‘nowness’ of this is beyond anything I 
know of, beyond anyone’s ability to comprehend intellectually, beyond all your 
expectations, even beyond a Buddha’s Eye to catch a glimpse of. So how can it 
possibly be fathomed by any human speculations? 


In Great Sung China there was a lay Buddhist called Toba. His family name 
was So, his official name was Shoku, and his name as an adult was Shisen. He 
must have been a veritable dragon in the sea of letters, for he had trained under 
dragon elephants in the ocean of Buddhism . 4 Swimming in the fathomless waters 
of Buddhism, he would soar up through the cloud banks to plunge once again into 
the depths of that ocean. Then there came a time when, whilst on a visit to Mount 
Ro , 5 he was struck by the sound of the valley stream rippling through the night, 
and he awoke to the Way. He composed the following poem about the experience, 
which he presented to Meditation Master Joso: 

The valley stream s rippling is indeed the eloquent 
tongue of Buddha: 

The mountain s contour is not other than that of the 
body of Buddha. 

With the coming of night, I heard the eighty-four 
thousand songs , 6 

But with the rising of the sun, how am I ever to offer 
them to you? 

Upon his presenting this poem to Meditation Master Joso, the Master said in 
approval, “Just so!” Master Joso is Meditation Master Shokaku Joso, who was the 
Dharma heir of Meditation Master Oryu Enan, who, in turn, was the Dharma heir 
of Meditation Master Jimyo Soen. 


* See Glossary. 

4. As used here, the word ‘dragon’ by itself refers to someone markedly brilliant. The term 
‘dragon elephant’ is explained in the Glossary. 

5. The home of many notable literary figures of his day. 

6. In Buddhism, ‘eighty-four thousand’ represents both the number of atoms in a human body 
and the number of forms of illumination assumed by Amitabha Buddha, the Buddha of 
Immeasurable Light. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


67 


There was also a time when layman Toba had a spiritual interview with the 
Great Priest Ryogen Butchin. The latter, investing Toba with the Buddha seal,* 
gave him a monk’s Dharma robe and the Buddhist Precepts, among other things. 
Layman Toba, from then on, trained in the Way whilst wrapped in the kesa.* Out 
of respect and reverence, Toba presented Butchin with a priceless jeweled sash. 
People at the time commented that this was not something that an ordinary, 
everyday person would possibly think of doing. 

The situation was such that Toba’s awakening to the Way upon hearing the 
valley stream was, undoubtedly, due partly to the condition of its sound flowing 
through the night. How sad that so many countless times the voicing of the Dharma 
by the manifest body of Buddha has escaped our notice. What, moreover, do you 
see when you view the contour of a mountain, or hear when you listen to the sound 
of the valley stream? Is it a single phrase you hear, or half a phrase, or the whole 
eighty-four thousand songs? 

What a pity that Its sound and form lie within the landscape, unseen. And 
how glad we will be for the occasion and conditions when It reveals Itself in the 
landscape! ‘His giving tongue to’ is never remiss, for how can the contours of His 
Body be subject to a temporal existence and dissolution? Nevertheless, when It 
comes into sight, we leam how very near It has always been: when It is lying 
unseen, how are we to learn how near It really is? Are Its sound and form the 
whole of It or are they but half of It? In past springs and autumns, Toba had not 
seen or heard the Water. Then, on the occasion of a single night, he was just able to 
see the Mountain and hear the rippling of Its stream. Now you bodhisattvas* 
training in the Way, too, should open wide the gate to your training and enter by 
means of the verse, “That which flows is the Mountain: That which does not flow 
is the Water.” 

On the day preceding the night that this layman Toba awoke to the Way, he 
had gone to Meditation Master Shokaku Joso to ask him about the koan* story 
concerning the non-sentient giving voice to the Dharma. Although he had not yet 
directly understood what the Master meant when he spoke on that occasion of 
‘turning oneself around’, nevertheless, upon his hearing the rippling of the valley 
stream, it was as though the swirling waters had struck the very heavens. Thus it 
was that the sound of the stream now startled Toba. But was it the voice of the 
stream or was it what had poured forth from his Master Joso’s lips? Perhaps Joso’s 
comment that the Non-sentient gives voice to the Dharma had not yet ceased to 


7. Here, ‘non-sentient’ carries a double meaning. On one level it refers to anything that is not a 
sentient being and, on another level, to That which transcends the duality of sentient and 
non-sentient. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


68 


reverberate in Toba, and, unbeknownst to Toba, had intermingled with the sound of 
the stream’s rippling through the night. Who will say, upon discerning It, that It is 
‘a whole dipperful’, or who will say, upon flowing into It, that It is ‘a whole 
oceanful’? In short, was it layman Toba who awakened to the Way or was it the 
landscape that awakened to the Way? What person is clear of eye and yet fails to 
quickly spot His eloquent tongue and His immaculate body? 


As another example, at one time Meditation Master Kyogen Chikan was 
training at Mount Daii in the community of Isan Reiyu. Isan said to him, “You are 
a learned scholar of considerable intelligence. So, without having to rely on what 
you have memorized from commentaries, surely you should be able to explain for 
me in your own words what the phrase ‘before “father” and “mother” were bom’* 
means.” 

However many times he tried, Kyogen was unable to do so. Deeply ashamed 
of himself, he consulted all the Scripture books and their commentaries that he had 
amassed over the years, but he was still left at wit’s end. Finally, he took a torch 
and burned the writings he had previously collected, saying, “A rice cake in a 
painting will never satisfy one’s hunger! I swear that I will no longer crave after 
the Buddha’s Teachings in this lifetime, but will just be a kitchen monk who serves 
up the rice and gruel.” 

And so he served up the rice and gmel as the months and years went by. 
‘The monk who serves up the rice and gmel’ refers to one who serves meals to his 
fellow monks. It is like the person in our country who dishes out the food. After 
having worked in this way for many years, he remarked to Isan, “Dunce that I am, I 
am still in the dark, unable to find the words to speak. O Reverend Monk, please 
say something to help me.” Isan responded, “It is not that I refuse to say anything 
for your sake, but I fear that later on you would come to resent me for it.” 

And so, several more years passed, and Kyogen went to visit the site where 
the National Teacher Echu had lived. Arriving at Mount Buto, he collected up 
grass and built himself a hermit’s hut on the spot where the National Teacher’s 
hermitage had stood. He planted some bamboo, which served as his sole 
companion. One day, whilst intent on sweeping his walkway clean, he accidentally 
sent a piece of tile flying, which hit the bamboo. Upon hearing the knocking sound 
it made, he suddenly had a great awakening. He bathed himself and, abstaining 
from anything physical or mental that might be sullying, he turned in the direction 
of Mount Daii to offer incense and reverently bow. Then, as though facing Isan 
himself, he said, “O Great Monk Isan, if long ago you had said something to me 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


69 


for my sake, how would I now have had this experience? My indebtedness to you 
is so deep that it surpasses even that which I owe to my parents.” He ended by 
composing the following poem: 

At one blow, I have forgotten all that I had learned with 
my head. 

Truly, I myself am no longer the one in control. 

Breaking out in a smile, I make my way along the Old 
Path, 

Neither looking down in moments of despair 

Nor leaving behind, here and there, traces of where I 
have been. 

Only a dignified manner remains, which lies beyond 
anything heard or seen. 

Those everywhere who have realized the Way, 

All as one, say it is the moment supreme. 

When he presented this poem to Isan, the latter said, “This disciple has struck 
Home.” 

djb 

CX) 


As still another example, Meditation Master Reiun Shigon had trained and 
practiced for thirty years. Then one day, whilst ‘swimming about’, visiting 

o 

mountain monasteries, he took a rest at the foot of a mountain, when in the 
distance he spied a village. It was spring at the time, and, glimpsing the peach 
blossoms in bloom there, he suddenly awoke to the Way. Composing a poem, he 
presented it to Isan: 

Thirty years I sought for Him, the Good Friend with His 
Sword of Wisdom: 

For so many rounds have the leaves fallen and the 
branches burst anew with blooms! 

But just one glance at those peach blossoms 
And straightaway—at that very moment —/ arrived, never 
again to be in doubt. 


8. It was customary at the time for monks who had not yet had a kensho to visit other 
monasteries for the summer retreat. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


70 


Isan said, “The person who enters the Truth by way of some external condition is 
not likely to ever retreat from It or lose It.” Thereupon, he gave his approval to 
Reiun. 

Is there anyone who has not entered by way of some external condition? Is 
there anyone who, once having entered, would retreat from this Place, or lose It? 
This is not something that applies to Reiun and Reiun alone. Ultimately he 
inherited the Dharma from Isan. Were it not that the contour of the mountain is the 
Pure Body of Buddha, how could a thing like this possibly happen? 


Also, Meditation Master Chosa Keishin was asked by a certain 
monk, “How is it possible to change the great earth with its mountains 
and rivers so that we make it return to the True Self?” 

The Master responded, “No, the question is, ‘How is it possible 
to change ourselves so that we make It return to the great earth with 
its mountains and rivers?’” 

What is being said here is that the True Self is, in Its own right, the True Self. Even 
though we speak of the Self as being ‘the great earth with its mountains and rivers’, 
this is not something that should delude us as to what is returned to. 

Similarly, the monk Egaku, who was a Dharma descendant of 
Nangaku, was once asked by Shison, a lecturer in the scholastic 
tradition, “How is it possible for one’s Original Nature, which is 
immaculate, to all at once produce something as polluted as the great 
earth with its mountains and rivers?” 

The monk pointed out in response, “Since our Original Nature 
is immaculate, how does It, all at once, produce the Great Earth with 
Its mountains and rivers?” 

We must realize here that we are not to make the mistake of taking ‘the Great Earth 
with Its mountains and rivers in their immaculate Original Nature’ to be the great 
earth with its mountains and rivers. Yet, scholars who simply take Scriptures 
literally have never even dreamt of this, and consequently do not comprehend what 
‘the Great Earth with Its mountains and rivers’ signifies. 

We must understand that were Original Nature not the contour of a mountain 
and the rippling of a valley stream, then Shakyamuni would not have begun His 
voicing of the Dharma by holding a flower aloft, nor would Eka’s reaching the 
Very Marrow of what Bodhidharma was teaching have come about. Because of the 
merit that comes to fruition in the rippling of a stream and the contour of a 
mountain, the great earth and its sentient beings simultaneously realize the Way, 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


71 


and there are Buddhas, such as Shakyamuni, who awaken to the Way upon seeing a 
morning star. Flesh-and-blood human beings like these are Masters of bygone days 
whose determination to seek the Dharma was profound indeed. 


We humans today should, by all means, consider following in Their 
footsteps. And, likewise, we of today should give rise to a similar determination by 
pursuing genuine training, which is in no wise connected with personal fame or 
gain. In recent times, in far-flung places like Japan, people who are truly searching 
for the Buddha’s Teachings are rare. It is not that such persons do not exist, but that 
it is difficult to encounter them. 

Occasionally, there are some who appear to leave home to become monks, 
letting go of the mundane, but too many of them only use the Buddha’s Way as a 
bridge to fame and gain, sad to say. It is such a pity for them to waste their days 
and nights without regret, vainly training in pursuit of such dark and wayward 
goals. When will come the time that they abandon such things and realize the Way? 
Even should they meet a genuine teacher, they probably would not be fond of this 
‘True Dragon’. Former Buddhas would say of such people that they are persons to 
be pitied, since such a response is due simply to their attitude of mind, which has 
arisen from bad karmic roots planted in some previous life of theirs. Although they 
have been bom as a human being, they do not have the determination to seek the 
Dharma for Its own sake. As a result, when they encounter true Teaching, they are 
suspicious of the Tme Dragon. When they meet genuine Dharma, they are repelled 
by It. Since they have never lived—neither in body and mind, nor in bones and 
flesh—in accordance with the Dharma, they are not suited to It, nor do they accept 
and apply It. 

For a long time now, Masters and disciples in our Ancestral Tradition have 
continued to pass on the Dharma as they had received It. But nowadays, to speak 
of ‘the mind that seeks enlightenment’ resembles talking about some dream dreamt 
long ago. How sad not to know of, or ever see, the precious ore that lies buried in a 
mountain of treasure, but how much more sad when it is the mother lode of the 
Dharma! 

Once you have given rise to the intention to seek enlightenment, even 
though you are spinning about through the six worlds* of existence, being bom 
through any of the four modes of birth, the very causes and conditions of your 
spinning will become your heartfelt practice of enlightenment. Accordingly, even 
though you have spent your past days and nights in vain pursuits, you should make 
the following vow while you are still in this present life: 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


72 


I pray that I and all sentient beings, from this life through all 
future lives, will ever be able to hear the True Teachings. Once I have 
heard the True Dharma, I will not harbor doubts about It or fail to 
trust in It. Right at the time when I encounter the True Dharma, I will 
let go of the whole world and embrace the Buddha’s Teachings. Then, 
together with all sentient beings on the great earth, may we fulfill the 
Way. 

If you make your vow in this manner, it will, of itself, be a cause for your 
enlightenment-seeking mind to arise. Never neglect the attitude of mind behind this 
vow. 

Further, this land of Japan is a distant place separated from others by vast 
seas. The hearts of its people are befuddled in the extreme. From the distant past, it 
has not been common for saintly persons or those naturally gifted with good sense 
to be bom here, to say nothing of the scarcity of tme students of the Way. When the 
fellow who knows nothing of the heart that seeks the Way is told of this Way¬ 
seeking heart, he turns a deaf ear to this good instmction. As a result, he does not 
reflect upon himself and harbors resentment towards others. 

In short, when you put into practice your intention to seek enlightenment, 
you should not concern yourself with letting worldly people know that you have 
given rise to the enlightenment-seeking mind and are practicing the Way. Rather, 
you should conduct yourself so that they may not know it; even more, you should 
not speak of it openly. People today who seek Tmth are rare; as a result, the 
majority do not engage themselves in spiritual practice and have not awakened in 
their hearts. Desirous of praise from others, they seek for someone who will tell 
them how integrated their practice and understanding are. This is just what ‘being 
deluded within delusion’ means. You should immediately toss out such ridiculous 
notions. 

When training in the Way, the most difficult thing to experience is the mental 
attitude of the Tme Dharma. That attitude of mind is something that Buddhas come 
to Transmit to each Other. We call this the mutual Transmission of a Buddha’s 
Light and of a Buddha’s Heart and Mind. 

From the time when the Tathagata was in the world up to this very day, the 
number of fellows who appear to be paying heed to training in the Way with the 
sole purpose of seeking personal fame and gain have been many. But even in such 
cases, if they encounter the instmctions of a genuine Master, turn themselves 
around, and seek the True Dharma, they will naturally realize the Way. You who 
are now training in the Way today need to know that a spiritual illness such as this 
seeking after fame and gain exists. It can occur, for instance, in those with a 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


73 


beginner’s attitude of mind who have just begun to train, as well as in those, 
whether Transmitted or not, who have trained and practiced for a long time. 

There will be those who dote on what has passed and try to mimic that, and 
there may even be demons who slander those above them and refuse to leam from 
them. Do not be attracted to either type or feel resentment towards either. Why do I 
say not to feel sorry for them or resent them? Because it is said that people who 
recognize the three poisons of greed, hatred, and delusion to be what they are, are 
rare enough, so there is no need to feel resentment towards those who do not. Even 
more importantly, you should not lose sight of the intention that arose when you 
first took delight in seeking the Way of the Buddhas. It is said that when we first 
give rise to this intention, we are not seeking the Dharma so that others will praise 
us, but are discarding thoughts of fame and gain. Without seeking fame or gain, we 
should simply be persons who hold to the true course of realizing the Way, never 
concerning ourselves with expectations of recognition or support from rulers or 
other officials. 

Even though this is the ideal, there are some people today who, alas, are 
devoid of any fundamental spiritual aspirations, having no spiritual goal that they 
seek, and are not the least concerned over their delusive entanglements with both 
ordinary people and those in lofty positions. On the other hand, there are some 
befuddled people who once did have a heart intent on the Way, but have all too 
quickly forgotten about their original intention and have fallen into error, 
anticipating offerings from ordinary people and those in lofty positions, which 
offerings they joyfully consider to be merit accruing to them from the Buddha’s 
Teachings. If they secure the confidence of some ruler or official, they fancy that 
they have succeeded in seeing what our Path is. This is one devil of an impediment 
to training in the Way. Even though you must not lose sight of the heart filled with 
pity for all beings, you must not delight in forming entangling relationships with 
them. Look! The Buddha once deigned to express it with His golden words, “Even 
in the present day, the Tathagata is greatly vilified and envied.” Those who are 
foolish do not recognize what is bright and wise, which is why little brutes envy 
and resent great saints. 

As a further example, our Ancestral Master from Western India, 
Bodhidharma, underwent great torments for the sake of non-Buddhists, shravakas,* 
pratyekabuddhas,* rulers, and the like. This was not because the paths of non- 
Buddhists were superior, nor because of some lack of deference to the Ancestral 
Master. After this First Ancestor came from the West, he hung up his traveling staff 
on Mount Suzan at Shorin-ji Temple when he discovered that neither Emperor Wu 
of Liang nor the king of Wei understood what the spirit of Buddhism is. About that 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


74 


time, there were two veritable dogs, Bodhiruchi and Vinaya Master Koto . 9 Fearing 
that Bodhidharma might hinder the spread of their false reputations and wicked 
influences among honest people, they conspired against him, just as if they had 
looked up at the sun and tried to put it into eclipse. They were even more excessive 
in their behavior than Devadatta was when the Buddha was alive . 10 The fame and 
gain that they, alas, so deeply doted on was even more repellent to Bodhidharma 
than excrement and filth. The reason for such things is not that the strength of the 
Buddha’s Dharma is less than ideal: just be aware that there are dogs who bark at 
good people. Do not worry about barking dogs and do not resent them. Give rise to 
the wish to offer them guidance by providing them with the following Teaching, 
“Although you are, undoubtedly, beasts, you should still give rise to the intention 
to realize enlightenment.” A former sage has called these two ‘beasts with human 
faces’. 

There is also that type of ‘beast’ who gives his confidence and support. As 
the former Buddha Shakyamuni said, “Do not seek to be an intimate of kings or 
princes, ministers or officials, brahmans or lay Buddhists .” 11 Truly, this is a 
principle of practice which those who would train in the Buddha’s Way should not 
forget. The meritorious fruits of a bodhisattva’s first beginning to train will pile up 
as he continues on. 

Further, ever since ancient times, the skeptical Indra, Lord of Heaven, has 
come to test the intentions of practitioners, as has Mara the Tempter come to 
disturb and obstruct the practitioner’s training in the Way. All instances of this have 


9. During that time, there were two Indian scholars named Bodhiruchi: one was an eminent 
translator of Scriptures and the other was a scholar who was envious of Bodhidharma. It is 
the latter Bodhiruci who is referred to here. The Chinese Vinaya Master Koto was a 
translator and writer of Scriptural commentaries. Both tried to discredit Bodhidhanna’s 
focus on meditation practice, and it is said that both attempted to poison him. 

The Vinaya is the section of the Buddhist canon containing the rules of monastic 
discipline. Dogen is not advocating that one should not follow the Teachings of this work, 
but rather that one should not become rule-bound simply for the sake of rules due to a lack 
of spiritual understanding of their purpose and aim. 

10. Devadatta was Shakyamuni Buddha’s cousin and His disciple. While a senior monk, he 
caused a schism in the assembly, with five hundred novices following him. Although 
maintaining that he was still Shakyamuni’s disciple, he even attempted, unsuccessfully, to 
kill Shakyamuni. 

11. Context implies that the confidence and support in this instance derive from a desire to gain 
control over or manipulate a monk. As a preventative, monks are instructed not to seek out 
or encourage close, emotionally binding personal relationships with lay people, which 
would be inviting entanglements. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


75 


occurred when someone has not let go of hopes for fame and gain. When great 
compassion is deep within you, and your wish to spiritually aid sentient beings 
everywhere is well seasoned, there are no such obstructions. Then your training 
and practice will flower; they will be strong enough to win the citizenry over and 
will seem to permeate the course of events. At such periods in time, you should 
scrutinize yourself all the more for signs of attraction to fame and gain. Do not 
close your eyes to these and doze off. People who are confused by their follies 
rejoice in this flowering, like foolish dogs gnawing on dried-out bones. The wise 

and saintly treat this flowering with a repulsion such as that which the worldly 

12 

have for excrement and filth. 

In general, the discriminatory disposition of the beginner’s mind is incapable 
of measuring the Buddha’s Way: though it may try to sound Its depths, it does not 
touch them. But this does not mean that, because one cannot fully fathom It with a 
beginner’s mind, one is incapable of arriving at the farthest reaches of Its realm. 
That which penetrates to the deepest halls of this region is not the shallow 
cognitive functions of a beginner’s mind. Simply, you should walk the Path that 
former saints have trod. At such a time as this, in order to visit a Master and inquire 
into the Way, you may have to scale mountains with a ladder and cross vast seas in 
a rowboat . 13 And, while you are seeking out a teacher to guide you or praying for a 
good friend to give you instruction, such a one may fall from the heavens or well 
up from the earth. When, with a beginner’s mind, you encounter a teacher and let 
him guide you, he will let you hear him speak of things sentient and non-sentient, 
and you will hear of things pertaining to your body and to your mind. Even though 
hearing with one’s ears is daily fare, to ‘hear’ sound with the eye is indeed 
something that seems impossible, but is not . 14 When you ‘see Buddha’, you will 
see Buddha in self and others: you will see great Buddhas and small Buddhas. Do 
not be startled or frightened by a great Buddha: do not be skeptical of, or troubled 
by, a small Buddha. What we call ‘great Buddhas and small Buddhas’ are Those 
whom, for the time being, we recognize as the contour of a mountain and the 
rippling of a valley stream. Here can be found the eloquent tongue and the eighty- 
four thousand songs. By offering these songs as our voicing of the Dharma, we free 
ourselves from the mundane. When we see through, piercing to the Truth, we root 
out the self. This is why the proverb says, “The higher, the harder.” And, as my 


12. That is, when Buddhism prospers and flourishes either within oneself or around oneself, one 
should not get caught up in or attached to either. 

13. Allusions to the diligent effort one may be called on to make when training in the Way. 

14. As, for example, when the ‘eye’ is the Eye of Wise Discernment. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


76 


former teacher and Buddha put it, “Boundless as the heavens, pervasive as water.” 
And there is the restrained demeanor of the pine tree in spring, and there is the 
radiant beauty of chrysanthemums in autumn: within themselves, just as they are, 
lies the Truth. 

When a good friend reaches this region, he will be a great teacher to gods 
and men. If he has not yet reached this region and tries to give instruction to people 
indiscriminately, he will be a great thief of gods and men. Unaware of the 
springtime pine, blind to the autumnal chrysanthemums, what will he have as 
fodder for his teaching? How will he help others to sever their karmic roots? 

Further, if you are lazy or negligent in mind or body, if you are lacking in 
faith and trust, you should, in all devotion and sincerity, admit this openly before 
the Buddhas and repent your actions. When we do this, the strength from the 
meritorious fruits of repenting before the Buddhas will rescue and cleanse us. 
These meritorious fruits are the result of our being unencumbered as we live in 
pure trust and foster an attitude of devotion. Once we have manifested pure trust, 
both we ourselves and others alike turn around. The benefits of this will spread far 
and wide, encompassing both the sentient and the non-sentient. The meaning of 
this repentance can be expressed as follows: 

Even though the wicked deeds that I have done in the past have 
piled up deep and cause obstructions to my training in the Way, I pray 
that all the Buddhas and Ancestors who have realized the Truth in 
accordance with the Buddha’s Way will have pity on me, help me let 
go of my karmic entanglements, and help me dissipate any 
impediments to training in the Way. May They help the Gateway to 
the inexhaustible Dharma ceaselessly pour forth Its meritorious fruits 
to permeate the whole universe, so that the compassionate pity of the 
Teachings will spread to all of us. 

Keep in mind, we are as the Buddhas and Ancestors were in the ancient past: 
the Buddhas and Ancestors are what we will be in the future. When we look up to 
the Buddhas and Ancestors, we and They are but one single Buddha Ancestor. 
When we observe the arising of our resolve, it is but one and the same resolute 
Heart as Theirs. ‘Making our compassionate pity permeate every nook and cranny’ 
means knowing when to apply it and when to let go of it. This is why Zen Master 
Ryuge said, “If you have not yet realized your enlightenment in a past lifetime, by 
all means realize it now. In this life, ferry this body of yours, which is the product 
of successive past lives, to the Other Shore. Before the Buddhas of the past had 
awakened to the Truth, They were just like people today. Once they have 
completely awakened, people today will be as those Buddhas of the past.” You 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Rippling of a Valley Stream... ’ 


77 


should take time to study and investigate this principle, for this is what all Buddhas 
have guaranteed us will take place. 

While being mindful in mind and decorous in body, own up to what you 
have done and openly admit it to Buddha. The power from owning up destroys the 
roots of what is defiling you. This is the whole body of true training and practice. It 
is the heart that truly trusts: it is the body of true faith. When you truly train and 
practice, the voice of valley streams and the appearance of valley streams, the 
appearance of mountains and the voice of mountains, along with their eighty-four 
thousand songs, will be unstinting. If you yourself do not prize fame or gain, body 
or mind, then the valley streams and mountains will, in turn, be unstinting in 
revealing to you That Which Is. Whether the voice of valley streams and the 
contour of mountains manifest for you the eighty-four thousand songs or not is, 
simply, what comes in the darkness of night. On the other hand, should you not yet 
possess the strength to proclaim valley stream and mountain as Valley Stream and 
Mountain, who will be able to hear you give forth the valley stream’s True Voice or 
see you take the mountain’s True Form? 

Given to the assembly of monks at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple on the fifth day of the 
summer training period in the second year of the En ’o era (May 12, 1240). 

Recopied before the summer training period on the anniversary of the Buddha s birth in the first 
year of the Kangen era (April 28, 1243) in my room in the same temple. 

Ejo 


Recopied again on the eleventh day of the seventh lunar month in the first year of the Kenji era 
(August 2, 1275). 



9 

On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever’ 

(Shoaku Makusa) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen discusses the significance of a poem that 
appears in Chinese translations of the Pali Agama Scriptures, the earliest known Buddhist 
Scriptures. Although they are part of the Theravadan tradition, they are nevertheless viewed as 
fundamental to Mahayana Buddhism. The poem is considered to encapsulate the Precepts, which 
form the moral basis for the actions of a Buddhist. Although there have been various 
interpretations of this poem over the centuries, this English translation reflects Dogen’s 
particular understanding of the Chinese version. After Dogen has presented the significance of 
each of the four lines of the poem, he then explores the appropriate attitude of mind towards 
these Preceptual Teachings by means of a story concerning Haku Rakuten, whom the Japanese 
have traditionally regarded as the greatest of the Chinese poets. 


The Buddha of long ago said in verse: 

Refrain from all evil whatsoever, 

Uphold and practice all that is good, 

And thereby you purify your own intentions: 

This is what all Buddhas teach. 

These are the Precepts that the Seven Buddhas* and all the Ancestors of our 
Tradition have held in common. They are passed down from a previous Buddha 
directly to the next Buddha: They are what a Buddha inherits from a preceding 
Buddha. This refers not only to the Seven Buddhas, for these Precepts are what all 
Buddhas teach. You should examine Them with the mind of meditation and 
thoroughly investigate the principles They voice. 

When mention is made of ‘the Dharma voiced by the Seven Buddhas’, it is 
doubtless a reference to this Teaching which the Seven Buddhas have given voice 
to. Moreover, what is passed on and what is inherited is precisely what is being 
communicated here through this Scriptural verse. It is ‘what all Buddhas teach’. It 
is what the hundreds of thousands of millions of Buddhas have been instructed in, 
what They have practiced, and what They have personally come to realize. 


* See Glossary. 


78 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


79 


djb 

CX) 

The ‘all evil’ of which we are now speaking has the quality of ‘being evil’ 
among the three qualities of ‘being good’, ‘being evil’, and ‘being neutral ’. 1 This 
quality of ‘being evil’ is something that does not arise and perish, as thoughts and 
things do. Although the qualities of ‘being good’ and ‘being neutral’ are also 
beyond arising, as well as being without stain and bearing the characteristics of the 
Truth, these three qualities, in each instance, are quite diverse in form and 
character. 

‘All evil’ is not exactly the same as what is considered wrong among us in 
the monastic community or among those in the mundane world, nor is it exactly 
the same as what was thought of as evil in the past or what is thought to be so in 
the present. And it is not exactly the same as what is considered evil among the 
lofty or among ordinary, everyday human beings. And vast indeed is the difference 
between the way that good, evil, and neutral are spoken of in Buddhism and the 
way they are spoken of in the world of ordinary, everyday people. What is seen as 
good and what is seen as evil depend on the times, but time itself is neither good 
nor evil. What is good and what is evil depend on what thoughts and things they 
give rise to, but whatever arises is likewise inherently neither good nor evil. To the 
extent that thoughts or things are alike, they partake of good alike, and to the extent 
that they are alike, they partake of evil alike. 

Nevertheless, while we are pursuing our study of That which is ‘absolute, 
supreme enlightenment’, while we are listening to instruction on It, while we are 
training and practicing until we personally experience the fruits of realizing It, It 
seems something profound, something remote, something mysterious. We hear of 
this peerless enlightenment from our good spiritual friends and we learn of It from 
Scriptures. And the first thing we hear is, “Refrain from all evil whatsoever.” If you 
do not hear it said to refrain from all evil whatsoever, it is not the genuine Dharma 
of Buddha: it will be the preaching of demons. You must understand that to hear 
“Refrain from all evil whatsoever” is to hear what the genuine Dharma of Buddha 
is. 

This “Refrain from all evil whatsoever” is not something that worldly people 
are apt to think of before concocting what they are going to do. Only by hearing 
enlightenment explained to them will they be able to learn of this phrase. When 


1. These three qualities refer to the nature of one’s intentions and actions, as well as to the 
karmic consequences these intentions and actions set in motion. When the nature of one’s 
intentions or actions is good, these intentions and actions produce good karmic effects; 
when evil, evil effects; when neutral, effects that are neither good nor evil. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


80 


they hear of it in this way, it will merely be words related to supreme 
enlightenment. At this time, enlightenment will be for them only a word, and so the 
word ‘enlightenment’ is used. But when these people turn themselves around upon 
hearing supreme enlightenment being talked about, they will wish to refrain from 
all evil whatsoever, and they will act to refrain from all evil whatsoever. Once they 
have arrived at the point where they are no longer doing all manner of evil, the 
strength from their training and practice will immediately manifest itself before 
their very eyes. This blossoming of strength will extend beyond all places, all 
worlds, all times, all things. And the measuring of it will take ‘refraining’ as its 
yardstick. 

Those who have arrived at this point in time may reside in some place where 
all manner of evil is going on, or they may be traveling back and forth there, or 
they may be confronted with conditions where all manner of evil actions may be 
going on, yet they do not perform such evil actions themselves because they are 
clearly manifesting the strength from their self-restraint. They do not speak of evil 
actions as, in and of themselves, evil actions, for there is no such thing as a 
predestined ‘tool for evil’. At such a point in time, the principle that evil does not 
break a person will be understood: the principle that a person does not defeat evil 
will be crystal clear. 

Rouse your heart and mind fully and do your training and practice, for when 
you rouse your heart and mind to do the training and practice, you will have 
already realized eight- or nine-tenths of the Way. Before you know it, you will have 
‘refraining’ always in the back of your mind. Whether you pay heed to your own 
handling of mind and body whilst doing your training and practice, or pay heed to 
someone else’s handling of mind and body whilst they are doing their training and 
practice, the strength from your practice and training with the four elements and 
the five skandhas* will instantly manifest before your very eyes. At such a time, 
the four elements and the five skandhas will not sully you; even with the four 
elements and the five skandhas being just as they are at the present time, your 
training and practice can go on. The strength from the four elements and the five 
skandhas, just as they are in our present training and practice, has been brought 
about through our previous training and practice with the four elements and the 
five skandhas. 

Moreover, when we train and practice upon the great earth with its 
mountains and rivers, and beneath the sun, moon, and stars, then the great earth 
with its mountains and rivers, as well as the sun, moon, and stars, will help us to 
train ourselves and to do the practice. It is not a matter of being clear-eyed at one 
time: it is having your Eye open at all times. Because the Buddhas and Ancestors 
were clear-eyed, with Their Eye open at all times, It helped Them to do the training 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


81 


and practice, just as It helped Them to hear and heed what the Scriptures teach and 
to bring Their spiritual certainty to fruition. Because the Buddhas and Ancestors 
have never let the Scriptural teachings, Their practice, or Their certainty be sullied, 
these things have never stood in the way of any Buddha or Ancestor. This is why, 
in the training and practice of Buddhas and Ancestors, there are no Buddhas or 
Ancestors who have avoided or turned away from these three aspects or ever 
would, be it in the past, present, or future. At the time when a sentient being 
‘becomes’ a Buddha or an Ancestor, the Buddhas and Ancestors that have existed 
previously do not hinder or act as obstacles to Him or Her. Even so, we must 
consider carefully the principle of ‘becoming a Buddha’ as we walk, stand, sit, or 
recline throughout the twenty-four hours of a day. Becoming a Buddha or Ancestor 
does not tear a sentient being to bits, or rob him of anything, or deprive him of 
something. It is simply his letting go. 

The karmic* consequences of our good and bad actions are what we are 
training with. That is, we try not to set karmic consequences into motion or not to 
stir things up. There is a time when karmic consequences are what cause us to do 
the training and practice. Once the true face of our karma has been made clear to 
us, then we understand what ‘refraining’ really means, for this refraining is what 
Buddha Nature is: it is being impermanent, it is being subject to causality, and it is 
being free, because it is letting go. When we study the matter in this manner, we 
will bring about a state where we will completely refrain from all evil. To actualize 
this, we are helped by focusing on refraining from all evil until we succeed in 
penetrating to its heart, which is our sitting in meditation until we are able to sever 
ourselves from what is evil. 

When we have actualized “Refrain from all evil whatsoever” from beginning 
to end, then, at such a point in time, there is just refraining, since evil is not 
something that arises from karmic causes and conditions. And since evil is not 
something that disappears along with karmic causes and conditions, there is just 
refraining, simply that. Were all evils alike, then all physical and mental things 
would be alike. If you suppose that evils arise due to some karmic cause or 
condition and do not see that such a cause or condition is, in itself, ‘something not 
to be done’, you are folks to be pitied. Just as the seed of Buddhahood comes along 
with the arising of co-existing conditions, so co-existing conditions will come 
along with the appearance of the seed of Buddhahood. 

It is not that there are no evils: it is only that there are things that one should 
not do. It is not that there are evils: it is only that there are things that one should 
not do. It is not that evils are lacking in form: it is simply that they are things not to 
be done. It is not that evils have some particular form: simply they are things not to 
be done. Evils are not ‘things that one should not do’: they are simply things one 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


82 


does not do. For instance, it is not a matter of whether the springtime pine ‘has 
existence’ or ‘does not have existence’: the pine tree is simply a thing that we do 
not invent. It is not that the autumn chrysanthemum ‘exists’ or ‘does not exist’: this 
flower is something that we have not fabricated. Whether Buddhas exist or do not 
exist, there are things we do not do. Whether or not there is a round temple pillar, 
or a stone lantern, or a ceremonial hossu, or a traveling staff , 2 3 there are things we 
do not do. It is not a matter of whether we have existence or not: it is a matter of 
refraining from things not to be done. 

Our studying in this way will be our spiritual question manifesting right in 
front of us. Since it is a manifestation of our spiritual question, we should meditate 
on this from the perspectives of both the host and the guest. As regards what you 
have already done, to have done what you should not have done will create 
remorse in you. Even so, do not evade such feelings, since facing them will, in 
turn, prove to be a strength for you, a strength that arises from your training in 
refraining. Accordingly, should you head off in the direction of thinking, “If it is 
something I should not do, I ought to give it a try to see what it’s like,” you will be 
like someone going north to arrive at the south. To refrain from all evil whatsoever 
is not just the well looking at the donkey: it is the well looking at the well, the 
donkey looking at the donkey, the ordinary person looking at the ordinary person, 
the mountain looking at the mountain. ’ Because the cases spoken of here share a 
principle which, at bottom, is in accord with each of them, they all involve 
refraining from all evil. 

The true Dharma Body of the Buddha 
Is unbounded, like empty space. 

It reveals Its form in accordance with an object, 

Like the moon reflected in water. 


2. These four items are associated with a Meditation Master, one who serves as the 
fundamental support for his or her temple or monastery, who is a guiding light for his or her 
disciples, who pours forth the Water of the Spirit for their spiritual benefit, and who is 
willing to travel anywhere literally and figuratively to help sentient beings arrive at the 
Other Shore. 

3. An allusion to a remark by Meditation Master Sozan Honjaku that when a donkey looks into 
the well, the well looks at the donkey. The donkey here refers to the stubborn mind of the 
trainee (the guest position), and the well to That which he looks into in training. While he is 
looking into this Well, the Well (the host position) is ‘looking at’ the donkey. It is also the 
ordinary mind looking at the ordinary mind, and it is the mind in meditation looking at the 
mind of meditation. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


83 


Because this refraining is done in accordance with what an object is, it is a 
refraining that takes various forms. It resembles empty space, which is the same 
wherever you point, right or left. It is like the moon in water: the moon is not 
hampered by the water. Furthermore, these cases of refraining will, beyond doubt, 
manifest before your very eyes. 

djb 


“Uphold and practice all that is good.” This ‘all that is good’ refers to the 
quality of ‘being good’ among the three qualities. Although ‘all that is good’ 
resides within the quality of ‘being good’, it does not mean that what is good 
already exists somewhere and is waiting for someone to put it into operation. At 
the very moment when someone does good, nothing but good comes forth. 
Although the myriad expressions of goodness are without an outer form, when 
good is done, it attracts goodness faster than a magnet attracts iron. Its strength 
surpasses that of the Great Storming Wind . 4 Even the strength amassed by the 
karma from the great earth with its mountains and rivers, as well as from the world 
with its nations and countries, will never hinder the accumulating of good. 

Even so, what is good depends on what ‘world’ you are talking about, for it 
will not always be perceived as being the same thing, since people consider what 
‘good’ is from their own perspective. It is also like this when Buddhas give voice 
to the Dharma in the three temporal worlds. What They give voice to is the same, 
but how It was voiced when Each was in the world has depended on the times. 
Even though Their length of life and the number of Buddhas may vary over time, 
what They all give voice to is the Teaching of non-discriminatory thinking. 

This is why what is seen to be good from the perspective of practicing in 
faith and what is seen to be good from the perspective of practicing in accordance 
with the Dharma vary so widely, yet they are not separate Teachings . 5 For instance, 


4. This wind, whose raging is capable of destroying all in its path, arises beyond the Iron 
Mountains which surround and protect Mount Sumeru. This is an allusion to the worst, most 
powerful fonn of karmic consequence which, like a storm, is capable of destroying ordinary 
human beings physically and mentally. However, the Iron Mountains (when understood as a 
metaphor for Buddhist practitioners sitting unmoved in their meditation) form a protective 
spiritual barrier against such a destructive force for the trainee who is meditating ‘atop 
Mount Sumeru’. 

5. That is, what is good from the perspective of meditation (sitting in complete faith and trust) 
and the good which is derived from applying what the Buddha taught in the form of the 
Precepts may sometimes superficially appear to be different, but when meditation and 
practice are properly undertaken, they are seen to be all one identical Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


84 


it is like the situation of a shravaka’s holding to the Precepts being a breaking of 
the Precepts in a bodhisattva . 6 

‘All that is good’ is independent of what karmically arises and what 
karmically undergoes dissolution. ‘All that is good’ is synonymous with ‘all 
thoughts and things’, yet all such things are not necessarily good. Since the cycles 
of karmic conditions, that which arises and ceases with them, and ‘all good’ are 
alike in having a beginning, so they will also have their ending. Although ‘all good’ 
is what we uphold and practice, since it is not of the self, it is not known via the 
self; since it is not of others, it is not known via others. When speaking of 
consciousness of self and other, there is a self and an other in what is known; there 
is a self and an other in what is seen. Hence, each and every Eye that has opened to 
the Truth, when activated, will have Its Sun and Its Moon: this is what is meant by 
‘upholding and putting into practice’. 

At the very moment of our upholding and practicing, there will be the 
spiritual question arising before our eyes. Even so, it will not be the first time that 
it has manifested nor will the question remain indefinitely, continuing on, nor can 
we possibly say that it is the fundamental practice. 

Although, as I have said, the doing of what is good is what we uphold and 
practice, it is not something to be speculated upon or intellectually analyzed. Even 
though the upholding and practicing of which I now speak are, indeed, the 
activities of the Eye That has opened to the Truth, it is not a subject for speculation. 
It is not something that has manifested for the purpose of our speculating on the 
Dharma. The conclusions drawn by the opened Eye will not be the same as those 
drawn by other things. 

‘All that is good’ does not depend on something having existence or not 
having existence, on something having form or being devoid of form, and so forth. 
It is simply what is upheld and practiced. No matter where it manifests, no matter 
when it manifests, it is what we uphold and practice, without fail. This adherence 
and practice will manifest what is good, without fail. Even though our adherence 
and practice are what manifest because of our spiritual question, ‘all that is good’ 
lies beyond birth, beyond annihilation, beyond any karmic conditions. The same 


6. That is, someone who is new to training and has just begun to try to live in accordance with 
the Precepts (that is, a ‘shravaka’) may need to hold closely to the literal meaning of them. 
However, in someone whose training and practice have advanced to the point where he or 
she is naturally acting from the Precepts as their very blood and bones (that is, a 
‘bodhisattva’), this ‘holding on tightly’ is precisely what could work against the intent of the 
Precepts if the trainee were to apply them as a rigid yardstick, thereby opening the door to 
judgmentalism. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


85 


holds true for our entering into adherence and practice, our persisting in them, our 
departing from them, and so forth. When, from among all of our acts, even a single 
good act is upheld and practiced, the goodness of every single thing in its totality— 
all of which together form the ground of reality—is upheld and put into practice. 

The causes and effects of this goodness have, likewise, sprung from our 
spiritual question, which we have actualized by our adherence to and practice of 
what is good. Although it is not a matter of cause necessarily preceding effect, both 
cause and effect will be fully perfected. When the causes are alike, the thoughts 
and things they give rise to will be alike: when effects are alike, then it is because 
the thoughts and things have been alike. Although depending upon the cause we 
feel effects, it is not a matter of ‘before and after’, because ‘before’ and ‘after’ are 
merely ways of speaking. 

djb 


In the statement, “You purify your own intentions,” the ‘you’ is the ‘you’ 
that refrains, the ‘purifying’ is the purifying by refraining, the ‘own’ is the ‘own’ of 
yourself, the ‘intention’ is the intention that you have. The ‘your own’ is the ‘your 
own’ that refrains, the ‘intention’ is the intention to refrain. ‘Intention’ is ‘the 
intention to uphold and practice’, ‘to purify’ is ‘to purify by upholding and 
practicing’, ‘your own’ is ‘your own adherence to practice’, the ‘you’ is the ‘you 
that upholds and practices’. This is why it is said, “This is what all Buddhas teach.” 

All Buddhas may resemble gods like Ishvara, the Indian creator of the world. 
Although They have some things in common with Ishvara, all such gods are not 
Buddhas. They also resemble sovereign, Wheel-turning Lords.* However, it cannot 
be said that all those holy sovereign lords are Buddhas. We must carefully study 
the principle enunciated here. Although it seems that there are people who fail to 
examine what ‘all Buddhas’ means and thereby create suffering for themselves— 
and to no good purpose—nevertheless, this is simply suffering from being a 
sentient being; it has nothing to do with practicing the Way to Buddhahood. 
‘Refraining from’ together with ‘upholding and putting into practice’ means 
“Before all the donkey matters have passed, horse matters have already arrived .” 7 


The poet Haku Rakuten of the T’ang dynasty was a lay disciple of 
Meditation Master Bukko Nyoman, who was a Dharma heir of Baso. When 


7. That is, refraining from evil (which trains the stubborn ‘donkey’) is not something to be 
completed before beginning to practice good (putting the willing ‘horse’ to use.) 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


86 


Rakuten was governor of Hangchow, he trained under Meditation Master Dorin of 
Choka. 

Rakuten once asked Dorin, “Just what is the major intention of 
the Buddha Dharma?” 

Dorin replied, “Refrain from all evil whatsoever; uphold and 
practice all that is good.” 

Rakuten remarked, “If that’s all there is to it, even a child of 
three knows how to say that!” 

Dorin replied, “Though a three-year-old child can say it, there 
are old men in their eighties who still cannot put it into practice.” 

Upon hearing the matter put this way, Rakuten then bowed in 
gratitude. 

Rakuten was actually a descendant of General Haku. Even so, he was a 
wizard of a poet, the likes of which is rare in any generation. People refer to him as 
‘the literary genius of twenty-four generations’. Some have called him a veritable 
Manjushri; * others, a Maitreya, the Buddha-next-to-come. There is no one who has 
not heard of his personality; everyone in the world of letters pays court to him. 
Even so, when it comes to the Buddha’s Way, he was a beginner, a youngster. 
Furthermore, it was as if he had never even dreamt of the meaning of “Refrain 
from all evil whatsoever; uphold and practice all that is good.” Rakuten thought 
that in saying to refrain from all evil and practice all good, Dorin was looking at 
the matter from the perspective of an ordinary, everyday person’s way of thinking. 
Rakuten had failed to grasp the principle of refraining from evil and practicing 
good—a principle which has existed in Buddhism from ancient-most times and has 
extended even to the present—nor had he ever even heard of it; consequently he 
did not tread where the Buddha Dharma is. Lacking the strength of the Buddha 
Dharma, he said what he did. Even so, when we refrain from evil or practice good 
as understood by ordinary, everyday people, it will still be our actualizing of 
‘refraining’. 

For the most part, what we first learn about Buddhism from a good spiritual 
friend and what we bring to fruition through our diligent practice are both one and 
the same. We describe this as ‘learning, from start to finish’. It is also called ‘the 
wondrous cause and the wondrous effect’, as well as ‘the cause of seeking 
Buddhahood and the effect of seeking Buddhahood’. Cause and effect in Buddhism 
should not be confused with such notions as ‘effects are totally unrelated to their 
cause’ and ‘cause and effect are exactly the same thing’, because these notions are 
not what is meant by ‘seeking Buddhahood’, and they will not achieve the effect of 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


87 


seeking Buddhahood. Because Dorin enunciated this principle, he ‘possessed’ the 
Buddha Dharma. 

Were evil to pile upon evil and spread throughout the whole world, 
absorbing everything into its mass, ‘emancipation through refraining’ would still 
hold true. Since all that is good is already good—beginning, middle, and end—the 
nature, characteristics, form, and strength of upholding and practicing it will 
likewise be good. Rakuten had never walked in such footsteps, which is why he 
said, “Even a child of three knows how to say that!” He said this because he was 
lacking in the strength to realize the Way. Poor, pitiful Rakuten, why did you say 
such a thing? 

Since Rakuten had not yet got wind of what Buddhism is really about, it is 
unlikely that he was truly acquainted with any three-year-olds or with what such a 
child is naturally capable of. If someone can truly understand a three-year-old, he 
will surely know all the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds. If someone does not 
yet know all the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds, how will he be able to 
understand a three-year-old? Do not imagine that you understand such a child just 
because you have met one face-to-face. Do not think that you do not know such a 
child just because you have not met one face-to-face. He who knows but a single 
mote of dust knows the whole world: he who fully comprehends one thing 
comprehends all the myriad things that comprise the universe. He who fails to 
comprehend all the myriad things will not comprehend even one of them. When 
someone has fully trained himself in this principle of comprehending and has 
reached full comprehension, he will not only see the myriad things that comprise 
the universe but will also see each one of them. This is why the person who studies 
one mote of dust will undoubtedly be studying the whole universe. To think that a 
three-year-old child cannot give voice to the Buddha Dharma or to think that a 
three-year-old is ‘cute’ is the height of foolishness. This is because clarifying what 
birth is and clarifying what death is constitutes the most important matter for a 
Buddhist monk. 

A virtuous elder once said, “When you were born, you were provided with 
the lion’s roar.” Being provided with the lion’s roar is the meritorious fruit of a 
Tathagata’s turning of the Wheel of the Dharma: it is the turning of the Wheel of 
the Dharma. And another virtuous elder said, “The coming and going of birth and 
death is the Real Body of man.” Thus it is that clarifying what one’s True Body is 
and possessing the merit from the lion’s roar will indeed be the One Great Matter,* 
and I do not mean that the task is easy or simple. Hence, attempting to clarify what 
prompts the words and actions of a three-year-old is also the Great Cause for which 
we train, since it is the same—and yet not the same—as what prompts the words 
and actions of all the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Refrain from All Evil Whatsoever ’ 


88 


Befuddled Rakuten had never heard what a three-year-old child had to say, 
and so he had never questioned himself as to what the Great Matter was. Instead, 
he made the kind of remark that he did. He did not hear what Dorin was voicing, 
though It resounded louder than thunder. In speaking of That which cannot be put 
into words, Rakuten said, “Even a child of three knows how to say that!” Not only 
did he not hear the child’s lion roar, he also stumbled over the Master’s turning of 
the Wheel of the Dharma. 

The Master, out of pity, could not give up on Rakuten and went on to say, 
“Though a three-year-old child can say it, there are old men in their eighties who 
still cannot put it into practice.” The heart of what he said exists in what a child of 
three can say, and this we must thoroughly investigate. Also, there is the practice 
which eighty-year-olds may not be doing, but which we must diligently engage in. 
What Dorin has told us is that what the child is capable of saying has been 
entrusted to us, though it is not a task for a child, and what the old men were not 
able to practice has been entrusted to us, though it was not the task for old men 
such as these. In a similar way do we keep the Buddha’s Dharma in mind and take 
It as our foundation, so that we may make It our reason for training. 

Delivered to the monks on the evening of the full moon in autumn in the second year of the En ’o 
era (September 2, 1240) at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple, Uji Prefecture, 
Yamashiro Province. 

Transcribed by me on the twenty-seventh day of the third lunar month in the first year of the 
Kangen era (April 17, 1243) in the chief disciple’s quarters. 

Ejo 



10 


On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure for You 
the Very Marrow of the Way’ 

(Raihai Tokuzui) 

Translator’s Introduction: Dogen’s title, Raihai Tokuzui, in addition to the translation given 
above, can also be rendered as ‘Respectfully Bowing to Those Who Have Realized the Very 
Marrow of the Way’. The text is in two parts. The first, delivered to his monks in the spring of 
1240, deals with being willing to learn from any who give voice to the Dharma, be they male or 
female, human or animal, living or dead, animate or inanimate. The second, given in the fall of 
the same year, specifically addresses various questions on learning from women. For 
unexplained reasons, the second part was not incorporated in the earlier versions of the 
Shobogenzo, but was kept under lock and key in Dogen’s temple, Eihei-ji. This may be due in 
part to the strong tone of this section, which might be misunderstood as being improperly critical 
of the practices and attitudes of other monks and other Buddhist traditions. When read in context, 
however, it is likely that Dogen’s initial talk on gratitude towards those who teach the Dharma, 
which includes female monks, garnered some negative reactions, and he found it necessary, to 
borrow his metaphor, to drive the wild foxes of delusion out from their lairs. Hence, his remarks 
are colored by strong rhetoric, along with his insistent use of the phrase ‘and also’ to punctuate 
his remarks, for he seems determined to rid his monks of any and all negative, conventional, 
non-Buddhist cultural attitudes towards women, including those arising from some long-standing 
practices within Buddhist communities. 

At that time when a person undertakes spiritual training and practice in order 
to realize anuttara-samyak-sambodhi —that is, supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment—it is extremely difficult to acquire a teacher and guide. Whether 
that guiding Master has the physical features of a male or a female, or whatever, is 
irrelevant, but it must be someone who is spiritually outstanding, one who is truly 
‘with It’ here and now . 1 Whether he or she is someone of the past or a present-day 
person is of no matter; even one who has the nagging manner of a wild fox may 
prove a good spiritual friend , 2 for this is the countenance of one who has secured 


1. To be “ ‘ with It’ here and now” is an attempt to render the term immo when used in its 
Chinese slang meaning for the condition of persons or things being just what they truly are, 
without any sense of an existence separate from time and without any sense of a false self. 

2. In Zen literature, the epithet ‘wild fox (or jackal)’ is usually applied to a person who is, as 
yet, unawakened to the Truth, one who tags after someone who is voicing the Dharma, and 


89 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way ’ 90 


the very Marrow, one who will be a spiritual guide and of benefit to you. This is 
someone who does not deceive others about cause and effect, and who will treat 
you, me, and others as spiritual equals. 

Once you have encountered a teacher and guide, from then on you should 
discard your myriad involvements, cease frittering away your time, and devote 
yourself to diligently practicing the Way. You should do your training and practice, 
even though you may still be attached to discriminatory thinking; you should do 
your training and practice, even if you have gone beyond discriminatory thinking; 
you should do your training and practice, even though you may be half-hearted in 
the attempt. Study with urgency, as though you were extinguishing a fire on your 
head: study with joy and hopefulness, as though you were standing on tiptoes. 3 
Should you behave in this way, you will not be disturbed by bad-mouthing 
demons. Besides, the Second Chinese Ancestor’s ‘cutting off his arm to obtain the 
Marrow’ of his Master’s Teachings was a unique deed. 4 I myself had become ‘the 
teacher who has cast off body and mind’ before I was fully aware of it. 

Securing the Marrow and communicating the Dharma inevitably depend on 
sincere devotion and a trusting heart. Sincerity and trust do not in the least come 
from outside ourselves, nor is there any place within from which they emerge. 
Simply, beyond doubt, those who have done this emphasize the Dharma and play 
down themselves. These people flee society’s world and make the Path their 
dwelling place. If they were then to pay heed to their false self, prizing that above 
the Dharma, then the Dharma would not be Transmitted to them and they would 
never realize the Way. This attitude of prizing the Dharma has not been limited to 
just a single case, so perhaps we can look at a few cases, without turning to any of 
the many other instructive examples. 

It has been said, “Prizing the Dharma means that if our guide and teacher— 
be it one who is a supporting pillar* of the temple or a temple lantern,* a Buddha 
or a wild fox, a hungry ghost* or a divine being—is presenting the Great Dharma 
and has personally realized Its Marrow, we should respectfully serve him for 


persists in asking nagging and vexatious questions. The term is sometimes applied in a 
positive sense to a Buddhist Master who keeps at his disciples, urging them in the direction 
of realizing the Truth through his probing questions. 

3. A Buddhist metaphor similar to the English phrase ‘walking on air’. 

4. ‘Cutting off one’s arm’ is being used metaphorically to refer to giving up one’s willfulness at 
all costs. Such a ‘severing’ is done by applying Manjushri’s Sword of Wise Discernment. 
Dogen is not recommending self-mutilation. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way’ 91 


immeasurable eons, with our bodies and minds as a resting place for the Teaching.” 
Obtaining a body and mind comes easily enough—like the rice, hemp, bamboo, 
and reeds that sprout up throughout the world. What is rare is encountering the 
Dharma. 

djb 

Shakyamuni Buddha once said: 

Should you meet teachers who expound supreme 
enlightenment, do not inquire into their family pedigree, do not look 
at their personal appearance, do not despise their shortcomings, do not 
be concerned with their behavior. Simply, out of respect and esteem 
for spiritual wisdom, feed such persons daily with hundreds of 
thousands of ounces of gold, bestow upon them food fit for the gods, 
make them offerings to meet their needs, and scatter celestial flowers 
upon them as a reverential offering. 5 Thrice every day—morning, 
noon, and evening—reverently bow to pay your respects, without 
letting any feelings of resentment arise in you. When you behave in 
this way, there will undoubtedly be a way to enlightenment for you. 

From the time when I first gave rise to the intention to realize 
Buddhahood, I have trained and practiced in this manner so that today 
I am realizing supreme enlightenment. 

In accordance with this, we should pray that the trees and stones give voice to the 
Dharma for us: we should hold in our hearts the wish that the fields and the 
villages also give voice to It. We should ask It of the pillar of a temple: we should 
have the walls and fences explore It thoroughly with us. 

In olden times, there was a celestial emperor, one Shakrendra, who 
respectfully bowed to a fox as his teacher and asked it about the Dharma, and, 
according to tradition, he gave it the title of Great Bodhisattva,* without concern 
whether, due to some deed in a previous life, it was a creature noble or humble. 6 
Even so, those foolish and deluded ones who have not paid attention to the 
Buddha’s Teachings express such views as: “I am a great monk, so I need not bow 
to some youngster’s realization of what Dharma is.” “I am one who has trained for 
a long time, so I need not bow to the realization of what Dharma is by someone 


5. What is being described here as ‘gold’, ‘food’, ‘celestial flowers’ and ‘reverential offerings’ 
are all metaphors for offerings of gratitude for the teacher’s Dharma. 

6. Dogen will relate this story later in Discourse 87: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 
of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha (Kie Bupposo Ho). 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way ’ 92 


who has come to training late in life.” “I have had the office of Teacher of 
Buddhism bestowed upon me, so I need not bow to one who lacks such a title.” “I 
am a business officer of the temple, so I need not bow to other monks.” “I am the 
monastery’s disciplinarian, so I need not bow to a lay person who has realized what 
Dharma is, be they male or female.” “I am one ‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’,* 
so I need not bow to female monks or any other such, even though they have 
realized what Dharma is.” “I am one of imperial descent, so I need not bow to 
ministers, their family members, or any in their retinue who have realized what 
Dharma is.” Since befuddled persons like these have vainly separated themselves 
from the legitimate Realm of the Buddhas and wandered off onto the pathways of 
other realms, they neither see nor hear of the Buddha’s Way. 

Long ago during the T’ang dynasty in China, Great Master Joshu Shinsai, 
upon giving rise to the intention to seek the Way, set out on a pilgrimage of Zen 
monasteries, saying at the time, “Even though it be someone seven years old, if he 
or she is spiritually my superior, I will ask that person to instruct me. Even though 
it be someone a hundred years old, if he or she is spiritually less advanced than I, I 
will give him or her instruction.” This old arhat* was bound to bow even when 
asking for teaching from a seven-year-old! Rare indeed is such an intention, and 
such was the aim of a Buddha of old. 

When a female monk who has realized both the Way and the Dharma 
becomes head of a temple, male monks who, in seeking the Dharma, wish to train 
under a Master will join her community, respectfully bowing as they ask her about 
the Dharma, for she is a splendid model for their training and study. It will be for 
the trainee like receiving something to drink when he is thirsty. 


In the land of China, Meditation Master Shikan was a highly venerated 
monk dwelling in Rinzai’s temple. The first time Rinzai chanced to see Shikan 
coming his way, he suddenly grabbed hold of him, whereupon Shikan responded, 
“As you wish.” Releasing him, Rinzai said, “I was just about to give you a 
thumping.” Thereupon, Shikan became Rinzai’s disciple. 7 

Later, Shikan left Rinzai’s temple and paid a visit to the female Master 
Massan, whose name means ‘the peak of the mountain’. 


7. Shikan’s lack of fear plus his respectful attitude of acceptance of Rinzai’s method of 
teaching was the basis for his being immediately accepted by Rinzai as a disciple. A 
‘thumping’ refers to any means Rinzai might employ to arouse a monk from his spiritual 
torpor. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way ’ 93 


Massan asked him, “What place have you recently come from?” 

Shikan replied, “From Luk’ou.” 

Massan said, “Why haven’t you put a lid on that mouth of 
yours?” 8 

Shikan was at a loss for words. Accordingly, he respectfully 
bowed, as one does when performing the ceremony of taking a 
Master. 

Arising, Shikan asked Massan, “What could this mountain peak 
be?” 9 

Massan replied, “Its apex does not emerge.” 

Shikan asked, “What kind of person dwells in this mountain?” 

Massan answered, “One whose characteristics are neither 
masculine nor feminine.” 

Shikan asked, “Why do you not transform yourself into a 
male?” 10 

Massan replied, “Not being a fox spirit, why should I transform 
myself into anything?” 11 

Shikan respectfully bowed. Then, giving rise to the intention to seek Buddhahood, 
he served her as the temple’s head gardener for three years. 

Later, when Shikan had become head monk of his own temple, he said as 
instruction to his community, “I received half a ladleful when I was with your 
grandfather Rinzai and the other half when I was with your grandmother Massan. 
Now that I have completely drunk a whole ladleful, it has been nourishment 
enough to satisfy me even to this very moment.” 


8. Luk’ou, the name of a village, means ‘the mouth of—or entryway into—the path’. Since 
Massan was not asking a social question but a spiritual one, her response, which is based on 
‘path’ being a reference to the spiritual Path, is asking Shikan why he is going about baldly 
claiming to have attained the Way, that is, to have realized Buddhahood. 

9. A reference to her name, Massan, which means mountain peak. 

10. A reference to a section of the Lotus Scripture, in which the Dragon King Sagara’s 8-year- 
old daughter, because she had already realized enlightenment, was capable of transforming 
herself into whatever it would take to quell the doubts of those who did not believe that a 
female could attain realization. 

11. In China, fox spirits are believed to have the ability to transform themselves into 
manifestations of other beings. One example of this is contained in the koan story of 
“Hyakujo’s Fox”, which Dogen will explore later in his Discourse 73: On the Great Practice 
(Daishugyd). 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way ’ 94 


Now that you have heard of this way of his, you may hanker to know 
something about those former times. Massan was a model disciple of Master Daigu 
and had the strength and authority from the Transmission line to be a spiritual jo 
for Shikan. Rinzai was a Dharma heir of Obaku Unshi and had the strength and 
authority from his single-minded meditation to be a spiritual ya for Shikan. Ya is a 
respectful Chinese word for father, and jo is a respectful one for mother. 
Meditation Master Shikan’s respectful bowing to the female monk Massan Ryonen 
and his seeking the Dharma from her is a model of intent that we should follow. It 
is an example of constancy and integrity for those of us who study the Way in these 
latter days of the Dharma; it can be said to break down the barriers erected by 
discriminatory thinking. 

djb 

CX) 


The female monk Myoshin was a disciple of Kyozan. At the time when 
Kyozan was engaged in selecting a monk to serve as the temple’s Head of Foreign 
Relations and Secular Affairs, he asked, among others, the monks who had long 
served in offices, as well as those seniors who had served as his personal 
attendants, which person would be ideal for the post. Since many opinions were 
voiced, Kyozan finally said, “My disciple Myoshin is, indeed, a woman; even so, 
she has the strength of will associated with courageous men. Surely, she should be 
appointed Head of Foreign Relations and Secular Affairs.” All the members of the 
community concurred with him, and Myoshin was then given this post. At that 
time, none of the other dragon elephants* in Kyozan’s community thought ill of 
him or of her. Although this post was not one of the truly lofty positions in a 
temple, as the person appointed, she would no doubt have been conscientious in 
her service. 

One day while she was serving in this post, a group of seventeen monks 
from the independent state of Shu [which is now part of Szechwan Province] 
arrived on a Zen-style pilgrimage to call on Masters and inquire of the Way. Intent 
on going up to seek an audience with Kyozan, they were lodged in the temple for 
the night. While resting, they began an evening discussion, taking up the account 
of Great Ancestor Daikan Eno’s ‘wind and banner’, but what each of the seventeen 
said was not on track. At this time Myoshin, who was in the room next door, 


12. Great Master Keizan’s Denkoroku recounts the pertinent event: [Whilst still a layman,] Eno 
had taken up lodging on a temple verandah when a strong wind began to flap the temple 
banner, whereupon he heard two monks engaging in an argument with each other. One was 
saying that it was the banner that was moving, the other that it was the wind that was 
moving. The debate went back and forth without their being able to agree on the principle. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way ’ 95 


overheard what they had said and commented, “Seventeen blind donkeys have, to 
no avail, worn out who knows how many pairs of straw sandals without ever 
having caught sight of the Buddha Dharma even in their dreams!” 

Also present at the time was a lay worker who overheard Myoshin’s 
disapproving comment about the monks and told them what she had said. The 
seventeen, to a monk, felt no rancor at Myoshin’s disapproval, but instead, felt 
embarrassed at not being able to say what Daikan Eno was talking about. 
Accordingly, they put on their formal robes and, making an offering of incense, 
respectfully bowed to her, requesting her to respond. Myoshin said to them, “Come 
right in front of me.” The seventeen had barely taken a step towards her when she 
said, “This is not the wind moving, nor is This the flag moving, nor is This your 
mind moving.” Upon her expressing the Matter* in this way, the seventeen, to a 
one, fully understood. They bowed, as disciples do when offering respect to their 
teacher. They immediately returned to the western state of Shu, without ever 
having gone up to visit Kyozan. 

Truly, her level of spiritual understanding is not surpassed even by those 
thrice wise and ten times saintly; her speech and actions are in direct descent from 
the Buddhas and Ancestors. For this reason, even today, when there is a vacant post 
for an Abbot or one who teaches in the Abbot’s stead, we should invite a female 
monk who has realized what Dharma is to take the position. Even though a male 
monk be one of greater age and longer residence, if he has not realized what 
Dharma is, why would you want him instead? The one who is the head monk for a 
community must undoubtedly be someone spiritually clear-eyed. A person who is 
as dissipated in body and mind as he is limited in outlook, however, will be so 
hard-headed that he will often be the laughing stock of ordinary people. When it 
comes to the Buddha’s Dharma, such a one is not even worth mentioning as a 
candidate. Likewise, there have no doubt been lay women and female monks of 
long standing who have not gone along with making bows to the monastic teachers 
who have passed on the Dharma to them. Because such women have neither 
understood nor practiced the Dharma, they are close to being animals and far from 
being Buddhas or Ancestors. 

Should people deeply commit their hearts to sincerely devoting body and 
mind to the Buddha Dharma, the Buddha Dharma will undoubtedly 
compassionately reveal Itself to such people. Among people of all stations, even 
the foolish and befuddled are sensitive to sincerity, so why would the genuine 


Eno said to them, “Might a member of the laity be permitted to call a quick end to this lofty 
debate? Frankly, it is not the wind or the banner that is moving, kind sirs, it is your minds 
that are moving and nothing more.” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way ’ 96 


Teachings of all the Buddhas not respond compassionately to sincerity? Even the 
dirt, stones, sand, and pebbles are not impervious to feelings of sincerity. 

In present-day Sung China, there are female monks who have hung up their 
bowl bag in a temple. 13 Should word get around that one of them has realized what 
Dharma is, an imperial decree will be issued by a government office that she 
should be appointed Abbess of her own temple, and as a result, she will begin to 
teach in the Monks’ Hall of the temple in which she is presently residing. The 
community of monks from the Abbot on down will go to seek her Teaching, and 
stand there listening to her Teaching, with the male monks asking her to answer 
their spiritual questions as well. This has been, and still is, the standard procedure. 
Once such a woman has realized what Dharma is, then she is truly an Old Buddha, 
so we should not look upon her as we did in the past. When we are having an 
audience with her, our contact will be from a new and special standpoint. When we 
meet her, we should face her with an attitude of ‘today is today’, regardless of how 
things were in the past. For example, a female monk to whom the Treasure House 
of the Eye of the True Teaching has been Transmitted should respectfully be bowed 
to and asked for the Teaching by those in the four stages* of arhathood, those who 
are pratyekabuddhas,* and those thrice wise and ten times saintly, and she will 
acknowledge this bow. Why should only males be worthy of respect? Boundless 
space is simply boundless space; the four elements* are simply the four elements; 
the five skandhas* are simply the five skandhas. And they are no different for 
women. When it comes to realizing the Way, everyone may realize It. In any case, 
anyone who has realized what Dharma is should be deeply respected: do not 
concern yourself with whether it is a man or a woman. This is a most excellent rule 
of the Buddha’s Way. 

Also, in Sung China the term ‘lay devotee’ refers to a Buddhist gentleman 
who has not left home to become a monk. Some such gentlemen build a retreat for 
themselves and their wives, whereas others live alone in celibacy. It must be said, 
though, that they will still be troubled by various delusions and defiling passions as 
dense and entangling as a jungle. Nevertheless, once one of them has clarified the 
Matter, trainees will gather about him like clouds and mist, respectfully bowing 
and seeking spiritual benefits, behaving the same as they would towards a Master 
who had left home and become a monk. Be it a woman or be it an animal, you 
should do the same. 

Someone who has not yet even dreamt of the Truth of Buddhism, even if he 
be an old monk of a hundred years, will not be the equal of a man or woman who 


13. That is, they have entered a temple to train. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way ’ 97 


has realized what Dharma is; he should not be reverenced, but simply paid 
common respect, as between guest and host. Even a seven-year-old—were he or 
she to train in and practice Buddhism, and then say something that is Buddha 
Dharma—can be a teacher and guide for monks and laity, male and female. This 
child will be a compassionate parent to all sentient beings, just as was, for instance, 
the dragon king’s daughter who had become a Buddha. We should make offerings 
and pay respect to such a one the same as we would to all Buddhas and Tathagatas. 
This is an ancient custom of the Buddha’s Way. Those who may still be in 
ignorance and who lack the direct Transmission are to be pitied. 

Recorded on the Clear, Bright Day in the second year of the En ’o era (April 28, 1240) at 
Kannonddri in Koshorin-ji Temple. 


And also, in past and present China and Japan, there have been women who 
have occupied the Imperial Throne. As each of these countries comes under the 
dominion of their imperial person, the people serve as this person’s subjects. These 
imperial persons are not revered as individuals, but are respected instead for their 
social position. In the very same manner, ever since ancient times, female monks 
have not been revered as individuals, but humbly respected for having realized 
what the Dharma is. 

And also, whenever there are female monks who have become arhats, the 
spiritual merits from their complying with the four stages to arhathood will come 
forth. These spiritual merits will always accompany them, and who among 
ordinary people of any social station could possibly equal the spiritual merits of 
these four stages? All the heavenly ones in the three worlds of sensual desire, form, 
and beyond form are in no position to surpass them. Nevertheless, when someone 
renounces worldly views, this is something that all heavenly beings revere. So, 
who would possibly fail to revere a Tathagata who passes on to us the True 
Teaching, or a bodhisattva who has given rise to the greatest of intentions? Anyone 
who fails to respect such a person is a strange one indeed! Should any of you 
possibly fail to respect supreme enlightenment, you would be a foolish and 
befuddled being who slanders the Dharma. 

And also, in our country, imperial daughters, as well as daughters of high 
ranking ministers, have, on occasion, followed the retiring imperial consort into a 
monastery and have been given the Empress’s ‘cloister name’ as an honor. Some of 
these women have shaved their heads; others have not. Be that as it may, monks in 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way ’ 98 


name only who covet fame and crave gain are known to go in and out of the doors 
to the Empress’s domicile, knocking their heads against the slippers of these 
women. Such people are even lower than the low. And worse still, how many of 
these male monks have grown old playing the role of slave to these women? 14 
Alas, how pitiful that, for those born in a small, out-of-the-way country like ours, a 
form of wickedness like this has gone unrecognized. It does not exist in India or 
T’ang China. Only in our country, sorry to say, does this practice exist. These men 
have shaved their heads and then thoughtlessly transgressed the True Teachings of 
the Tathagata. Their defiling act, it must be said, is deep and heavy. How 
lamentable that, in losing sight of the fact that the worldly path is as the false 
flowers of fantasy and delusion, they have tied themselves down to the role of a 
slave. They have acted in this manner for the sake of some diverting and vain 
worldly way. In the name of that enlightenment which is unsurpassed, why have 
they passed over reverencing someone—be it male or female—who has truly 
realized that Teaching which is to be revered? It is simply because their resolve to 
esteem the Teaching is shallow and their determination to seek the Teaching is not 
broad in scope. 

When someone is entangled with coveting jewels, he does not consider that 
he ought not to have them because they are a woman’s jewels: when someone 
attempts to seek the Dharma, his determination should surely outdo this. When, 
indeed, it does, the sprouting grass and the trees, as well as the walls and the 
fences, dispense the True Dharma, and the myriad things that make up heaven and 
earth likewise bestow the True Dharma. This is a principle that, without fail, you 
need to be aware of. Even if you meet a genuine spiritual friend but have not yet 
given rise to this intention to seek the Dharma, you will be unable to take in the 
delightful, thirst-quenching waters of the Dharma. So, make a diligent effort. 

And also, even today there are people, wretched from their folly, whose 
unconverted thinking has not gone beyond looking upon women simply as objects 
in the world of sensual desire. Disciples of Buddha should not be this way. Should 
you detest women because you think that they must be objects in the world of 
sensual desire, would you also detest all men? What causes staining and defilement 
to arise is treating men as comprising one world and women as another. In 
addition, looking upon someone as being neither male nor female is also to treat 
that person as ‘an object apart’; even looking at that person as though a phantasm 
or an illusory flower is likewise treating him or her as ‘an object apart’. There have 


14. In other words, even those ladies-in-waiting who ‘shaved their heads’—that is, had formally 
entered monastic life—were not behaving as female monks should, but were manipulating 
these ambitious, worldly monks for their own personal purposes. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way ’ 99 


been those who have engaged in a sexual act in connection with some reflection in 
water, and there have been sexual acts committed in connection with the sun in the 
sky. Deities have been used as such objects, as have hungry ghosts. Connections 
such as these are surely beyond count. It is said that there are eighty-four thousand 
worlds of them. Shouldn’t these all be things to be given up? Are they not things 
that should all be ignored? 

It says in the Vinaya : 15 “The two orifices of a male and the three orifices of 
a female are alike when it comes to committing a grievous breakage of the 
Precepts; those doing so may not dwell within the monastic community.” Thus, if 
you dislike women because you think that they must be objects in the world of 
sensual desire, then males and females will end up mutually disliking each other, 
and it is unlikely that there will be any opportunity for either to find a way to the 
Other Shore. You should explore this principle in detail. 

And also, among non-Buddhists there are those who are unmarried. 
Although celibate, they have not comprehended the Buddha’s Dharma, and, 
because of their false views, they are outside the Way. Also, among the Buddha’s 
disciples there are lay men and women who are husband and wife. Even though 
living as husband and wife, they are disciples of the Buddha, and thus no one 
among ordinary people of any station is their equal. 

And also, in T’ang China there have been foolish and befuddled monks who, 
having given rise to the intention to commit themselves to the Way, have said, “I 
will never look at a woman in this or any future lifetime, no matter how long such 
a life may be.” 16 On what teaching is this vow founded? Is it founded on the rules 
of society? Or on the Buddha’s Dharma? Or on the teachings of some non- 
Buddhist? Or on the doctrines of some distracting demon from the world of sensual 
desire? What fault is there in being female? What virtue in being male? When it 
comes to being wicked, there have been men who were wicked; when it comes to 
being virtuous, there have been women who were virtuous. To respectfully ask to 
hear the Teaching and to long to leave the world of delusion behind certainly do 
not depend on one’s being male or female. When people have not yet cut 
themselves off from their delusions, they are equally attached to delusion whether 
they be male or female. When people cut themselves off from delusion and reach 
certainty as to what is Real, again, there is no dividing line between males and 


15. The Vinaya is a part of the Buddhist Canon which outlines and discusses the meaning and 
application of the Buddhist Precepts and various monastic rules and regulations. 

16. This vow is probably based on a misunderstanding of one of ten vows listed in the 
Avatamsaka Scripture : “May my eye not look upon a woman (as a sexual object).” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way’ 100 


females. Further, should you vow never to look at a woman, ought you to forsake 
women even at the moment when you take the Bodhisattva Vow to save all sentient 
beings from suffering, howsoever innumerable they may be? Were you to forsake 
women, you would not be a bodhisattva, so how could you speak of Buddhist 
kindliness and compassion? This vow to never look at a woman is simply the 
raving words of one who has drunk too deeply of the wine that those who rigidly 
follow the Lesser Course* are wont to brew. No one of any station should believe 
this to be what Truth is. 

And also, should you despise women because you think that in ancient times 
they have committed some offense, then you must despise all bodhisattvas as well. 
Or, should you despise women because you think that at some later date they will 
surely commit some offense, then you must despise all bodhisattvas who have 
given rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood. If you despise women in any 
such ways, you must despise every single person, so how will you make manifest 
the Buddha’s Dharma? Words like the ones uttered by such monks are, sad to say, 
the wild remarks of foolish people who do not understand what the Buddha taught. 
If the matter were like this vow, did the Venerable Shakyamuni and the 
bodhisattvas who were alive during His lifetime all commit offenses? Have Their 
enlightened minds been shallower than yours? You would do well to quietly think 
about this. Since the Ancestors and Masters associated with the Treasure House of 
the Dharma, as well as the bodhisattvas who lived during the Buddha’s lifetime, 
did not take this vow, as part of your training and study you should look to see 
whether there is any place in the Buddha’s Teachings where this could possibly 
have been taught. Were the matter like this vow, not only would you fail to ferry 
women to the Other Shore, you would also be unable to come and hear a woman 
who, having realized what Dharma is, has come out among the people to give 
voice to the Dharma for the sake of people in all stations of life. To fail to come 
and hear her is to fail to be a bodhisattva and, consequently, to be outside the Path 
of Buddhism. 

If we now take a look at present-day Sung China, among the monks who 
seem to have trained and practiced for a long time, there are those who are 
uselessly counting the grains of sand in the ocean 17 and are drifting on the waves 
that arise upon the sea of birth and death. But there are women who seek out a 
spiritual friend to train under, and diligently do their training until they become a 
teacher and guide for people of all stations. It is like the old woman who threw 
away her rice cakes rather than selling them. Sad to say, even though her customer 


17. An allusion to those who waste their time, caught up in studying the words in Scriptures 
without comprehending their meaning in context. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way’ 101 


was a male monk, he was so busy counting sand grains in the ocean of Scriptural 
writings that he had still not seen what the Buddha was teaching, even in his 
dreams. 18 

To speak in broader terms, upon seeing an object in the world of desire, it 
would be good for you to leam to clarify what it is that you are looking at. To learn 
only to flee when you are frightened by something is the teaching and practice of 
those in the Lesser Course who rigidly follow what they have learned by rote. Were 
someone to attempt to abandon the populous east to live in seclusion in the 
sparsely-settled west, it would not mean that there are no objects in the world of 
desire to be found in the west. Even though such persons may think that they have 
succeeded in fleeing, to the extent that they have not yet clarified the matter of 
sensual desire, whether they keep their distance or come up close, there will be a 
world of desire. But this is not intended to be a full explanation, for the long 
threads of sensual desires will prove to extend even deeper. 

And also, in Japan there is a situation which is truly ridiculous and worthy of 
laughter. It relates to what is called ‘The Grounds of the Enclosed Realm’ by some 
and ‘The Training Ground of the Greater Course’ by others, places that female 
monks and lay women are not permitted to enter. 19 This mistaken custom has been 
handed down for ever so long, and people have never questioned what it is all 
about. Those who have studied the ancient ways have never attempted to change 
this practice nor have scholars ever taken up the matter. Some refer to this practice 
as ‘what an incarnation of a Buddha or a Bodhisattva does’; others speak of it as 
‘the tradition of our ancient predecessors’. Moreover, they have never called the 
matter into question. It is enough to make a person split a gut laughing. Just what is 
‘an incarnation of a Buddha or a Bodhisattva’? Is it a worldly-wise person or a 
saintly one? A god or a hungry ghost? One who is ten times saintly or one who is 
thrice wise? One who has realized what supreme enlightenment is or one who has 
realized the wondrous, full enlightenment of a Buddha? Furthermore, if we are not 


18. A reference to a koan story involving a famous scholar of Buddhist Scriptures who was 
unable to express Their meaning in his own words when asked to do so by an old woman 
selling rice cakes. When he failed, she refused to sell him a rice cake and he had to go 
hungry. Dogen will discuss this in detail later in Discourse 17: On ‘The Mind Cannot Be 
Held Onto’ (Shin Fukatoku). 

19. These terms are used in some Buddhist traditions for a monastery or the main training halls 
of a monastery. In Japan, it was a common practice to exclude women on the pretext of 
maintaining a strict adherence to the Precepts. However, as Dogen will assert, this practice 
actually arises from a cultural bias and is both unsupported and unjustified by the Buddha 
Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way’ 102 


to alter anything from the past, are we not to abandon our drifting through the 
realms of birth and death? 

And besides, the Venerable Shakyamuni, our Great Teacher, is anuttara- 
samyak-sambodhi, supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. What had to be 
clarified, He made completely clear; what had to be done, He did fully; what 
needed to be explained, He fully explained. Is there a single person today who 
surpasses Him? And yet, in the Buddha’s community during His lifetime, there 
were all four groups—male monastics, female monastics, lay men, lay women— 
and there were the eight categories of heavenly and demonic beings, and there 
were the thirty-seven categories of Venerable Ones who reside in the Diamond 
Mandala, and there were the eighty-four thousand categories of thoughts and 
things. In that all of these form the enclosure of the Buddha Realm, they are 
patently the Buddha’s community. So, what Buddhist community is without female 
monastics, or lay women, or lay men, or the eight categories? We should not pray 
for a more pure and immaculate Enclosed Realm than that of the Buddha’s 
community when the Tathagata was in the world, because such would be the realm 
of the demons of greed and desire. The manner of organizing a Buddhist 
community is such that it never differs, be it in the Buddha’s own realm or in any 
other realm, including the realms of all the ten thousand Buddhas in the three 
temporal worlds. 

90 

What are called ‘the Four Fruitions of Arhathood’ refer to ultimate stages. 
Whether a person is following the Greater or the Fesser Course, there will be no 
difference in the spiritual merits accruing from realizing these ultimate stages. 
Indeed, female monks who have experienced the Four Fruitions are many indeed. 
Within the three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form, as well as in any of the 
Buddha lands throughout the ten directions of the universe, what world may they 
not reach? Who can ever possibly prevent anyone from doing his or her daily 
training in the Way? 

And also, the wondrous, fully perfected enlightenment is the highest level. 
Since women are already acting as Buddhas, which of all the Teachings may they 
not thoroughly master? 21 Who could presume to hamper them or prevent them 
from realizing the goal? They already have spiritual merits that are said to illumine 
the whole universe in all ten directions, so who can put limits on them? 


20 These are the fruitions of the four stages of arhathood referred to previously in this 
discourse. 

21. ‘Acting as a Buddha’ is synonymous with keeping the Precepts. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way’ 103 


And also, would you hamper a celestial female who is in one of the heavens 
of the world of desire so as to prevent her from realizing the goal, or do the same to 
a daughter of some deity? Such celestial women have not as yet severed 
themselves from delusive views. They are still sentient beings who are drifting, and 
there are times when they commit acts that break the Precepts, and there has never 
been a time when this was not so, just as with female humans and animals who at 
times defile themselves, and there has never been a time when this was not so. 
Who is the one who would block these celestial women from the way of heaven or 
the way of the gods? They are already paying visits to the Buddhist communities in 
the three temporal worlds and have come to do spiritual training wherever a 
Buddha is. If you make a distinction between a place where a Buddha is and what a 
Buddhist community is, how will you accept either one in faith as a place of the 
Buddha Dharma? This is, simply, the height of folly of worldly people crazed by 
delusion: they are foolish when they fail to regret that someone has not wrested 
their wild fox of delusion from its dark and cavernous lair. 

And also, the classification of disciples of the Buddha—be they bodhisattvas 
of the Greater Course* or shravakas* of the Lesser Course—is the same for both: 
first, male monastics; second, female monastics; third, lay men; fourth, lay women. 
This classification is known to those in the heavenly worlds as well as to those in 
the human worlds, and has been familiar since ancient times. Be that as it may, 
when it comes to the second group of Buddhist disciples, they surpass even a 
saintly ruler who makes the wheels of governance roll on, and they surpass even 
Shakrendra, Lord of the Thirty-three Heavens. There is no spiritual place that one 
of this group cannot realize, to say nothing of the ranks of rulers and high ministers 
in a small out-of-the-way nation like ours. 

Now, when we look at a ‘Training Ground’ where they say female monks 
must not enter, male field hands, simple rustics, farmers, and woodcutters are given 
entrance with impunity, to say nothing of rulers, high ministers, officials of all 
types, and councilors: whoever is male may enter. Were we to discuss the 
understanding of the Way of a field hand, say, and a female monk, or the spiritual 
level they have realized, what quality would we ultimately come to ascribe to 
each? No matter whether we are discussing the matter in worldly terms or in 
Buddhist ones, the place that a female monk may realize cannot possibly be 
realized by a field hand or a simple rustic. 22 Small nations that are excessive in 
their turbulent and riotous behavior, first of all, have left the traces of their 


22. Not because such persons are spiritually deficient, but because it is improbable that they are 
devoting themselves to the spiritual training that a monk is undergoing. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way’ 104 


excess. 23 How lamentable that there is any place where a disciple of that Kindly 
Parent of the Three Temporal Worlds, upon arriving in a small country, is barred 
from and may not enter. 

And also, some fellows who may dwell in a place they call ‘the Enclosed 
Realm’ show no dread of the ten evil acts and fully commit the ten most serious 
forms of them. In a realm where defiling acts are cultivated, is it simply a matter 
of despising those who do not cultivate them? 

Further, the five treacherous deeds* are considered even more serious, yet 
some who live within ‘the Grounds of the Enclosed Realm’ are apparently 
committing such acts. Devilish realms like these should, beyond question, be 
smashed. 25 Such monks would do well to study the edifying instructions given by 
the Buddha and thereby to enter into the Realm of Buddhas, which, of course, 
includes repaying one’s indebtedness to the Buddha for His kindness. I wonder 
whether those of old who constructed such ‘Enclosed Realms’ really understood 
their purpose. From whom did they receive Transmission: from whom did they 
receive the seal* of Buddha Mind? As it has been described, the person who truly 
enters the Great Realm wherein all Buddhas are enclosed cuts himself free from 
any attachments, not only to ‘all Buddhas’ but also to ‘sentient beings’, not only to 
‘the physical world’ but also to ‘emptiness’, and thus returns to the Source, Which 
lies within the wondrous Teachings of all the Buddhas. Accordingly, any sentient 
being who takes but one step into this Realm will nevertheless receive the spiritual 
merits of a Buddha. They will receive the merits from not having deviated from the 
Path, as well as the merits from realizing Immaculacy. When someone is attached 
to one place, then he is attached to the whole realm of thoughts and things: when 
someone is involved with one serious breakage of the Precepts, he is tied to the 
world of all thoughts and things. 

There is a realm enclosed by Water, and there is an enclosing of this realm 
by Mind, and there is an enclosing of this realm by the Unbounded. You need to 
realize that, within this realm, beyond doubt, there is a Transmission and a passing 
on of the Buddha seal. Furthermore, once this realm has been enclosed, the Sweet 


23. Dogen wrote this during the height of a series of clan wars that had already been devastating 
many areas of Japan for almost a century. 

24. That is, the ten evil acts arising from breaking the Ten Precepts and the more serious forms 
of such breakage. 

25. The term ‘devilish’ refers to those conditions wherein a trainee is faced with a delusive 
obstacle to his training which he allows to divert him from the Path. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure the Very Marrow of the Way’ 105 


Dew has flowed into it, the ceremony of Taking Refuge in the Triple Treasure has 
been performed, and the realm has been consecrated, then it is as the poem says: 

This realm completely permeates 

the worlds of thoughts and things 
And, by its very nature, 

is bound to Boundless Immaculacy. 

I wonder whether those old men of former times who spoke of what is now 
habitually called ‘the Enclosed Realm’ understood the meaning of this poem. For, 
when you try to think about it, my dear monks, the mind cannot directly grasp that 
the whole universe of thoughts and things is enclosed within this Enclosure. 
Beyond doubt, should you drink of the wine of those who rigidly follow the Lesser 
Course, you will mistake the tiny world of self for the Great Matter. 

I pray that you will quickly sober up from your habitual drunkenness on 
delusion and that you will not deviate from “The whole universe is the Great 
Realm of all Buddhas.” In your trying to rescue all sentient beings from their 
suffering and ferry them across to the Other Shore, they will respectfully bow to 
you and venerate the merits from receiving your spiritual instructions. Who among 
them will not call this ‘securing the very Marrow of the Way’? 

Written at Koshohorin-ji Temple on the day before the winter season in the first year of the Ninji 
era (October 16, 1240). 



11 


On 4 Just for the Time Being, 

Just for a While, 

For the Whole of Time is the Whole of Existence’ 

(Uji) 

Translator’s Introduction: “Uji” is Dogen’s discourse on the significance of anatta and 
anicca —the Buddhist terms for ‘no permanent, abiding self’ and ‘continual change’—and their 
application to treading the paths of Right Understanding and Right Thought. It is not, strictly 
speaking, a discourse, for Dogen gave the text to his monks in written fonn, which suggests that 
he intended it to be read over and studied carefully, rather than to be absorbed by hearing it only 
once. 

Because it is linguistically possible to translate the title as ‘Being and Time’, some modem 
scholars have been led to assume that Dogen was engaging in a form of philosophical 
speculation akin to that of some Western existentialists. Such an approach, however, would seem 
counter to the purpose behind a discourse given by a Buddhist Master, since speculative 
thinking—philosophical or otherwise—is a type of mentation that trainees are working to 
disengage themselves from so that they may progress towards realizing spiritual Truth, which 
lies beyond the reaches of speculation. 

The key term, which is presented as the title, has meanings which no single English 
rendering fully encompasses. To begin with, uji (the Japanese pronunciation of the Chinese you- 
shih ) has long been a common, everyday phrase in China, as it has been for the Japanese when 
read as aru toki, encompassing in both languages such English equivalents as ‘just for the time 
being’, ‘there is a time when’, ‘at some time’, ‘now and then’, and the like. During his 
presentation, Dogen also explores the two components from which the word uji is made, drawing 
examples of their usage from everyday Japanese. The first half (u) refers to ‘existence’ or 
‘being’; the second (ji) has a variety of close English equivalents, including ‘time’, ‘a time’, 
‘times’, ‘the time when’, ‘at the time when’ (as well as ‘hour’ or ‘hours’ when used with a 
number) or as signifying what is temporal (‘sometime’, ‘for a time’, etc.). The phrase aru toki 
has already appeared with some frequency in several of Dogen’s earlier discourses, particularly 
as a phrase in an extended koan story to signal that an important event is about to happen, such 
as a one-to-one exchange with a Master that will trigger the disciple’s realization of what Truth 
is. In this context, it conveys the sense of ‘and then, one day’. 

Underlying the whole of Dogen’s presentation is his own experience of no longer being 
attached to any sense of a personal self that exists independent of time and of other beings, an 
experience which is part and parcel of his ‘dropping off of body and mind’. From this 
perspective of his, anything having existence—which includes every thought and thing—is 
inextricably bound to time, indeed, can be said to ‘be time’, for there is no thought or thing that 
exists independent of time. Time and being are but two aspects of the same thing, which is the 


106 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


107 


interrelationship of anicca, ‘the ever-changing flow of time’ and anatta, ‘the absence of any 
permanent self existing within or independent of this flow of time’. Dogen has already voiced 
this perspective in Discourse 1: A Discourse on Doing One’s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the 
Buddhas ( Bendowa), and in Discourse 3: On the Spiritual Question as It Manifests Before Your 
Very Eyes (Genjo Koan), where he discussed the Shrenikan view of an ‘eternal self’ and the 
Buddhist perception of ‘no pennanent self’. 

In the present discourse, Dogen uses as his central text a poem by Great Master Yakusan 
Igen, the Ninth Chinese Ancestor in the Soto Zen lineage. In the Chinese version, each line of 
this poem begins with the word uji, which functions to introduce a set of couplets describing 
temporary conditions that appear to be contrastive, but which, in reality, do not stand against 
each other. These conditions comprise what might be referred to as ‘an I at some moment of 
time’; this is a use of the word ‘I’ that does not refer to some ‘permanent self’, abiding 
unchanged over time (as the Shrenikans maintained) but to a particular set of transient conditions 
at a particular time. In other words, there is no pennanent, unchanging ‘Yakusan’, only a series 
of ever-changing conditions, one segment of which is perceived as ‘a sentient being’, which is, 
for convenience, conventionally referred to as ‘Yakusan’. Both Yakusan and Dogen understand 
uji (in its sense of ‘that which exists at some time’) as a useful way of expressing the condition 
of anatta, and in this sense it is used to refer to a state of ‘being’ that is neither a ‘permanent 
self’ nor something separate from ‘other’; it is the ‘I’ referred to in one description of a kensho 
experience (that is, the experiencing of one’s Buddha Nature) as ‘the whole universe becoming 
I’. Hence, when the false notion of ‘having a permanent self’ is abandoned, then what remains is 
just uji, ‘the time when some form of being persists’. 

After presenting Yakusan’s poem, Dogen focuses on that aspect of the poem that does not 
deal with metaphors, images, symbols, etc., and which is the one element in the poem that 
readers are most likely to pay small heed to: the phrase uji itself. His opening statement 
encapsulates the whole of what he is talking about in this text, namely: “The phrase ‘for the time 
being’ implies that time in its totality is what existence is, and that existence in all its occurrences 
is what time is.” 

Dogen then begins to ‘unravel’ this statement, describing not only its implications but also its 
applications to practice. The points that he takes up are dealt with as they come to him, as they 
‘flow forth’. Therefore, he talks about ‘time’ for the time being, and then talks about ‘existence’ 
for the time being, and then goes back to ‘time’just for a while before moving on to some other 
aspect just for a while. In other words, his text is not only about uji, it is written from the 
perspective of one who lives uji, and who also writes “Uji” so that the very way in which he 
presents his discussion reflects what uji is about. That is to say, he holds onto nothing as 
absolute, for all that is phenomenal—that is, every thought and thing that ever arises—is just for 
the time being. 

Within the original text, there are sudden, unexpected shifts, as though Dogen were 
deliberately trying to help his readers bypass or short-circuit a purely intellectual comprehension 
of what he is saying in order to catch a glimpse of that state of being which Dogen himself had 
already reached. To help the present-day reader keep from making unintentional links between 
sentences that appear in sequence but which take up different points, Dogen’s text has been 
divided accordingly. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


108 


Although the entire discourse contains a number of remarks that may require some reflection 
to penetrate, near the end of his discourse Dogen has an extended discussion that may prove 
daunting to some readers because of its succinctness. To make what is being said there more 
accessible, paraphrases have been supplied in the footnotes, which make explicit in English what 
is implicit in the original. 

Readers who find it helpful to refer to the Introduction and footnotes may find it rewarding to 
rereadjust the text of “Uji”, for there are aspects of this discourse, in particular, that may well 
open up for them through encountering the flow of Dogen’s presentation without interruptions. 


A former Buddha once said in verse: 

Standing atop a soaring mountain peak is for the time 
being 

And plunging down to the floor of the Ocean s abyss is 
for the time being; 

Being triple-headed and eight-armed is for the time being 

And being a figure of a Buddha standing sixteen feet tall 
or sitting eight feet high is for the time being; 

Being a monk’s traveling staff or his ceremonial hossu is 
for the time being 

And being a pillar supporting the temple or a stone 
lantern before the Meditation Hall is for the time 
being; 

Being a next-door neighbor or a man in the street is for 
the time being 

And being the whole of the great earth and boundless 
space is for the time being . 1 


1. Dogen appears to understand Yakusan’s image of ‘a figure of a Buddha standing sixteen feet 
tall or sitting eight feet high’ as referring to one who has realized his or her Buddha Nature 
and lives accordingly at all times. It is likely that ‘standing’ and ‘sitting’ are references to the 
Four Bodily Postures: standing, walking, sitting, and reclining. The first two represent active 
modes, the latter two passive ones: that is, ‘whether one is inwardly or outwardly active, 
whether one is awake or sleeping’. 

‘Being triple-headed and eight-armed’ is an allusion descriptive of several guardian 
beings who protect Buddhist temples and their trainees. The most likely candidates in the 
Zen tradition would be Achalanatha, the Steadfast Bodhisattva, and Ragaraja, the Passionate 
Bodhisattva. The former is sometimes associated with the firm commitment of trainees to 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


109 


The phrase ‘for the time being’ implies that time in its totality is what existence is, 
and that existence in all its occurrences is what time is. Thus, ‘being a golden body 
sixteen feet tall’ refers to a time. And because it is a time, its time will have a 
wondrous luminosity—a point that we will be studying and learning about during 
the present twenty-four hours. ‘Being one with three heads and eight arms’ also 
refers to a time. And because it is a time, it will be one and the same as the present 
twenty-four hours. Granted that we may not yet have measured the length of these 
twenty-four hours as to whether they are ever so long or as short as a sigh, still we 
speak of them as ‘the twenty-four hours of our day’. The traces of this time having 
come and gone are clear, so people do not doubt that these hours have occurred. 
But, though people have no doubt about time having occurred, the past may be 
something that they have not known through their direct experience. And, just 
because sentient beings are always having their doubts about anything and 
everything that they have not directly experienced, this does not mean that what 
they may have previously doubted is the same as what they may now have doubts 
about, for doubts themselves are merely ‘just for the moment’ kinds of time, and 
nothing more. 

djb 

CX) 


Since we human beings are continually arranging the bits and pieces of what 
we experience in order to fashion ‘a whole universe’, we must take care to look 
upon this welter of living beings and physical objects as ‘sometime’ things. Things 
do not go about hindering each other’s existence any more than moments of time 
get in each other’s way. As a consequence, the intention to train arises at the same 
time in different beings, and this same intention may also arise at different times. 
And the same applies to training and practice, as well as to realizing the Way. In a 
similar manner, we are continually arranging bits and pieces of what we experience 
in order to fashion them into what we call ‘a self’, which we treat as ‘myself’: this 
is the same as the principle of ‘we ourselves are just for a time’. 

Because of this very principle of the way things are, the earth in its entirety 
has myriad forms and hundreds of things sprouting up, each sprout and each form 
being a whole earth—a point which you should incorporate into your study of the 
Way, for the recognition of the coming and going of things in this manner is a first 


train until they have overcome all hindrances to realizing enlightenment as they persist in 
helping others to realize Truth. The latter has associations with a passionate desire to help all 
sentient beings realize Buddhahood. 

Please see the Glossary for the metaphorical meanings of a monk’s traveling staff, a 
ceremonial hossu, a temple pillar, and a stone lantern. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


110 


step in training and practice. When you reach such a fertile field of seeing the way 
things really are, then the earth in its entirety will be ‘one whole sprouting, one 
whole form’; it will be comprised of forms that you recognize and forms that you 
do not, sproutings that you recognize and sproutings that you do not. It is the same 
as the times we refer to in ‘from time to time’, which contain all forms of existence 
and all worlds. So take a moment to look around and consider whether there is any 
form of being, that is, any ‘world’, that does or does not find expression at this 
very moment of time. 

djb 

CX) 


When ordinary, everyday people who do not take the Buddha’s Teachings as 
their model hear the phrase ‘just for the time being’ in Yakusan’s poem, they 
customarily hold a view like the following: 

There was once a time when Yakusan had become what he 
describes as ‘someone with three heads and eight arms’ and some 
other time when he had become ‘someone eight or sixteen feet tali’. It 
is as though he were saying, “I have crossed the rivers and climbed 
over the mountains. Even though those mountains and rivers may 
have existed in the past, I have completely gone beyond them and 
have now made a place for myself atop a vermilion pedestal in the 
Jeweled Palace. 2 3 1 fancy that the mountains and rivers on the one hand 
and I on the other are now as far apart as heaven and earth.” 

But such a view is not all there is to the principle of the case. 

At the time when, proverbially, a mountain was being climbed and a river 
was being crossed, an I existed, and it was the time for that particular I. 4 Since 
such an I existed, time could not abandon it. If time did not have the characteristic 
of ‘coming and going, being continually in flux’, then the time when this I was 


2. An allusion to surpassing hindrances by training oneself to live by the Precepts and to 
surmounting obstacles by practicing meditation. 

3. A metaphor for being in the state of experiencing what ‘being enlightened’ is. The reference 
is to a lotus pedestal upon which an awakened being sits when residing in the Western Pure 
Land. 

4. Dogen’s point in using the word ‘I’ as a noun in this and the following paragraph is to 
indicate that there is no permanent, unchanging self that is being referred to, but rather a 
cluster of physical and mental characteristics that is flexible and fluid, undergoing change as 
the conditions and circumstances of what is existing change. Hence, this T refers to a series 
of manifestations over time, which are perceived as related to ‘a sentient being called 
Yakusan’, but which have no unchanging, atemporal ‘permanent self’ passing through them. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


111 


‘climbing atop the mountain’ would have remained forever, eternally comprised of 
that particular ‘time when’. But, since time retains the characteristic of ‘coming 
and going, being continually in flux’, there is a flow of ever-present ‘nows’, each 
comprised of a time when an I exists. And this is what is meant by the phrase ‘just 
for the time being’. Surely you don’t think that the earlier time when the word ‘I’ 
referred to ‘climbing the mountain’ or ‘crossing the river’ gulped up the later time 
when the word ‘I’ referred to ‘being on a vermilion pedestal within the Jeweled 
Palace’, or think that the former has vomited out the latter, do you?! ? 5 

Yakusan’s ‘being a triple-headed and eight-armed one’ refers to a time that 
he would have called ‘yesterday’: his ‘being someone eight or sixteen feet tall’ 
refers to a time that he would have called ‘today’. Be that as it may, this principle 
of a past and a present simply corresponds to the two periods of time when an I had 
headed straight into the mountains and when an I was now looking out from a 
vermilion pedestal over the thousands of peaks and the thousands beyond them. 
Nor have such periods passed away. The time of an I being ‘triple-headed and 
eight-armed for the time being’ had passed, but even though it seemed to be of 
another time and place, it was indeed a part of the ever-present now. The time of an 
I being ‘eight or sixteen feet tall for the time being’ has also passed, but even 
though it now seems to be something distant from us, it is indeed part of the ever¬ 
present now. Thus, we speak of the pine as an analogy for time, as we also do of 
the bamboo. 6 

djb 


Do not look upon time as ‘something that just flies away’: do not teach 
yourself that ‘flying away’ is simply how time functions. Were we to endow time 
with the property of ‘flying away’, there would undoubtedly be a gap left by the 
time that has flown. Should anyone have not yet heard teaching upon the principle 
expressed by the phrase ‘just for the time being’, he may still think of time only as 
‘something which has gone away’. 


5. Most likely this sentence refers to common but erroneous views as to where the flowing 
moments of the ever-present now go to when they are no longer present, and where such 
moments come from. Dogen is asserting that the past does not exist as an entity that 
‘swallows up’ the instances of present time once they are over, nor is the present something 
thrown out from such a past, as fatalism might suppose. 

6. An allusion to the Zen saying, “The bamboo, all up and down its length, has joints (which 
mark the passage of the seasons); the pine (being ever-green) has no colors to differentiate 
past from present.” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


112 


djb 

CX) 

In short, everything whatsoever that exists in the whole universe is a series 
of instances of time. Since everything is for the time being, we too are for the time 
being. 

djb 

CX) 


Time has the virtue of continuity: it continuously flows from the today that 
we are talking about to a tomorrow, from a today to a yesterday, from a yesterday 
to a today. It flows from a today to a today and from a tomorrow to a tomorrow. 
Because continual, continuous flow is a function of time, past and present times do 
not pile atop each other nor do they form an accumulative line. Yet, even so, 
Seigen, too, represents a time, as does Obaku, and likewise Baso and Sekito 

n 

represent times. Because we ourselves and others, as previously stated, are already 
‘beings for a time’, our training and practice are times, as is also our awakening to 
Truth. Our ‘entering the mud or going into deep water’ 7 8 is likewise a time. 


The opinions of ordinary, everyday people today—as well as the source of 
those opinions—are based on what these people perceive. But this is not what 
ordinary people consider as being how things operate. For them, the way things 
operate is that they have ‘simply come about for a while’. Because these people 
have convinced themselves that this time and this existence of theirs is not related 
to the way things really operate, they conclude that a golden body sixteen feet tall 
could not possibly be theirs. 9 Trying to free oneself from this opinion that “the 


7. Seigen, Sekito’s Master, was already dead before Yakusan was born, and therefore 
represents a time that Yakusan did not know through direct experience. Obaku, whose 
Master was Baso Doitsu, was a contemporary of Yakusan, and therefore ‘a time’ 
simultaneous with Yakusan’s time. Baso was contemporary with Sekito, both together 
representing a time that included a past that Yakusan did not know directly, a past that he 
did, a present that was also ‘his time’, and a future time that was not theirs. Although 
Yakusan was Sekito’s disciple and ultimately his Transmission heir, at one point Sekito sent 
Yakusan to train under Baso, who triggered Yakusan’s realization of the Truth. These 
relationships represent various ways in which the time of a particular sentient being 
(Yakusan) relates to the times of other sentient beings. 

8. A traditional Zen saying alluding to the actions of a bodhisattva who is willing to go 
anywhere to help ferry sentient beings to the Other Shore. 

9. That is, they think, “I am no more than what I am right now, so I could not possibly be a 
Buddha, and being what I am now, I cannot see how I could possibly become a Buddha.” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


113 


golden body of a Buddha cannot be mine” is also a bit of what the phrase ‘just for 
the time being’ implies, and is something about which a trainee who has not yet 
reached spiritual certainty may say, “Oh, I see, I get it!” 


In the world today, we structure time by segments which we name, for 
instance, the Hours of the Horse or the Hours of the Sheep. 10 Be that as it may, 
these segments are merely persistent fluctuations in the here and now of thoughts 
and things which arise and fall. It is the same with the Hours of the Rat and the 
Hours of the Tiger, which are also ‘for a time’. 11 And being an ordinary creature is 
also ‘for a time’, as is being a Buddha. At such times as these, one will swear that 
being three-headed and eight-armed is the whole universe or that being a golden 
body sixteen feet tall is the whole universe. To universally penetrate the whole 
universe by means of the whole universe is called ‘complete realization’. For us to 
give proof of a golden body sixteen feet tall by our attaining a golden body sixteen 
feet tall is to manifest our initial spiritual intention, our training and practice, our 
realizing of enlightenment, and our experiencing the freedom of nirvana—all of 
which comprises what existence is and what time is. It is a complete realization 
that the whole of time is what the whole of existence is, and that there is nothing 
more than this. Anything else would be a time when there was a partial ‘complete 
realization’, which would be a full realization of a part of what ‘just for the time 
being’ refers to. 

djb 

CX) 


Even at a stage where it would seem that you have taken a false step, this 
condition will be a state of ‘being’. Further, should you leave the matter at this, 
your condition will still constitute a persistence of ‘a time being’, which will 
include both a before and an after to this ‘having taken a false step’. Dealing with 


10. In medieval Japan, a full day was divided into twelve two-hour segments, named after the 
twelve signs of the Chinese zodiac. The Time of the Horse was 12:00 noon, and the Hours of 
the Horse were the hours preceding and following noon. Similarly, the Time of the Sheep 
was equivalent to 2:00 P.M. Except in the imperial court, where a water-clock was used for 
assuring that a ceremony was performed at the most auspicious time, determining time 
throughout medieval Japan was approximated based on the position of the sun in relation to 
the zenith. 

11. The Time of the Rat was midnight, and that of the Tiger was 4:00 A.M., times which were 
still commonly referred to as ‘segments of time’, even though they could not be determined, 
since the sun was not visible. Dogen’s point is that all such divisions are cultural 
conventions and do not constitute what time really is. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


114 


thoughts and things while they persist, like a fish darting about through the water, 12 
is indeed what ‘being just for the time being’ is about. So, do not be upset over 
what is not, and do not be pressured by what is. 


Should you reckon one-sidedly that time only goes by, you will not 
comprehend time as something that has not yet arrived. Although we can say that 
comprehending something also constitutes a time, there is no connection that can 

i o 

link the one to the other. No one with a human carcass who looks on time merely 
as ‘something that rolls on by me’ can have any insight into the ‘time being’ that 
persists just for a while, not to even mention the time when the barrier gate to 
realizing enlightenment is penetrated. 

Even if we comprehend that It is what persists, who can express in words 
what This is that we have realized? Even if, over a long time, we have found ways 
to express It in words, there is no one yet who has not groped for ways to make It 
be manifest before your very eyes. Were we to leave the matter of what ‘being for 
the time being’ means to the way in which ordinary persons understand the phrase, 
it would be a ‘being for the time being’ in which enlightenment and nirvana were, 
at best, merely passing characteristics. The ever-present ‘time being’ of which I am 
speaking cannot be snared like some bird by net or cage: it is what is manifesting 
before us. It is a time when the heavenly lords and the other celestial inhabitants 
are now manifesting right and left of us, and are making every effort to do so, even 
at this very moment. In addition, it is a time when beings of water and land are 
making every effort to manifest. Beings of all sorts, who are visible or invisible for 
the time being, are all making every effort to manifest, making every effort to flow 
on. If they did not make every effort to flow on, not even a single thought or thing 
would ever manifest: nothing would continue on. You would do well to consider 
this point. 

djb 

CX) 


The transiting of time and being is not to be thought of as wind blowing the 
rain from east to west. And it would be inaccurate to say that the whole world is 
unchanging, or that it is motionless: it is in transition. The flow of time and being is 
like spring, for instance. The spring has an appearance of being abundant in its 


12. A traditional Zen simile applied to a person who engages in the practice of all-acceptance 
and non-attachment. 

13. That is, for instance, one cannot predict the precise moment when someone will comprehend 
something. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


115 


burgeoning, and we refer to this as its ‘passage’. We should consider well that the 
spring ‘passes’ without excluding anything within it. In other words, the passing of 
spring is, to be sure, a passing of what we humans call ‘spring’. ‘Passing’ is not 
what spring is, but refers to the passage of the springtime; hence, it is a transition 
that is now being actualized during the time of spring. You would do well to 
consider and reflect on this very carefully, for in speaking of ‘transiting’, some 
may think of it in reference to some place physically apart from themselves, which 
can be reached by turning eastward, say, or by traveling past myriad worlds over 
millions and millions of eons. But such people are not concentrating simply on the 
study of the Buddha’s Way. 

djb 


Yakusan, who by imperial decree was named ‘The Great Teacher Whose 
Way Is Broad’, one time, at the direction of Great Master Sekito Kisen, made a 
spiritual call on Meditation Master Baso. 

Yakusan asked him, “The one standing before you has a fairly 
good idea of what all twelve divisions of the Scriptures as found 
among the followers of the Three Vehicles* of Buddhism are about, 
so just why did the Ancestral Teacher Bodhidharma come east to 
China???” 

Being queried in this manner, Meditation Master Baso 
responded, “There are times when we make That One’s eyebrows rise 
and His eyes twinkle, and there are times when we do not make His 
eyebrows rise and His eyes twinkle. There are times when we who 
make That One’s eyebrows rise and His eyes twinkle are right, and 
there are times when we who make His eyebrows rise and His eyes 
twinkle are not right.” 

Upon hearing this, Yakusan had a great awakening and humbly 
said to Baso, “When I was with Sekito, I was like a mosquito climbing 
over an iron ox, trying to find a place to bite.” 

Baso’s way of putting things is unlike that of any other. ‘Brows and eyeballs’ 
would refer to the mountains and the oceans, because the mountains and the oceans 
are His brows and eyeballs. 14 Baso’s ‘making Him raise His eyebrows’ would be 


* See Glossary. 

14. In this and the following paragraph, the images of ‘mountain’ and ‘ocean’ echo the opening 
couplet of Yakusan’s poem. Context suggests that ‘mountain’ is an allusion to training and 
practice, and ‘ocean’ to the realization of one’s innate state of‘being enlightened’. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


116 


comparable to Yakusan’s focusing on the Mountain, and Baso’s ‘making His eyes 
twinkle’ would be comparable to Yakusan’s fixing his eyes on the Ocean. ‘Being 
right’ means attempting to leam from ‘That One’: ‘That One’ is That which is 
being invited to teach. ‘Not being right’ does not mean ‘not causing Him to act as 
He did’, nor does ‘not causing Him to act as He did’ mean ‘not being right’. 


Mountains are of time: oceans are of time. Were there no time, neither 
mountains nor oceans could be. Do not think that time does not exist for the 
mountains and oceans of the present moment. Were time to cease to exist, so would 
mountains and oceans cease to exist: if time does not become extinct, then 
mountains and oceans too will not become extinct. This is why the morning star 
arose, the Tathagata emerged, his clear Eye of Wise Discernment manifested, and 
the raising of the udumbara flower came about. 15 These are times: were they not 
times, there could not be any ‘being with It’ here and now. 16 


Meditation Master Kisei of Sekken County was a Dharma descendant of 
Rinzai, as well as Shuzan’s direct heir. One day, he addressed his monastic 
community in verse, saying: 

There is a time when intending has arrived, but not 
expressing, 

There is a time when expressing has arrived, but not 
intending, 

There is a time when both intending and expressing have 
arrived, 

And there is a time when both intending and expressing 
have not arrived . 17 


15. Allusions to Prince Siddhartha’s awakening to the Truth upon seeing the morning star arise, 
and then, as the Tathagata, with eyes twinkling, holding aloft the udumbara flower, which 
set in motion the Transmission of the Truth, starting with his smiling disciple Makakasho. 

16. To ‘be with It’ here and now is an attempt to render the term immo when used in its Chinese 
slang meaning for the condition of persons or things being just what they truly are, without 
any sense of an existence separate from time and without any sense of a false self. 

17. To paraphrase these four conditions from the perspective of Dogen’s analysis of the poem: 
(1) there is a time when someone deliberately trains with the intention of realizing what the 
Truth is, but since he (or she) has not yet arrived at that state, he is unable to express what 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


117 


Both ‘intending’ and ‘expressing’ are ‘for the time being’: both ‘having 
arrived’ and ‘having not arrived’ are ‘for the time being’. Even though one may say 
that “the time of arriving is not yet fully here,” the time of ‘having not arrived’ is 

1 o 

here. ‘Intending’ is the donkey; ‘expressing’ is the horse. The role of the horse is 
assigned to expressing; the role of the donkey is assigned to intending. Just as 
‘arriving’ is not synonymous with ‘coming’, ‘having not arrived’ does not mean 
‘still not having arrived’, for this is what being ‘just for the time’ is like. Arriving is 
hindered by ‘arrival’, but is not hindered by not having arrived. Having not arrived 
is hindered by ‘not having arrived’, but is not hindered by arriving. So, when it 
comes to intending, we look at our intention as just an intention; when it comes to 
expressing, we look at our expression as just an expression; when it comes to 
hindrances, we look at what is hindering us as just a hindrance. It is a matter of 
‘obstructions’ getting in the way of obstructions, all of which are ‘just for a time’. 19 
Although you may say that ‘obstruction’ is a word that we can apply to other 
situations, there is still nothing which I am calling ‘an obstruction’ that impedes 
those situations. It is ourselves encountering others; it is others encountering each 
other; it is ourselves encountering ourselves; it is one who is emerging 
encountering one who has emerged. If each of these did not have their specific 
time, being ‘with It’ here and now would be impossible. Furthermore, ‘intending’ 
refers to the time when the spiritual question manifests before our very eyes; 


that Truth is, and (2) there is a time when the trainee realizes what this Truth is and 
spontaneously (that is, without intention) gives expression to It, but without being fully 
conscious that this is what he has done, and (3) there is a time after having realized the Truth 
when the trainee deliberately gives expression to It, and (4) there is a time after having 
realized the Truth when the trainee is simply going on with his training, without deliberately 
trying to ‘make a point of it’. These four conditions correlate with Dogen’s terms 
‘intending’, ‘arriving’, ‘having arrived’, and ‘having not arrived’, which he presents in the 
ensuing paragraph. 

18. That is, trainees should not wait until they have completely finished all training (‘doing the 
donkey work of training’) before attempting to give voice to the Dharma (‘doing the horse 
work of teaching’). 

19. To help simplify this difficult and profound passage: One’s arriving at realizing the Truth is 
hindered by any notion of ‘having to arrive’, but is not hindered by the fact that one has not 
yet arrived. One’s state of having not arrived is hindered by a notion of ‘not having arrived’, 
but is not hindered by arriving. So, when it comes to intending to train, we look at our 
intention as just an intention; when it comes to expressing the Truth, we look at our 
expression as just an expression; when it comes to hindrances, we look at what is hindering 
us as just a hindrance. Similarly, it is a matter of our notions of ‘obstructions’ getting in the 
way of our seeing our obstructions (all of which, too, are just for the time being). 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While... ’ 


118 


‘expressing’ refers to the time when one looks up and unbolts the barrier gate; 
‘arriving’ refers to the time when body and mind are dropped off; and ‘having not 
arrived’ refers to the time when this ‘dropping off’ is left behind [as you go always 
onward, always ‘becoming Buddha’]. This is the way that you should diligently 
apply yourself, the way that you should treat whatever arises as ‘just for a while’. 

Although the venerable Masters up to the present time have spoken about 
the Matter* in such a way, might there not be something more that needs to be 
said? Well, I would add, “There are times when intending and expressing are 
halfway there, and there are times when intending and expressing are halfway not 
there.” You would do well to investigate and clarify the Matter in such a way. And 
again, “Making That One’s eyebrows rise and His eyes twinkle is half of what ‘just 
for the time being’ is about, and making That One’s eyebrows rise and His eyes 
twinkle may also be a counterfeit ‘just for the time being’, and making That One’s 
eyebrows rise and His eyes twinkle may also be a completely false ‘just for the 
time being. ’ ” 

In such a manner, coming to training, going on in training, training until you 
arrive, and training beyond arriving are, at all times, ‘just for the time being, just 
for a while’. 

Written at Kdshohorin-ji Temple on the first day of winter in the first year of the Ninji era 

(October 17, 1240). 

Copied by me during the summer training period in the first year of the Kangen era (1243). 

Ejo 



12 

On the Transmission of the Kesa 

(Den ’e) 


Translator’s Introduction: This discourse and Discourse 84: On the Spiritual Merits of the 
Kesa (Kesa Kudoku) are both concerned with the kesa, the cloak-like robe which has 
traditionally been worn by most Buddhists, both monastic and lay, since the time of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. This discourse was based on a Dharma talk that Dogen gave to his assembly and it 
appears in the earliest version of the Shobogenzo, whereas the Kesa Kudoku was apparently 
written to cover, in greater detail, certain points raised in Den ’e, but it was not formally 
incorporated into the Shobogenzo until some time after Dogen’s death. While both discourses 
share common topics and even some similar or identical passages, each has much that is unique, 
and readers may well find the reading of both to be worthwhile, despite any repetitions. 

Two technical Buddhist terms that are applied to the kesa in both texts need some 
explication. The first is juji, translated as ‘to accept and keep to (the kesa)’. While, from a 
linguistic perspective, it might also be rendered as ‘to receive and keep (the kesa)’, Dogen 
explicitly states in both texts that he does not intend this latter meaning with its passive 
implication of ‘being given something which is then put away for safekeeping’. That is, it is not 
enough to receive a kesa, the recipient must also accept it and what it implies; likewise, the robe 
is not to be stored away, but is to be put to use. ‘Putting it to use’ implies keeping to it and what 
it stands for, just as one keeps to the Precepts and what they stand for, an analogy that Dogen 
implies in both texts but does not explicitly make. 

The second term is butsue, which has multiple meanings, including ‘the Buddha robe’, ‘the 
Buddha’s robe’, ‘a Buddha robe’, and ‘a robe for a Buddha’, referring to both a physical garment 
and that which spiritually enrobes the trainee. In some contexts, it is clear which meaning Dogen 
intends, whereas in other contexts more than one of these may be intended, so that the meaning 
of the passage becomes ambiguous, permitting a different understanding according to whether 
the reader is, say, a lay person, a novice monk, a transmitted monk, or one who has or has not 
had a kensho, that is, the experience of one’s Buddha Nature. And there are times when Dogen is 
obviously talking about a physical robe, only to suddenly shift to talking about a spiritual robe, 
and then almost immediately to go back to his discussion of a physical robe. It is left to the 
reader to discover and enjoy this multidimensional, kaleidoscopic aspect in Dogen’s writing. 

In these two texts, there is also an aspect of tone that needs comment, for it may seem to 
some readers that, in a number of passages, Dogen is being singularly bombastic. This is not the 
case. Dogen was faced with several problems in the training of his disciples. First, he was having 
difficulty with state and ecclesiastical authorities who did not want him (or anyone else) to teach 
pure meditation to the exclusion of other fonns of meditation. Second, his reputation had already 
spread widely enough that he was beginning to attract disciples who had done training under 
other teachers, teachers who were given to mixing all manner of non-Buddhist teachings and 
methods in with their Buddhist training. Third, as a verse from the monastic ordination ceremony 


119 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


120 


states, “All bodhisattvas, when converted to the Truth for the first time, search therefore, but 
their minds are hard and set and cannot be broken,” but Dogen attempts to help his bodhisattvas 
by hammering away at some of the hardness and rigidity of their thinking. Fourth, because 
trainees are apt to dismiss points of teaching which seem trivial to them, Dogen, through his 
strong expression of feelings about these points, is helping his disciples to realize the vital 
importance of keeping true to the Dharma. Such an emotional appeal would have been more 
persuasive to his medieval Japanese compatriots (and more easily remembered) than a finely 
wrought, elegantly presented logical refutation of erroneous practices and teachings. 


The robe and the Dharma which Buddhas correctly Transmit to Buddhas 
were, beyond doubt, properly Transmitted to China only by the Highest Ancestor 
Bodhidharma at Shorin-ji Monastery. That is to say, the Highest Ancestor was the 
Ancestral Master of the twenty-eighth generation from Shakyamuni Buddha. The 
twenty-eight generations in India passed this robe and Dharma on in succession, 
and They were properly Transmitted through six generations in China. These 
comprised thirty-three generations altogether for India and China. 1 

The Thirty-third Generation Ancestor, Meditation Master Daikan Eno, 
received the Transmission of this robe and Dharma on Mount Obai in the middle of 
the night and safeguarded Them throughout his life. To this day, this robe is still 
safely enshrined at Horin-ji Temple on Mount Sokei. Various generations of 
imperial rulers respectfully requested that it be brought to court, where they made 
venerative offerings to it. It is treated as an object protected by wondrous spiritual 
guardians. Three emperors of the T’ang dynasty—Chu-tsung, Su-tsung, and T’ai- 
tsung—repeatedly had it brought back to court, so that they might make venerative 
offerings out of respect for it. Whenever it was sent for or returned, the emperors 
would have an imperial emissary accompany it, along with their edict on the 
matter. This is indicative of their great respect. 

Emperor T’ai-tsung once sent the following edict when returning the 
Buddha’s robe to Mount Sokei, “I am now pleased to entrust to Commander 
General Liu Chung-ching, Pacifier of Our Nation, the return of this robe with all 
courtesies. We declare this robe to be a national treasure. Venerable Abbot, I pray 
that you will safely enshrine it in your temple, placing it under the rigorous care 
and protection of those monks of your community who have personally received 
from you the tenets of our religion, never letting it fall into neglect.” Because of 
this attitude, emperors over a number of generations all regarded it as an important 
national treasure. Truly, the one who safeguards this robe of the Buddha in his 


1. That is, Bodhidharma was considered both the twenty-eighth Indian Ancestor and the first 
Chinese Ancestor. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


121 


country is also a great treasure who surpasses even those who may hold dominion 
over any of the three-thousand great-thousandfold worlds, which are as countless 
as the sands of the Ganges. It is an object that far outranks Pien-ho’s jewel. Even 
if such a gem were to serve as the imperial seal at an enthronement, how could it 
possibly compare with the wondrous treasure that Transmits Buddhahood? 

From the time of the great T’ang dynasty on, the monks and laity who have 
looked upon this robe with reverence and bowed to it have undoubtedly had a great 
capacity for faith in the Dharma. Had they received no help from the good that they 
did in previous lives, how could they possibly have received that body of theirs 
which made possible their actually looking upon, and reverently bowing to, the 
Buddha’s robe that Buddha after Buddha had directly passed on? The skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow of those who accept it in faith will take delight in it; those who 
cannot accept it in faith, even though this is the result of their own doing, will 
regret the absence of this seed of Buddhahood. 

Even common folk say, “To see someone’s daily deeds is to see what that 
person really is.” To look upon and respectfully bow to the robe of a Buddha is to 
see Buddha, in all humility, right now. We should erect hundreds of thousands 
upon thousands of stupas* in venerative offering to this Buddha robe. Any beings 
who possess a mind, be they in the heavens above or in the oceans below, will 
deeply respect it. Among humans too—from saintly ones who rule over vast 
empires on down—anyone who can discern what is true and recognize what is 
surpassing will prize it. 

Sad to say, some of the kinsmen who became rulers of China in later 
generations did not realize the enormous treasure that they had in their country. 
Often misled and captivated by Taoist teaching, many indeed abandoned the 
Buddha Dharma. At those times, they did not don the kesa but put the cap of a 
Taoist upon their shaven domes, and, when they lectured, their talk was in the 
direction of how to extend the length of one’s life. This occurred during both the 
T’ang and Sung dynasties. Even though such types were considered rulers of their 
nations, they must have been more base than any of their subjects. 

You should calmly consider whether the Buddha robe has come to abide in 
our country and is present here now. And you would also do well to ponder 
whether ours could be a Buddha Land for the robe, for it is more valuable than any 


2. Pien-ho was a person in ancient China who offered to three rulers a huge, unpolished jewel 
that he had found, but none of these rulers were able to perceive its intrinsic value, and 
therefore summarily rejected the offering. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


122 


ash relic or such. As for ashes, we have them for rulers of vast lands, and for lions, 
and for ordinary folk, as well as for pratyekabuddhas* and the like, but mighty 
rulers do not have a kesa, nor do lions, nor do ordinary folk: accept in deepest faith 
that Buddhas alone have the kesa. 

Nowadays, foolish people in great numbers highly prize ash relics whilst 
knowing nothing of the kesa, much less of how they should preserve and keep to 
one. This is due to the fact that those who have heard of the importance of a kesa 
are few, and even they may not yet have learned of the True Transmission of the 
Buddha’s Dharma. 

When we carefully take into consideration how much time has passed since 
the Venerable Shakyamuni was in the world, it has been scarcely some two 
thousand years. Many of our national treasures and ancient sacred utensils that 
have come down to us today are older by far: the Buddha’s Dharma and the 
Buddha’s robe are newer and nearer our times. As the Lotus Scripture observes, the 
spiritual benefits arising from the propagation of the Buddha’s Teachings will be 
wondrous, no matter how widely this Teaching may spread—be it through 
farmlands or towns—even if one person passes It on to only fifty others. National 
treasures and sacred utensils do have their merits, and the merits of the Buddha 
robe can never be less than, or even merely equal to these, for this robe has been 
truly Transmitted by authentic Dharma descendants. 

Be aware that we can realize the Way when we hear the four lines of the kesa 
verse, and we can realize the Way when we hear a single line of Scripture. Why 
can the four lines of the verse or a single line of Scripture produce such a profound 
spiritual experience of being ‘with It’ here and now? 3 Because, as it is said, they 
are part and parcel of the Buddha Dharma. 

Now, each kind of robe, including the nine types of sanghati robe, has been 
correctly passed on from the Buddha’s Teaching. 4 None can be inferior to the four 
lines of the kesa verse or less beneficial than a single line of Scripture. Because of 
this, for more than two thousand years, the various beings who have been 
exploring how to follow the Buddha—both those whose practice stems from faith 
and those whose practice stems from understanding the Dharma—have all 
protected and kept to the kesa, and treated it as their very Body and Mind. Those 
folks who are in the dark as to the True Teaching of Buddhas do not revere or prize 


3. To be ‘with It’ here and now is an attempt to render the term immo when used in its Chinese 
slang meaning for the condition of persons or things being just what they truly are, without 
any sense of an existence separate from time and without any sense of a false self. 

4. The sanghati robe is the largest of three basic types of kesa. Dogen gives a detailed 
explanation of all three in Discourse 84: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa (Kesa Kudoku). 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


123 


the kesa. Now, both Shakrendra [ruling lord of the Trayastrimsha Heavens] and the 
dragon lord who dwells in Anavatapta Lake, for instance, have guarded and 
protected the kesa, even though the first is a celestial lay ruler and the second a 
dragon lord. 

Be this as it may, that type who shave their heads and then go around calling 
themselves ‘disciples of Buddha’ have not the slightest awareness of those who, 
having put on the kesa, accept and keep to it. This is to say nothing of their having 
any knowledge about its materials, colors, or dimensions, nor are they aware of the 
ways in which it is worn, nor, even less, have they ever seen, even in their dreams, 
the dignified manner in which it is treated. 


From ancient times, when the kesa has been spoken of, it has been called 
‘the garment that protects us from overheating our brains’ and ‘the garment of 
liberation’. In short, its spiritual merits are beyond measure. By virtue of the kesa, 
a dragon’s scales can be liberated from their three types of burning pain. 5 When 
any of the Buddhas fully realized the Way, it was undoubtedly due to Their having 
made use of this robe. Truly, even though we have been born in a remote region at 
the time of the final stages of the Teaching, if any of us have the opportunity to 
choose whether to be Transmitted or not, we must accept in faith—as well as guard 
and maintain—the true inheritance that is being passed on to us. 

What other tradition has genuinely Transmitted the robe and the Dharma of 
our Venerable Shakyamuni as we have genuinely Transmitted Them? They exist 
only in the Buddha’s Way. Who, upon encountering this robe and Dharma, would 
fail to be generous in respecting Them and in making venerative offerings to 
Them? Even if, in the space of a single day, we were to renounce our physical life 
for times as countless as the sands of the Ganges, we should make venerative 
offerings to Them. We should vow that we will humbly raise Them above our head 
whenever we encounter Them in life after life, for generation after generation. 
Even though we may have been born in a place separated from the Buddha’s native 
land by more than a hundred thousand leagues of mountains and seas, and even 
though we may be muddle-headed, ignorant provincials, the fact that we have 
heard this True Teaching, and have accepted and are keeping to this kesa, even if it 
be only for a single day and night, and are exploring how to put into practice a 
single line of Scripture or the whole of the kesa verse, this cannot be due simply to 


5. Namely, suffering from fiery heat, from fierce desert winds, and from being devoured by a 
garuda bird. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


124 


the blessings and merits from our having made venerative offerings to just one or 
two Buddhas; it must be due to the blessings and merits from our having made 
venerative offerings to, and having attended upon, countless hundreds of thousands 
of millions of Buddhas. Even if it were due to our own efforts, we should feel 
respect for the robe and Dharma, cherish Them, and prize Them. 


We should show our gratitude to the Ancestral Masters for their great 
kindness in Transmitting the Dharma to us. Since even animals repay kindliness, 
how could humans fail to understand kindness? If people do not recognize 
kindness, they must be inferior to animals; they must be even denser than animals. 


Those who are not Ancestral Masters who Transmit the Buddha’s True 
Teaching do not even dream of the spiritual merits of this Buddha robe. How much 
less could they come up with anything that clarifies for others what its materials, 
colors, and measurements are? If you would follow in the footsteps of the Buddha, 
then you should, by all means, follow this robe and Dharma. Even after a hundred 
thousand myriad generations, people would still be able to correctly pass on the 
genuine Transmission for, undoubtedly, it will be the Buddha’s Dharma. The proof 
of Its authenticity will indeed be evident. 


Even the secular Confucian teaching admonishes its followers not to wear 
clothing which differs from that officially worn during the time of the previous 
ruler, nor to act in ways that go against the regulations of previous rulers. It is also 
the same for the Buddha’s Way: if something is not in accord with the Dharma 
clothing of previous Buddhas, do not use it. If it is something other than the 
Dharma clothing of previous Buddhas, what are we to clothe ourselves with so that 
we may train in and practice the Buddha’s Way and attend upon all the Buddhas? 
Were we not to clothe ourselves with this ‘garment’, it would be hard indeed for us 
to enter into the assembly of the Buddhas. 


Since the middle of the Yung-p’ing era (67 C.E.) of Emperor Hsiao-ming of 
the Later Han dynasty, monks who came from India to eastern lands ceaselessly 
followed upon the heels of their predecessors, and we have often heard of monks 
heading to India from China, but none of these travelers said that they had ever 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


125 


encountered anyone who conferred the Buddha Dharma face-to-face. All they had 
to show were words and forms that they had vainly learned from disputatious 
teachers and pedantic scholars of the Tripitaka.* They had not heard of the direct 
heirs of the Buddha’s Dharma. Because of this, they could not go so far as to 
impart to anyone that the Buddha’s robe was actually to be passed on, or to say that 
they had personally encountered anyone to whom the Buddha’s robe had been 
passed on, or to tell of having seen or heard of anyone who had Transmitted the 
robe. Be very clear about this: they had not crossed the threshold and entered into 
the Buddha’s family. Those fellows saw the kesa as just an item of clothing and 
nothing more, and did not realize that it was the most venerable and prized 
manifestation of the Buddha Dharma. Truly, what a pity! 

Those who are genuine successors and have continued to Transmit the 
Treasure House of the Buddha’s Dharma have also continued to pass on the robe of 
a Buddha, which they had received in turn. Among ordinary people, as well as 
among those in more lofty positions, it is widely known that the Ancestral Masters 
to whom the Treasure House of the Dharma has been genuinely Transmitted have 
never failed to see the Buddha robe or failed to pay attention to what it signifies. 
Hence, the Ancestors have come to accurately pass on what the materials, colors, 
and dimensions of a Buddha’s kesa are. Since they have actually seen and paid 
attention to such a kesa, they have accurately Transmitted what its great spiritual 
merits are and have genuinely Transmitted the Body and Mind, Bones and Marrow 
of the kesa of a Buddha—all of which occurs only through the actions of those in 
the tradition of the authentic Transmission. It is unknown to the various traditions 
associated with the Agarna Scriptures. A robe that has been established according 
to some personal design of the moment is not a genuinely Transmitted one, nor is it 
the robe of any legitimate descendant. 


When our Great Master, the Tathagata Shakyamuni, conferred on 
Makakasho the Dharma of Supreme Wisdom—which is the Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching—He passed on along with It the Buddha robe. After that, 
the robe was received by successor after successor down to Meditation Master 
Daikan Eno of Mount Sokei, spanning thirty-three generations. Each generation 
had personally seen and passed on what the materials, colors, and dimensions of 
monastic robes were to be. Our Zen tradition has long passed this information on 
and, as is evident today, has accepted and kept to it. In other words, that kesa which 
the founding Ancestors of the five branches of Chinese Zen have each accepted 
and kept to is what they have correctly Transmitted. It is likewise evident that there 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


126 


has never been any confusion about this between any Master and his or her heir, 
not even in those traditions having forty, fifty, or even more generations. They have 
all worn and constructed the robe according to the methods of previous Buddhas, 
which each Buddha on His own has passed on, just as all the Buddhas have done, 
generation after generation, without the slightest interruption. 

In the instructions of the Buddha which heir after heir has correctly passed 
on, the following are mentioned: 

The robe of seven panels, each comprised of three long 
segments and one short segment. 

The robe of nine panels, each comprised of four long segments 
and one short segment. 

The robe of eleven panels, each comprised of three long 
segments and one short segment. 

The robe of thirteen panels, each comprised of three long 
segments and one short segment. 

The robe of fifteen panels, each comprised of four long 
segments and one short segment. 

The robe of seventeen panels, each comprised of four long 
segments and one short segment. 

The robe of nineteen panels, each comprised of four long 
segments and one short segment. 

The robe of twenty-one panels, each comprised of four long 
segments and one short segment. 

The robe of twenty-three panels, each comprised of four long 
segments and one short segment. 

The robe of twenty-five panels, each comprised of four long 
segments and one short segment. 

The robe of two hundred fifty panels, each comprised of four 
long segments and one short segment. 

The robe of eighty-four thousand panels, each comprised of 
eight long segments and one short segment. 

What I have now given you is an abbreviated list. There are, in addition, various 
other types of kesas which, all together, comprise the sanghati robes. 

No matter whether a person is a householder or someone who has left home 
to be a monk, he or she accepts and keeps to the kesa. When I speak of accepting 
and keeping to it, I am referring to wearing it and putting it to use, not to uselessly 
keeping it all folded up and stored away somewhere. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


127 


Even if someone shaves their head and beard, should that person not accept 
and keep to the kesa, but instead hate and despise it, or be afraid of it, such a one is 
outside the path and will attempt to bedevil and obstruct others. As Meditation 
Master Hyakujo Daichi once said, “A person who has planted no good seeds in 
former lives will shun the kesa, despise the kesa, and both fear and despise the 
True Teaching.” 

djb 


The Buddha once said: 

Let us suppose that some person enters into Our Teaching and 
then commits some heavy offense or falls into false views. If, within 
the space of a single thought, that person shows deep reverence for the 
sanghati robe out of a feeling of respect, then all the Buddhas, 
including Myself, will surely give this person a guarantee that he or 
she shall realize Buddhahood from within any one of the Three 
Courses.* If any—be they lofty beings, or dragons, or ordinary 
humans, or hungry ghosts*—are able to show even the slightest 
respect for the spiritual merits of this person’s kesa, then, once having 
entered any of the Three Courses, they will neither regress nor turn 
away from them. Suppose that there is some hungry ghost or spirit, or 
even any other type of sentient being. Should such a one be able to 
obtain even a four-inch bit of a person’s kesa, he or she will have what 
they hunger and thirst for completely satisfied. Suppose that there are 
sentient beings who are about to fall into false views through having 
antagonistic attitudes towards each other. If they hold in mind the 
spiritual potential of the kesa, then, due to the influence of the kesa, 
they will be able, before long, to give rise to a compassionate heart 
and return to a state of immaculacy. Suppose that there is some person 
who is in military service. Should he have in his possession the 
smallest bit of a kesa which he respects and reverently prizes, he will 
undoubtedly attain spiritual liberation. 

So, obviously, these spiritual merits of the kesa are peerless and beyond anything 
that we can imagine or conceive of. Whenever anyone has faith in this kesa, 
accepts it, protects it, and keeps to it, he or she will, beyond question, attain future 
liberation as well as a state of non-regression. This was not proclaimed by 
Shakyamuni Buddha alone: it has likewise been proclaimed by all Buddhas. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


128 


djb 

CX) 

We must recognize that the bodily aspect of all Buddhas is the kesa. This is 
why the Buddha said, “Anyone who has fallen into wicked ways will loathe the 
sanghati robe.” Thus, whenever anyone sees a kesa and pays heed to it, should 
thoughts of loathing then arise, he or she should give rise to a compassionate heart, 
saying, “I am about to let myself fall into wicked ways,” and, feeling remorse, 
admit to what he or she has done. 

Moreover, Shakyamuni Buddha, right after He had left the royal palace on 
His way to entering the mountains, was forthwith presented with a sanghati robe by 
a tree spirit who said to Him, “If you respectfully place this robe above your head, 
you will avoid being disturbed by bedeviling obstructions.” At that time, 
Shakyamuni Buddha accepted this robe and respectfully lifted it above His head, 
and then, it has been said, for the next twelve years until His awakening, He did 
not let it drop for even a moment. This is reported in the Agama Scriptures. 

Some say that the kesa is indeed an auspicious garment, and that anyone 
who makes use of it as raiment will surely arrive at an exalted spiritual rank. 
Speaking in more general terms, there has been no season when this sanghati robe 
has not existed right before us. Its manifestation at any particular time is an 
instance of its continual existence, and its continual existence reveals itself at some 
particular time within the long stretch of eons. To obtain a kesa is to obtain the 
banner that is the badge of Buddha. Because of this, there has not yet been any 
Buddha Tathagata who has not accepted and kept to the kesa. There has never been 
anyone who accepts and keeps to the kesa who will not realize Buddhahood. 


The Methods for Wearing a Kesa 

The usual method is to keep the right shoulder bare. There is also a method 
for wearing a kesa over both shoulders. [You begin with the unfolded kesa held 
behind your back by its upper corners.] When placing the upper right and left ends 
atop the left arm and shoulder, bring the right corner across in front [passing it 
under your right arm] and drape it back over the left shoulder. You then tuck the 
right vertical edge between your left arm and your torso. Next, bring the left corner 
to the front over the left shoulder and arm, and then tuck the left vertical edge in 
towards the back between your arm and your torso . 6 This reflects the Buddha’s 


6. Dogen’s description conforms to the way in which the kesa is still being worn in the 
Theravadin tradition. In present-day Soto Zen, a clip or tie is used to hold the kesa at the left 
shoulder, which necessitates a slightly different procedure. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


129 


everyday behavior. It is not something that any of the shravakas* saw or heard 
about, nor did they pass it on, nor has a word of this leaked out from the teachings 
of any of the Agama Scriptures. In general, the dignified procedure for wearing a 
kesa in the Buddha’s Way is what was undoubtedly accepted and kept to by 
Ancestral Masters who passed on the True Teaching that was being manifested 
before them. Beyond question, what we accept and keep to should be what was 
accepted and kept to by these Ancestral Masters. Accordingly, the kesa that the 
Ancestors of the Buddha have correctly passed on is not something that Buddhas 
Transmitted to Buddhas in some haphazard manner. It is the kesa of former 
Buddhas and of present-day Buddhas: it is the kesa of old Buddhas and of new 
Buddhas. It transforms what ‘the Way’ means: it transforms what ‘Buddha’ means. 
It transforms the past, the present, and the future. In doing so, it makes a genuine 
Transmission from the past to the immediate present, from the immediate present 
to the future, from the immediate present to the past, from the past to the past, from 
present moment to present moment, from future to future, from the future to the 
immediate present, and from the future to the past—because it is the genuine 
Transmission of each Buddha on His own, just as it has been for all the Buddhas. 

Because of this, starting with our Ancestral Master Bodhidharma’s coming 
from the West and continuing through the hundreds of years of the great T’ang and 
Sung dynasties, there were many expert lecturers on the Scriptures who saw 
through what they were vainly doing. When these folks, who were involved with 
such things as philosophical schools and teachings on monastic rules and 
regulations, entered into the Buddha Dharma, they discarded their former kesa, 
which was a shabby old robe, and straightaway accepted the kesa that was 
authentically Transmitted in the Buddha’s Way. The effects of their doing so are 
strung together, one after the other, in such works as the Ching-te Era Record of 
the Transmission of the Lamp, the T’ien-sheng Era Record of the Widely Illumining 
Lamp , the Supplementary Record of the Lamp , and the Chia-tai Era Record of the 
Lamp Whose Light Reaches Everywhere. Letting go of their numerous narrow 
scholastic views on doctrine and monastic rules, they straightaway prized the Great 
Way that the Ancestors of the Buddha had Transmitted, and all became Ancestors 
of the Buddha. People today should also take a lesson from these Ancestral Masters 
of old. 

djb 

CX) 


If you would accept and keep to the kesa, it must be a correctly Transmitted 
kesa that has been correctly Transmitted to you: it must be one that you have faith 
in and accept. You must not accept and keep to a spurious kesa. When I speak of 
that ‘correctly Transmitted kesa’, I am referring to the one that has been correctly 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


130 


Transmitted through Shorin-ji Monastery and Mount Sokei: this is the one that 
generation after generation of successors received from the Tathagata without 
skipping a single generation. Because of this, those engaged in the Way 
unmistakably accept and pass it on, relying upon the Buddha kesa being personally 
placed in their hands. 

The Way of Buddha is straightforwardly Transmitted to the Way of Buddha: 
it is not left to idle people to acquire the Transmission at their leisure. There is a 
common saying, “Hearing about something a thousand times does not compare 
with a single sighting of it, and seeing something a thousand times does not 
compare with a single direct encounter.” When we reflect on this, even if there 
were a thousand sightings and ten thousand hearings, they would not compare with 
the actual acquiring of a kesa: indeed, they could not compare with the direct 
Transmission of the Buddha robe. Those who may doubt that there is an authentic 
Transmission should doubt even more those folks who have not encountered the 
authentic Transmission even in their dreams. The person to whom the Buddha robe 
is authentically Transmitted will be more directly involved than the person who 
just hears someone else passing on Buddhist doctrines. And a thousand direct 
encounters with a robe or ten thousand acquisitions of one can never compare with 
a single realization of Truth. It is the Buddhas and Ancestors who have realized and 
given proof to the Truth. So, do not copy the stream of those ordinary, mundane 
students of doctrines and monastic rules. 


To speak more generally about the spiritual merits of the kesa in our 
Ancestral line: the authentic Transmission has been duly received, its original form 
has been passed on from person to person, and its acceptance and maintenance— 
along with the inherited Dharma—have continued on, unceasing, to this very day. 
Those who have genuinely accepted it are all Ancestral Masters whose realization 
of Truth has been attested to, and who Transmit the Dharma. They surpass even 
those who are ‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’.* We should revere and respect 
them, bow and humbly place them above the crown of our head. s 

Were you to trust and accept the principle of the authentic Transmission of 
the robe of a Buddha just once whilst in this body and mind, then that would be an 
indication of your encountering Buddha, and it would be the way to leam what 


7. Shorin-ji Monastery is associated with Bodhidharma and Mount Sokei with Daikan Eno. 

8. To place them above the crown of our head means to esteem them more highly than we 
esteem ourselves. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


131 


Buddha is. How pitiable your life would be if you were incapable of accepting this 
Dharma! You should deeply affirm for yourself that, having once wrapped your 
body in a kesa, it serves as an amulet for safeguarding you, so that you may settle 
the Matter* and fully realize Spiritual Wisdom . 9 It is said that if you let a single 
sentence or a single poem of Scripture permeate your trusting heart, Its radiance 
will continually shine forth for the long stretch of eons. If you let one bit of 
Dharma permeate your body and mind, Its effect will be the same. 

The thoughts that permeate the mind find no place of permanent abiding and 
are not part of us, yet their spiritual merits are completely as just described. And it 
is likewise with the body, which finds no abiding permanence. The kesa has no 
coming forth from anywhere, nor any place to which it goes. It is not something 
that we ourselves or any others possess, yet it manifests and dwells wherever 
someone keeps to it, and enlarges those who accept and hold to it. Whatever 
spiritual merits you may realize from it will manifest the same qualities. 


The ‘making’ in ‘making a kesa’ is not the kind of ‘making’ that ordinary 
people or even saintly ones do. The import and significance of this ‘making’ is not 
something that the ten times saintly or the thrice wise will exhaustively penetrate. 
Those who are lacking the seeds of the Way from previous lives, though they pass 
through one or two lifetimes, or even immeasurable lifetimes, will not see a kesa, 
or hear about the kesa, or know what a kesa is. How, then, could such persons ever 
possibly accept and keep to one? There are people who receive spiritual merits 
from having the kesa touch their physical body just once, and there are people who 
do not. Those who have already received such merits should rejoice, and those who 
have not yet received them should hope to do so, since not to receive them is a pity 
indeed! 

Whether within or outside the great-thousandfold world, only in the lineage 
of the Buddhas and Ancestors has the robe of Buddha been passed on, as 
commoners and those in lofty positions alike have universally come to know 
through what they have seen and heard about. 

The clarification of how the robe of Buddha looks is to be found only in our 
Ancestral tradition; it is unknown in other traditions. Those who are ignorant of 


9. This sentence, as translated, may lead some readers to an erroneous conclusion. Dogen is 
not asserting that the kesa has some inherent magical property which wards off evil; rather, 
it protects the wearer by serving as a constant reminder of the purpose for which he or she 
donned the robe in the first place, as well as serving as an outer sign to others of the 
wearer’s spiritual commitment. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


132 


this and do not feel sorry for themselves are dull-witted people indeed. Even 
though someone knows the eighty-four thousand meditative mantras, yet is without 
the genuine Transmission of the kesa, lacks the Dharma of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors, and has not yet clarified what the authentic Transmission of the kesa is, 
such a person cannot be a true heir of the Buddhas. How much people in other 
countries must wish that the robe of Buddha had been genuinely Transmitted to 
them as it was Transmitted in China! That a genuine Transmission has not been 
done in their countries must be a source for feelings of shame and deep regret. 

Truly, to encounter the Teaching in which both the robe and the Dharma of 
the World-honored Tathagata is truly passed on is due to the seeds of great merit 
from spiritual wisdom accrued over past lives. In the world today, when the 
Dharma is in Its last stage and the times are wicked, there are many devilish bands 
of people who are unembarrassed that they have had no genuine Transmission, 
whereas others have been jealous of the True Transmission. Whatever they 
themselves may possess, wherever they may make their dwelling place, these are 
not their True Self. Just to authentically Transmit the True Transmission is indeed 
the direct path for learning what Buddha is. 


To speak in general terms, you need to realize that the kesa is what the 
Buddha Body is, and it is what the Buddha Mind is. And also, it is called ‘the 
garment of liberation’, ‘the robe that is a fertile field of blessings’, ‘the robe of 
forbearance’, ‘the formless robe’, ‘the robe of merciful compassion’, ‘the robe of 
the Tathagata’, and ‘the robe of supreme, fully perfected enlightenment’. By all 
means you should accept and keep to it in this manner. 

Now in the present-day country of the great Sung dynasty, because that 
bunch who call themselves scholars of monastic rules and regulations are 
intoxicated by the wine served up by shravakas, they feel no shame that they are 
passing on a lineage that was unknown to their own tradition, nor do they regret it, 
nor are they aware of what they are doing. They have altered the kesa that has been 
passed down from India, which was passed on for ever so long during the Han and 
T’ang dynasties, acceding to one of smaller size, which complies with their small 
views—narrow views that they should be ashamed of. If you today were to use a 
small-sized robe like theirs, how could the everyday behavior of a Buddha ever 
continue for long? Their views take the form that they do because their exploration 
and passing on of the behavior of a Buddha has not been extensive. It is quite clear 
that the Body and Mind of the Tathagata has been correctly Transmitted only 
through the gates of our Ancestors and has not been disseminated through the 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


133 


activities of that bunch’s lineage. If, by chance, they actually recognized what the 
behavior of a Buddha is, they would not violate the Buddha robe. As they are still 
unclear as to the texts of the Scriptures, they cannot hear Their import. 


Further, to stipulate rough cotton cloth as the sole material for a robe is to go 
deeply against the Buddha’s Teaching. Since such cloth is not the only thing that a 
disciple of the Buddha may wear, this stipulation, in particular, does violence to the 
Buddha robe. And why is this so? Because, by proffering a judgmental opinion 
concerning cotton cloth, one has violated the kesa. What a pity that the opinions of 
the shravakas in the Lesser Course* should so twist and turn about, sad to say! 
After you have demolished your opinions concerning cotton cloth, the Buddha 
robe can fully manifest before your eyes. What I am saying about the use of silk 
and cotton cloth is not what just one or two Buddhas have said: it is an important 
Teaching of all the Buddhas that we consider waste cloth as the highest grade of 
immaculate raw material for a robe. When, later on, I list the ten types of waste 
cloth, it will include types of silk and types of cotton, as well as other types of 
cloth. Are we not to collect waste bits of silk? If such is the case, then we are acting 
contrary to the Way of the Buddhas. If we are already prejudiced against silk, we 
will also be prejudiced in regard to cotton. What reason could there possibly be for 
feeling that we should be prejudiced in regard to silk or cotton? To look down on 
silk thread because it was produced through the killing of a living being is vastly 
laughable, for is not cotton cloth the product of a living thing? If your view of 
something being either sentient or non-sentient is not yet free of any commonplace, 
sentimental feelings, how will you possibly understand what the kesa of a Buddha 
is? 

Also, there are those who talk in wild and confused ways, bringing up the 
so-called ‘theory of transformed thread’, which is also laughable . 10 What, pray, is 
not a transformation of something? You folks who bring this theory up may trust 
your ears when they hear the word ‘transformation’, but you doubt your eyes when 
they see a transformation. It is as if your eyes had no ears and your ears had no 
eyes. Where are your ears and eyes at this very moment? 

Keep in mind, for the moment, that while you are picking up some waste 
material, there may be times when it resembles silk or when it looks just like 
cotton. In using it, do not call it silk or cotton; just designate it as waste material. 


10. An ancient Indian view that silk is thread which is created by a living creature; it is not 
naturally occurring of itself. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


134 


Because it is waste material, as waste material it is beyond being ‘silk’, beyond 
being ‘cotton’. Even though there is a time after death when ordinary people and 
those in lofty positions may ‘continue to exist’ as waste matter, we cannot speak of 
them as ‘having sentience’, for they will be ‘waste material’. Even though there is 
a time when a dead pine tree or chrysanthemum have become waste matter, we 
cannot speak of them as being ‘non-sentient’, for they will be ‘waste material’. 
When we understand the principle that waste cloth is neither silk nor cotton, and 
that it is far from being either pearls or jade, the robe of waste cloth will fully 
manifest before us, and, with its arising, we will meet and experience the robe of 
waste cloth. When your opinions about silk and cotton have not yet dried up and 
fallen away, you will not see ‘waste material’ even in your dreams. Although for 
your whole life you may accept and keep to a kesa made from coarse cotton cloth, 
should you hold in your mind the view that it is cotton, what you have accepted 
will not be the genuine Transmission of the Buddha robe. 


Further, among the various kinds of kesas, there are cotton kesas, and silk 
kesas, and leather kesas. Buddhas have all made use of each of these at some time, 
for these have the Buddhist merits of a Buddha robe. They possess the fundamental 
principle that has been genuinely Transmitted without ever having been 
interrupted. However, those folks who have not yet discarded their commonplace, 
sentimental feelings treat the Buddha’s Dharma lightly and do not trust the 
Buddha’s words. They aim at following where others have gone based on 
commonplace, sentimental feelings, and we should certainly speak of them as non- 
Buddhists who have latched onto the Buddha’s Dharma. They are a bunch that 
would demolish the True Teaching. 

Some have claimed that they altered the Buddha’s robe based on instructions 
from a celestial being. If this is so, then they must be aspiring to celestial 
Buddhahood! Or have they become part of some stream of celestial beings? 
Disciples of the Buddha will expound the Buddha’s Teaching to celestial beings; 
they do not ask celestial beings what the Way is. How sad that those who lack the 
True Transmission of the Buddha’s Dharma are like this! 

The perspective of the host of celestial beings and the perspective of a 
disciple of the Buddha are vastly different in both large and small matters, yet 
celestial beings come down to ask disciples of the Buddha for the Teaching. This is 
because the Buddhist perspective and the celestial perspective are so vastly 
different. Chuck out the narrow-minded perspectives of scholastics and shravakas, 
and do not study them: recognize that such persons are of the Lesser Course. The 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


135 


Buddha said, “Such folks may indeed feel remorse for having killed father or 
mother, but they may well not feel remorse for having slandered the Dharma.” 

In sum, the path of small-mindedness and foxy suspiciousness is not what 
the Buddha intended for us to follow. The Great Path of the Buddha’s Dharma is 
beyond anything that the Lesser Course can reach. No one outside the Ancestral 
Path that is connected with the Treasure House of the Dharma even knows of the 
way that all Buddhas correctly Transmit the Great Precepts. 


Long ago on Mount Obai, in the middle of the night, the robe and the 
Dharma of the Buddhas were genuinely Transmitted upon the head of Daikan Eno, 
our Sixth Ancestor. This was truly the authentic Transmission of the passing on of 
the Dharma and the passing on of the robe. It occurred because the Fifth Ancestor 
‘knew his man’. Fellows who have realized any of the four stages* of arhathood, or 
those who are thrice wise and ten times saintly, or are academic teachers of 
philosophical theories or of Scriptural doctrines might well have conferred the robe 
on Jinshu, but they would not have passed it on to the Sixth Ancestor . 11 Even so, 
because an Ancestor of the Buddha, in singling out a Buddhist Ancestor, crosses 
beyond the well-trodden road of commonplace thinking, the Sixth Ancestor had 
already become the Sixth Ancestor. Keep in mind that the principle of descendant 
after descendant of Buddhist Ancestors ‘recognizing his or her man’ by 
recognizing the True Self is not something that can be left to those who weigh and 
measure things. 

A certain monk once asked the Sixth Ancestor, “Is the robe 
passed on to you on Mount Obai in the middle of the night one made 
of cotton, or one made of silk, or one made of taffeta? Pray, tell us, 
what on earth is it made of?” 

The Sixth Ancestor replied, “It is not cotton, or silk, or taffeta.” 

This was the way that the Highest Ancestor of Mount Sokei put it. Keep in mind 
that the Buddha robe is not silk, or cotton, or some fine quality broadcloth. Those 
who vainly judge it to be silk, or cotton, or some fine-quality broadcloth are folks 
that slander the Buddha’s Dharma. How could they possibly recognize the kesa of 
a Buddha? Moreover, there is the occasion when people come in good faith to take 


11. Jinshu was the most intellectually gifted and respected monk in the Fifth Ancestor’s 
monastic assembly, and the one who all his fellow monks assumed would be named the 
Fifth Ancestor’s Dharma heir. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


136 


the Precepts. The kesa they obtain, again, is beyond any discussion of silk or 
cotton: it is the Buddha’s instruction in the Way of Buddhas. 

Also, Shonawashu’s robe was an everyday garment when he was in lay 
life. When he left home to be a monk, it became a kesa. This principle should be 
calmly considered and concentrated upon. It is not something that you should 
disregard, acting as if you had neither seen nor heard of it. Moreover, it has an 
import that comes with the True Transmission of Buddha after Buddha and 
Ancestor after Ancestor. That bunch who tot up words cannot perceive it, nor can 
they weigh and measure it. Truly, how could the thousands of shifts and the myriad 
variations in the way that a Buddha says things possibly be in the realm where 
commonplace thinking flows? Yes, there are meditative states and mantric prayers, 
but those fellows who tot up grains of sand cannot see the precious Pearl that lies 
beneath the robe. 

djb 

CX) 


Now, we should take the materials, colors, and dimensions of the kesa that 
the Buddhas and Ancestors have genuinely Transmitted to be the true standard for 
the kesa of all Buddhas. From India to the lands in the east, examples of it have 
long existed. Those who distinguished the true from the false had already gone 
beyond the experience of realizing Truth. Although there were those outside the 
Ancestral Path who used the word ‘kesa’, none of the original Ancestors ever 
affirmed them as their offshoots, so how could they possibly germinate the seeds 
that produce the roots of virtue, much less the fruits of it? Not only are you now 
seeing and hearing the Buddha Dharma that those others had not encountered over 
vast eons, you are also able to see and hear about the Buddha robe, to learn about 
the Buddha robe, and to both accept and keep to the Buddha robe. This is precisely 
our respectfully encountering Buddha. We are hearing the voice of Buddha, and are 
pouring forth the radiance of Buddha, and are accepting and making use of what a 
Buddha accepts and utilizes. We are transmitting one-to-one the Mind of Buddha, 
and are obtaining the Marrow of Buddha. 


The Transmission of the Robe 

Whilst I was in Sung China doing my training on the long bench in the 
Meditation Hall, I noticed that at the first light of every day, following the striking 
of the wake-up block, the monks who sat on either side of me would raise their 


12. His name means ‘He of Hempen Robe’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


137 


folded kesa in a gesture of offering, place it atop their head, respectfully make 
gassho,* and recite a verse to themselves. On one occasion I had a feeling that I 
had not experienced before. A joy filled my body to overflowing; tears of gratitude, 
stealing from my eyes, rolled down my cheeks and soaked my collar. I had been 
reading the Agama Scripture and, though I had seen the passage on humbly 
offering up the kesa above one’s head, its relevance had not wholly dawned on me. 
Now I was personally witnessing it. In this connection, sad to say, was the thought 
that, when I was in my native land, there had been no teacher or any good spiritual 
companion to instruct me in this. How could I not regret the days and years I had 
so wastefully spent, or not grieve their passing? But now I was seeing and hearing 
this and was able to rejoice because of some good deed done in a past life. If I had 
vainly spent my time rubbing shoulders with any of those in the temples in my 
native land, I could not possibly have sat shoulder-to-shoulder with these Treasures 
of the Sangha who had donned the Buddha robe. My joy and sorrow were not 
unmixed, as my myriad tears issued forth. 

Then, in silence, I took a vow, “Somehow, be I ever so incompetent, I will 
correctly Transmit the true inheritance of the Buddha’s Dharma and, out of pity for 
the sentient beings in my homeland, I will help them see the robe and hear the 
Dharma that Buddha after Buddha has authentically Transmitted. Should my 
steadfast faith come to my aid in some unseen way, then surely my heartfelt vow 
will not have been in vain.” 

Disciples of the Buddha who are now accepting the kesa and keeping to it 
should humbly raise it above their head and unfailingly strive, day and night, to 
amass the effects of training, for this will produce real spiritual merits. The reading 
or hearing of one sentence or one poem from Scripture may well be as common as 
trees and stones, whereas the spiritual merits from the genuine Transmission of the 
kesa are undoubtedly difficult to encounter anywhere throughout the ten directions. 


In Great Sung China during the wintry tenth lunar month of the seventeenth 
year of the Chia-ting era (November, 1223), there were two Korean monks who 
came to Ch’ing-yuen Prefecture. One was called, in Chinese, Chi-huen, and the 
other Ching-yim. These two incessantly talked about the meaning of Buddhist 
doctrine and were, moreover, men of letters. Even so, they had no kesa or alms 
bowl and were like ordinary folk. Sad to say, even though they had the superficial 
form of monks, they lacked the Dharma of monks, which may have been due to 
their being from a small, remote country. When those fellows from our own court 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


138 


who have the superficial form of monks take to going to other countries, they are 
probably just like these two monks. 

Shakyamuni Buddha, before His enlightenment, had already humbly raised 
the kesa above His head for some twelve years, never neglecting it. As His distant 
descendants, you should investigate this. If you turn away from bowing to celestial 
beings, spirits, rulers or their ministers—since all such bowing is done in the vain 
pursuit of fame and gain—and turn towards humbly placing the Buddha robe atop 
your head, it will be a great joy in which we can rejoice. 

Recorded on the first day of winter in the first year of the Ninji era (October 17, 1240) at 
Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple. 

The mendicant monk Dogen 
who entered Sung China 
in order to receive and Transmit the Dharma. 


For robe material to make a kesa, we use that which is immaculate. 
‘Immaculate’ refers to robe material donated in veneration as an offering in pure 
faith, or something purchased in the market place by lay folk, or something sent 
you by the gentry, or the pure alms-gift of some spiritually empowered dragon, or 
the pure alms-gift of some fiercely protective guardian, all of which are robe 
materials we use. And pure alms-gifts from rulers and their chief ministers or pure 
pelts can also be used. 13 

Further, we consider ten types of waste cloth to be immaculate: 

First, cloth chewed by an ox. 

Second, cloth gnawed by rats. 

Third, cloth singed by fire. 

Fourth, menstrual cloth. 

Fifth, cloth discarded from childbirthing. 

Sixth, cloth abandoned at a wayside shrine for birds to 
peck apart. 

Seventh, cloth from a dead person’s clothing abandoned 
at a grave site. 

Eighth, cloth from abandoned prayer flags. 


13. ‘Pure pelts’ probably refers to skins taken from animals who died naturally or by accident, 
or were attained as a by-product, as distinct from those specifically hunted for their pelts. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


139 


Ninth, cloth from robes discarded by officials upon their 
advancement to higher rank. 

Tenth, burial shrouds discarded by those returning from a 
funeral. 

We consider these ten types to be robe material that is especially 
immaculate. Those in the world of common customs discard them: those on the 
Buddha’s Path make use of them. From these everyday ways of working with 
things, we can realize the difference between the mundane road and the Buddha’s 
Path. As a consequence, when we search for the immaculate, we should seek out 
these ten types of cloth. When we obtain them, we should recognize what is clean 
and distinguish it from what is unclean, just as we can recognize mind and 
distinguish it from body. When we obtain any of these ten types of cloth—whether 
of silk or of cotton—it is its cleanliness or lack of cleanliness that we should 
consider. 

It would be the height of silliness to hold to the notion that this waste cloth is 
being used simply to create ‘the shabby appearance of a raggle-taggle robe’. The 
kesa of waste cloth is something that we in the Buddha’s Way have come to use for 
clothing ourselves on account of its splendor and singular loveliness. When it 
comes to what would be considered raggle-taggle clothing from the perspective of 
the Buddha’s Way, what we would call ‘raggle-taggle’ is the impure aspect of a 
garment fabricated from brocaded or embroidered cloth, from fancy-patterned 
cloth or silk gauze, or from gold or silver cloth studded with pearls and jade. 14 

Speaking more generally, in the Buddhism of this land or of other countries, 
when we use what is immaculate and wondrously lovely, it should be of those ten 
types, for not only do they transcend the limits of what is clean and what is 
unclean, they also go beyond the realm of what is tainted with delusion and what is 
not tainted with delusion. Do not discuss them in terms of mind and matter; they 
are things unconnected with gain and loss. Simply, those who accept and keep to 
what has been genuinely Transmitted are Ancestors of the Buddha. When someone 
is an Ancestor of the Buddha, we accept and keep to this person as an Ancestor of 
the Buddha, for he or she has accepted, and is passing on, the genuine 
Transmission. And this Transmission does not depend on what is or is not 


14. What makes such garments ‘impure’ is the discriminatory attitude towards them that extols 
whatever is deemed rich or costly. ‘Raggle-taggle’ from the Buddhist perspective therefore 
does not refer to the quality or ‘look’ of a garment, but to a discriminatory attitude of mind 
about the cloth from which it is made. 



Shobogenzo: On the Transmission of the Kesa 


140 


manifested by the body, nor does it depend on what is or is not offered up by the 
mind. 

We should lament that in this country of Japan, for ever so long up to recent 
times, male and female monks have not worn the kesa, and we should rejoice that 
they now may accept and keep to one. Any householder, male or female, who can 
accept the Buddhist Precepts should don a kesa of five, seven, or nine panels. How 
much more should those who have left home to be monks do so! Why would they 
not wear one? It is said that everyone—from Lord Brahma and those in the six 
worlds below him, down to male and female prostitutes and those in forced 
servitude—can receive the Buddhist Precepts and don the kesa, so are there male 
and female monks who would not wear one? It is said that even animals can take 
the Buddha’s Precepts and put on a kesa, so why would a disciple of the Buddha 
not don the Buddha robe? 

Thus, those who would become a disciple of the Buddha—be they denizens 
of some heavenly state, ordinary folk, rulers of nations, or government officials, or 
be they laity, monks, those in forced servitude, or animals—should all accept the 
Buddha’s Precepts and have the kesa correctly Transmitted to them. This is indeed 
the straight path for correctly entering the ranks of Buddha. 


When washing and rinsing a kesa, mix various sorts of incense powders into 
the water. After it has dried out, fold it up, place it in an elevated place, make a 
venerative offering of incense and flowers, and bow three times. After that, kneel 
before it and, with hands in gassho, humbly place it atop your head, and then, 
rousing your faith, intone the following verse: 

How great and wondrous is the robe of enlightenment, 

Formless and embracing every treasure! 

I wish to unfold the Buddha s Teaching 
That I may help all sentient beings reach the Other 
Shore. 


After reciting this three times, stand up, reverently unfold the robe, and put it on. 



13 


On the Spiritual Discourses 
of the Mountains and the Water 

(Sansuikyd) 

Translator’s Introduction: If readers are not already familiar with the Zen Buddhist use of 
metaphorical language, they may find the following comments useful in grasping what Dogen is 
talking about in this Dharma discourse, which is baffling if its terms are taken only in their literal 
sense. 

It has been said that when the Sanskrit word dhyana, meaning ‘meditation’ in the Zen 
Buddhist sense, was introduced into China, the Chinese had no word that was its equivalent, so 
the Sanskrit word was spelled out by using two Chinese characters according to their 
pronunciation: chan-na (pronounced like English ‘john-nah’). Over time, the tenn was shortened 
and the Mandarin pronunciation altered slightly to ch ’an (pronounced like ‘tchahn’). In Japan, 
this character was pronounced as zen. Although there were other Chinese characters that had 
already been used for transliterating the Sanskrit sound dhya, the one chosen in the present 
instance also carried an ancient meaning, one relevant to Dogen’s discourse: ‘to bow respectfully 
to mountains and flowing water’. 

In the present discourse, Dogen takes up the difference between the general, conventional use 
of the terms ‘mountain’ and ‘(flowing) water’ and their special use by the Chinese Zen Masters 
for pointing to spiritual matters. As previously indicated in notes to Dogen’s earlier Dharma 
discourses, the term ‘mountain’ has several implications in Zen contexts. In this discourse in 
particular, ‘mountain’ is most often used as a descriptive epithet for one who is sitting in 
meditation, as still as a mountain among mountains (that is, one who is training among other 
members of the Buddhist Sangha), as well as for a wise and saintly person whose path has led 
him or her to seek a spiritual abode in a mountain, in both a literal and a figurative sense. Hence, 
the Chinese Zen Masters are referred to as ‘mountains’, and because their training never comes 
to an end but is ever green, they are referred to as ‘verdant mountains’. And because they are not 
rigid or static in their practice, they are sometimes referred to as ‘flowing mountains’. 

One of the meanings of ‘water’, in the Zen sense, is ‘the Water of the Spirit’, that is, Buddha 
Nature in general as well as one’s own Buddha Nature. In this translation, the use of this term is 
rendered as ‘the Water’ where context makes the meaning unambiguous. Someone’s ‘walking on 
the water’ is thus descriptive of that person’s doing his training and practice by following the 
ever-shifting, ever-flowing path of Buddha Nature. 

Dogen does not always signal which of the various meanings of ‘mountain’ and ‘water’ he 
intends, but often keeps his references fluid. Thus, as with his Discourse 11: On ‘Just for the 
Time Being, Just for a While...’ (Uji), readers may find it worthwhile to read this chapter 
through twice, once referring to the footnotes to get the immediate sense, and then just reading it 
to experience the flow. 


141 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


142 


The ‘mountains and water’ of which I am speaking at the present moment 
are a manifestation of the words and ways of former Buddhas. 1 Both terms, 
residing in their place within the Dharma, have completely fulfilled their function 
for these Buddhas. Because these words signify conditions that actively exist in the 
time periods before these Buddhas disappeared into the realm of spiritual 
Emptiness, 2 3 they refer to something that exists here and now, and because they 
signify the Self before any sign of these Buddhas’ existence has appeared, they 
transcend anything that manifests before our very eyes. The various spiritual merits 
of the mountains are so vast and far reaching that the merits from our practice of 
‘riding the clouds’ will certainly be attained because of the mountains. The 
wondrous effects from our ‘going on with the wind to our back’, beyond doubt, 
will liberate us, thanks to the mountains. 4 


The monk Dokai of Mount Daiyo, in instructing his assembly, said, “The 
verdant mountains are constantly moving on, and the Stone Maiden, in the dark of 
night, gives birth to Her Child.” 5 The mountains are never lacking in the spiritual 


1. That is, ‘mountains’ and ‘water’ are not only tenns used by previous Masters but also, as 
metaphors, can embody the way in which these Masters functioned. 

2. Rev. Master Jiyu-Kennett often referred to this ‘emptiness’ as “the fullest emptiness you can 
ever experience.” She herself used the term ‘the Immaculacy of Emptiness’ to describe It in 
a way that did not contain a connotation of a negative and ‘devoid’ sort of emptiness. 

3. ‘Riding the clouds’—originally, a Taoist term—refers to rising to higher levels. Here, it 
probably refers to trainees realizing higher spiritual levels, thanks to the Buddhas and the 
Ancestors, as well as to one’s fellow trainees. 

4. ‘Going on with the wind to our back’—another Taoist term—refers to being supported by a 
favorable tailwind, again, probably to be understood as spiritual help and support from the 
Sangha. 

5. To paraphrase the first half, Buddhist Masters who are literally, or figuratively, always 
‘sitting’ in meditation (the mountains) and whose training and practice is ‘alive’ (verdant) 
are constantly moving on (or, more literally, ‘progressing apace’), ‘always becoming 
Buddha’. The second phrase has multiple meanings which arise from the resonance of the 
saying. For example, on one level, the epithet ‘The Stone Maiden’ refers to That Which Is, 
from which all things arise, without having to depend on any external ‘impregnating’ agent 
and without the process being visible (happening ‘in the dark of night’). On another level, 
the Stone Maiden refers to the trainee whose intent to realize Truth is active, but whose 
mind is as hard as rock. Yet, despite this hardness, it will, through training, crack open, and 
the Child of Enlightenment will be born. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


143 


merits with which they are undoubtedly endowed. This is why they constantly 
reside at ease and are constantly moving on. By all means, you must examine in 
great detail the spiritual merits of their moving on. The moving on of a mountain 
will be just like the moving on of those who wander through life in ignorance, 6 so, 
even though you may think that it seems the same as the human activity of 
walking, nevertheless, do not doubt ‘the moving on’ of mountains. 

What this Ancestor of the Buddha expressed has already pointed to this 
‘moving on’; this was his ‘getting to the very root of the Matter’.* So, you should 
thoroughly pursue what he was pointing out to his assembly about ‘always moving 
on’. Since it is a ‘moving on’, it is constant. Although the moving on of the verdant 
mountains is more swift than the wind, those who live amidst the mountains do not 
perceive this, much less recognize it. ‘Being amidst the mountains’ refers to things 
blossoming forth within the everyday world. Those who live apart from the 
mountains neither perceive nor recognize them. They are people who lack an eye 
for seeing mountains: not only do they not perceive or recognize them, they do not 
see or hear them, nor do they comprehend what they are all about. Whoever 
harbors doubts about the moving on of mountains is one who does not yet 
recognize his own moving on. It is not that they themselves do not move on, it is 
that they do not yet recognize their own moving on and have not clarified what it 
is. To recognize your own moving on will certainly be no different from 
recognizing the moving on of the verdant mountains. 

A verdant mountain is already beyond being ‘sentient’ and beyond being 
‘non-sentient’: you yourself are already beyond being ‘sentient’ and beyond being 
‘non-sentient’. So, you must not harbor doubts about the moving on of the verdant 
mountains at the present moment. People do not know that they must scrutinize 
and clarify what ‘verdant mountains’ means if they are to measure all the existent 
worlds about them. 

It is necessary to scrutinize what ‘the moving on of mountains’ signifies. 
You have to look with utmost care at both ‘stepping forward’ and ‘stepping back’. 
You need to carefully explore moving on—both the steps that move you forward 
and those that move you back—and never cease in this for even a moment, from 
the time before there is any sign of something coming into existence until the Lord 
of Emptiness* appears. 

If this ‘moving on’ had come to rest, the Buddhas and Ancestors would 
never have appeared. If this ‘moving on’ had reached some culminating point, the 

6. That is, without any preconceived notion or plan. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


144 


Dharma of the Buddha would not have reached us today. Stepping forward has not 
ceased, nor has stepping back. When there is a stepping forward, it does not stand 
in opposition to stepping back; when there is a stepping back, it does not stand in 
opposition to stepping forward. We characterize this as ‘the mountain’s flowing’ or 
as ‘the flowing mountain’. 

Because a verdant mountain trains in order to master ‘moving on’ and Eno 
learned through practice to ‘go walking upon the Water’, 7 your learning these 
things through your practice is synonymous with a mountain’s learning them 
through practice. Without the mountains’ altering their body or mind, they have 
been going all around and about, learning through practice, with the look of a 
mountain about them. 

Do not slander the mountains by saying, “Verdant mountains are incapable 
of moving on,” or “No mountain to the east of us is capable of walking upon 
water.” It is because of the baseness of some people’s views of things that they 
doubt the phrase ‘mountains walk on’, just as it is due to their inexperience and 
scant knowledge that they are startled by the words ‘a flowing mountain’. 
Nowadays, although we may say that they have not thoroughly explored even the 
phrase ‘flowing water’ in all its varied meanings, it is actually just a matter of their 
being immersed in pedestrian views and drowning in ignorance. As a result, they 
take as their form and name, or as their very lifeblood, whatever they esteem as 
their ‘cumulative qualities’. Its walking on exists; its flowing exists. There is a time 
when a mountain gives rise to the Child of the Mountain. In accordance with the 
principle that a mountain becomes an Ancestor of the Buddha, the Ancestors of the 
Buddha have made Their appearance in this manner. 

When people have eyes before which a mountain is manifesting as grass and 
trees, earth and stones, or walls and fences, they do not doubt what they see nor are 
they disturbed by it, and it is not the whole of what is manifesting. Even though a 
time may occur when a mountain appears to them as being adorned with the Seven 
Treasures,* this is not the real refuge. Even if they see manifesting before them the 
realm in which all the Buddhas are carrying out the Way, it is never a place to crave 
for. Even if they have above their heads the sight of a mountain manifesting the 
indescribable spiritual virtues of all the Buddhas, Truth is not limited merely to 


7. This phrase would be conventionally translated as ‘The mountain to the east of us goes 
walking upon water’, but the reference is actually to a well-known Zen saying that Dogen 
discusses later, “Tozan goes walking upon the Water.” Tozan (‘The East Mountain’) was an 
epithet for the Sixth Chinese Ancestor Daikan Eno; it is unrelated to the name Tozan, 
meaning ‘Cave Mountain’, by which several other monks are known, such as Tozan Ryokai. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


145 


this. The fully visible manifestation of each and every thing is the physical body of 
each and every thing along with the environment in which it exists. So, such views 
as those above are not to be taken as the manner in which Ancestors of the Buddha 
put the Way into practice: they are merely what people can see when looking 
through a hollow straw. 

Splitting ‘subjective’ mind apart from ‘objective’ environment is what the 
Great Sage Shakyamuni warned us about; intellectually expounding on ‘mind’ or 
expounding on ‘nature’ is not something that Ancestors of the Buddha undertake. 
Having theories about mind or about nature is a profession for those who are apart 
from the Buddhist Way; to be bogged down in words and phrases is not speech that 
leads to liberation. There is a state that is free from such conditions as these. It has 
been described as “The verdant mountains are constantly moving on,” and as “Eno 
went walking upon the Water.” You need to explore this state in the greatest detail. 


The statement “The Stone Maiden, in the dark of night, gives birth to Her 
Child” refers to the time when the Stone Maiden gives birth to Her Child as ‘in the 
dark of night’. Generally speaking, there are stones that are male and stones that 
are female, as well as stones that are neither male nor female, and all of these quite 
nicely fill up the heavens and fill up the earth. And there are heavenly stones and 
there are earthly stones, which those who wander without a preconceived goal 
speak of, though persons who really know them are rare indeed. 8 

One needs to understand the principle of Her ‘giving birth to a Child’. At the 
time of Her giving birth to the Child, are Parent and Child made separate? You 
must devote yourself to exploring through your training not only that ‘the Child 
becoming the Parent’ is the full manifestation of ‘giving birth to the Child’, but 
also that ‘the time when the Parent becomes the Child’ is the full manifestation of 
‘giving birth to the Child’. You must thoroughly penetrate what is being said here. 


Great Teacher Ummon Bun’en once said, “Eno went walking upon the 
Water.” The meaning of what is fully manifested through these words is that all 


8. To paraphrase one level of meaning, male and female stones refer to those who are ‘Stone 
Maiden’ trainees as explained in footnote 5. These ‘stones’, as well as conventional stones, 
occur in both heavenly and earthly worlds. Though people may speak of spiritually 
developed beings as heavenly (‘beings spiritually beyond me’) or as earthly (‘real people’), 
those who can actually distinguish between them are rare indeed. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


146 


mountains are Eno, and every Eno goes walking upon the Water. This is why this 
Ancestor of the Buddha fully manifested Mount Sumeru amidst the nine 
mountains, and fully realized It through his training, along with realizing other 
things as well. 9 People call him Eno. But how could there possibly be the slightest 
gap between Ummon’s and Eno’s Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow, or between 
Ummon and his living within his own realization through training? 


In the nation of Great Sung China today, there is a certain type of unreliable 
person that has now grown to be quite a crowd. They have gotten to the point 
where they cannot be bested by the few true people. This bunch says such things as 
the following: 

Just like the comments about End’s walking on water or the one 
about Nansen’s buying a scythe, what is being said is beyond anything 
that reason can grasp. In other words, any remark that involves the use 
of intellect is not the Zen talk of an Ancestor of the Buddha, whereas a 
remark that goes beyond anything that reason can handle is what 
comprises a ‘remark’ by an Ancestor of the Buddha. As a 
consequence, we would say that Meditation Master Obaku’s applying 
a stick to his disciples or Meditation Master Rinzai’s giving forth with 
a loud yell go far beyond rational understanding and do not involve 
the use of intellect. We consider this to be what is meant by the great 
awakening to That which precedes the arising of any discrimination. 

The reason why the ancient virtuous Masters so often made skillful 
use of verbal phrases to cut through the spiritual entanglements of 
their disciples was precisely because these phrases were beyond 
rational understanding. 

Fellows who talk like this have never met a genuine teacher, nor do they 
have an eye for learning through training. They are foolish puppies who are not 
even worth discussing. For the past two or three centuries in the land of Sung 
China, such devilish imps and Tittle shavers’ like the Gang of Six have been 
many. 10 Alas, the Great Way of the Buddha’s Ancestors has become diseased! This 


9. A reference to the eight symbolic concentric rings of mountains with Mount Sumeru as their 
center, a metaphor for having achieved a full centering of oneself within one’s meditation. 

10. ‘The Gang of Six’ refers to six monks during the Buddha’s time whose wayward behavior 
prompted the framing of monastic rules and regulations. ‘Little shavers’ was a tenn applied 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


147 


explanation of those people cannot compare even with that of the shravakas* who 
follow the Lesser Course;* it is even more confused than that of non-Buddhists. 
These fellows are not laity nor are they monks; they are not gods or humans. And 
when it comes to exploring the Buddha’s Way, they are more befuddled than 
beasts. The stories which the Tittle shavers’ refer to as going beyond anything that 
reason can grasp only go beyond anything their reason can grasp: it was not that 
way for any Ancestor of the Buddha. Just because they said that such stories are 
not subject to rational understanding, you should not fail to learn through your 
training what the intellectually comprehendible pathways of the Ancestors of the 
Buddha are. Even if these stories were ultimately beyond rational understanding, 
the understanding that this bunch has cannot hit the mark. Such people are in great 
number everywhere in Sung China, as I have personally witnessed. Sad to say, they 
did not recognize that the phrase ‘the use of intellect’ is itself a use of words, nor 
realize that a use of words may liberate us from the use of our intellect. When I 
was in Sung China, even though I laughed at them for their foolish views, they had 
nothing to say for themselves; they were simply speechless. Their present negation 
of rational understanding is nothing but an erroneous view. Who taught them this? 
Even though you may say that they have not had someone to teach them of the true 
nature of things, nevertheless, the fact remains that, for all intents and purposes, 
they still end up being offspring of the non-Buddhist notion that things arise 
spontaneously, independent of any form of causality. 


You need to recognize that Eno’s walking on the Water is the Bones and 
Marrow of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Various kinds of water manifested under 
End’s feet. This is why various mountains ride the clouds or tread the heavens. 
Above the crests of various types of water are various types of mountains which go 
walking up and down on the Water. As the various mountains go walking through 
the various types of water, the tips of their feet often make the water dance; thus, 
their walking may go seven steps in one direction or eight in another. 11 That is, 
there is no time when training and enlightenment do not exist. 


to monks who shaved their heads so that they could partake of monastic food and lodging, 
but who had no interest in spiritual training. 

11. That is, ‘mountains’ are able to move about freely in their daily training. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


148 


djb 

<X> 

As for the Water, It is neither strong nor weak, nor is It wet or dry, nor does 
It move or stay still, nor is It cold or hot, nor does It exist or not exist, nor is It 
deluded or awakened. When frozen solid, It is harder than a diamond, so who can 
smash It? When melted, It is more yielding than diluted milk, so who can tear It to 
bits? This being so, we cannot doubt the qualities of the various forms of existence 
that manifest before our very eyes. 

For now, just concentrate on learning to recognize, through your training, the 
moments when you are able to open your eyes and see the Water in the whole 
universe as the Whole Universe. And ‘learning through training’ does not refer just 
to the times when ordinary people or those in loftier positions see the Water; there 
is your learning through training in which the Water sees the Water. Because the 
Water puts the Water into practice in order to realize what the Water is, there will 
be your thorough investigation of the Water’s expressing through words what the 
Water is. In this way, you will manifest the pathway upon which we ourselves meet 
our Self. Until then, you must go back and forth on that road of life upon which 
others are all involved with making a study of ‘other’, until you leap free. 


To speak in general, what people see as a mountain or as water differs in 
various ways. There are those who, upon catching sight of what I am calling ‘the 
Water’, see It as a string of pearls, but they fail to see such a necklace as the 
Water. They undoubtedly consider the form in which we humans perceive 
something as what the Water is. What they see as a pearl necklace, I see as the 
Water. And there are those who see the Water as a wondrous flower, but this does 
not mean that they are using an actual flower for the Water. Hungry ghosts,* upon 
encountering the Water, may see It as a raging inferno, or as thick, congealing 
blood. Dragons and other denizens of the deep may see It as a palace or as a stately 
mansion. Some may see It as the Seven Treasures or as the Wish-fulfilling Jewel, 1 ’ 
and others as various sorts of trees, or as fences and walls, and others as the 


12. For instance, they may see someone’s Buddha Nature as being a beautiful adornment, not as 
that person’s true, innate nature. 

13. The Wish-fulfilling Jewel, sometimes called the Mani Jewel, refers to the Buddha Nature 
which is inherent in all living beings. Meditation Master Gensha Shibi called it “The One 
Bright Pearl”. Dogen discusses this at length in Discourse 4: On ‘The One Bright Pearl’ 
(Ikka Mydju). 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


149 


immaculate, liberated Dharma Nature, and others as someone’s True Body, and 
others as someone’s physical appearance along with that person’s mental nature. 
When humans see the Water via any of these means, this can be the cause of their 
liberation from commonplace ‘life’. 

Although what is seen may differ completely according to the one who sees 
It, we should not be too hasty in accepting this as absolutely so. Are there really 
‘all sorts of ways’ of seeing any single object? Have you committed an error by 
taking the plethora of images for what is actually one object? Then, at the very 
peak of your efforts, you will need to make a further effort. If what I have just been 
saying is so, then, likewise, there cannot be just one or two ways for training to 
realize the Truth and for assiduously practicing the Way, and the realm of the 
Ultimate can be of a thousand kinds and ten thousand sorts. 

Further, when we think about the fundamental meaning of this, even though 
we may say that the varieties of the Water are many, it may seem to some as if 
there were no one, fundamental Water or as though the Water had no variety. Thus, 
the various ways in which the Water appears do not depend on one’s mind or on 
one’s body, nor do they arise from one’s karma*-producing actions, nor do they 
depend on oneself or on someone else: they possess that freedom from delusion 
which is dependent on the Water Itself. Thus, the Water is beyond being earth, 
water, fire, wind, space, or consciousness, beyond being blue, yellow, red, white, or 
black, beyond being form, sound, odor, taste, sensations, or thoughts, and even so, 
the Water naturally manifests fully as earth, water, fire, wind, and so forth. 

Because this is the way things are, it would be difficult to say clearly what 
has created our nation and its palaces as they appear before us today or to say what 
they will be made into. To say that they depend on the Wheel of Space and the 
Wheel of Wind is not what is true for me or true for others, for it is the product of 
speculation based on the suppositions of a narrow outlook. 14 This view has been 
asserted based on some people’s thinking that nothing could continue to exist if it 
did not have some place to hang onto. The Buddha said, “All thoughts and things 
are ultimately free of any attachments, so there is no place where they permanently 
abide.” You need to keep in mind that even though all thoughts and things are 
inherently free of any attachments, they do have some place where they exist. 


14. According to an ancient Indian view, the universe is comprised of the five elements (referred 
to here as ‘Wheels’), with the more solid elements being dependent on the less solid, the 
Wheel of Wind (i.e., gaseous matter) and the Wheel of Space being the least substantial. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


150 


djb 

<X> 

When human beings look at water, they only see it as something that 
ceaselessly pours out and flows on. This flowing has many forms, each being a part 
of the human perspective. It flows over the earth and out of the sky, now surging 
upwards, now pouring downwards, streaming along in the bends of a river and 
coursing through deep chasms. It rises up to make clouds and comes down to form 
pools. 

The Chinese scholar Wen-tsu once remarked, “It is the way of water to rise 
up to the heavens and become rain and dew, and to fall to earth and become rivers 
and streams.” Today, those who wander in ignorance still speak in this manner. It 
would be most shameful for those who call themselves the offspring of the 
Buddha’s Ancestors to be more in the dark about the meaning of this than such folk 
as these, for what he is really saying is “The way of the Water is not something that 
water is aware of, yet water is fully capable of functioning, and it is not something 
that the Water is not aware of, yet the Water is fully capable of functioning.” 

As Wen-tsu said, “It rises up to the heavens and becomes rain and dew.” Be 
aware that the Water ascends to ever so many lofty places in the heavens above to 
form rain and dew, and rain and dew take a variety of forms according to the 
worlds in which they appear. To say that there is some place that the Water does not 
reach is a teaching of the shravakas of the Lesser Vehicle or an erroneous teaching 
of non-Buddhists . 15 The Water extends into the tongues of fire, and into our 
thoughts and deliberations and distinctions, and into our perceptions, and into our 
Buddha Nature. 

Consider the statement, “It falls to earth and becomes rivers and streams.” 
When the Water descends to earth, It becomes rivers and streams. Some varieties of 
rivers and streams frequently turn into wise, perceptive persons. In the opinion of 
the everyday stream of the ordinary and the befuddled, water is unquestionably that 
which exists in rivers, streams, oceans, and seas. This is not so, for the rivers and 
seas have come into existence within the Water. Thus, there is the Water even in 
places where there are no rivers or seas. It is just that when the Water descends to 
earth, It creates the effect of ‘rivers and seas’. 

Also, do not work it out that, when there is some place where the Water has 
formed rivers and seas, there are no social worlds or Buddhist lands. Even in a 
single drop, immeasurable Buddhist lands manifest before our very eyes. Hence, it 


15. This is a reference to the mistaken notion of an icchantika, that is, someone who is believed 
to be totally devoid of Buddha Nature. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


151 


is not a question of water existing within a Buddhist land or of a Buddhist land 
existing in the Water. The existence of the Water is in no way dependent on the 
three temporal worlds or on the worlds of thoughts and things. Even so, the Water 
is the spiritual question that manifests before our very eyes. Wherever Buddhas 
and Ancestors go, the Water invariably goes. Wherever the Water goes, Buddhas 
and Ancestors invariably manifest. Because of this, Buddhas and Ancestors have 
always regarded the Water as Their body and mind, as Their very thoughts. 

Since the preceding is so, there is no document within or outside Buddhism 
that says that the Water does not run upwards. The path of the Water circulates 
every which way—up above and down below, far and wide. So, within Buddhist 
Scriptures, it is said that fire and wind climb up above, earth and water go down 
below. This ‘up above and down below’ is something to investigate in particular. 
Consider carefully the ‘up above and down below’ of the Buddha’s Way. It means 
that the place where earth and water go is ‘down below’; it does not mean that 
down below is some ‘place’ where earth and water go . 16 Where fire and wind go is 
up above. Even though the universe of thoughts and things does not completely 
depend on the measurements of the four directions, or upon up and down, we 
temporarily fabricate our universe in accordance with the four, five, or six 
elements . 17 The Heaven Beyond Deliberate Thought is not always ‘up above’; the 
Hell of Incessant Suffering is not always ‘down below’. Incessant suffering is one 
person’s whole universe; being beyond deliberate thought is another person’s 
whole universe. 

Hence, when a dragon or a fish views water as a palace, it will not be like a 
human being seeing a palace, nor will such a creature perceive the water to be 
something that is flowing on. Were some onlooker to say to the dragon or the fish, 
“Your palace is flowing water,” the creature would at once be startled and filled 
with doubt, just as some of you may have been startled earlier when you heard it 
asserted that mountains flow like water. Further, it may be possible to maintain that 
a similar assertion can be made about the railings, steps, and pillars of palaces and 
mansions. Calmly consider this principle and keep turning it about in your mind, 
for if you do not leam how to go beyond these borderline expressions, you will not 
let go of the body and mind of one who wanders in ignorance, or fully realize what 
the domain of the Buddhas and Ancestors is, or fully realize what the domain of 


16. That is, ‘down below’ refers to a direction, not to any specific place. 

17. The four elements are earth, water, fire, and wind; the five are the four elements plus space; 
the six are the five elements plus consciousness. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


152 


those who wander in ignorance is, or fully realize what the palace of one who 
wanders in ignorance really is. 

Now, we humans may clearly perceive the very essence of the sea or the 
very heart of a river to be water, but what sort of thing a dragon or a fish may 
perceive to be water, or may make use of as water, we do not yet know. Do not 
foolishly assume that other creatures make use of water in accordance with how we 
perceive water. 

Now, when we Buddhist trainees leam about the Water, we should not 
blindly cling to just the everyday, human view of water; we need to go on and 
investigate through our practice the Water of the Buddha’s Way. How we view the 
term ‘Water’ as used by the Ancestors of the Buddha is something we need to 
investigate through our practice. We also need to investigate through our practice 
whether or not the Water actually exists within the traditional families of the 
Buddha’s Ancestors. 

djb 

CX) 


The mountain, from times immemorial, has served as the place of residence 
for great saintly ones. Both the wise and the saintly have considered the mountain 
to be their innermost place and to be their body and mind. And thanks to the wise 
and the saintly, mountains have manifested before our very eyes. People in general 
tend to regard mountains simply as gathering places for ever so many great saints 
and wise ones, but for those who enter a mountain, there will not be a single person 
whom any of them will meet; only the natural functioning of a mountain will 
manifest, and nothing more. And furthermore, no traces of their having entered will 
be left behind. 

When someone with the perspective of the secular world encounters a 
mountain, and when someone with the perspective of one amongst mountains 
meets this mountain, how their minds think of this mountain or how their eyes see 
this mountain will be vastly different. The conventional human perception of 
‘something flowing’ and the conventional human perception of ‘something not 
flowing’ will not be at all like the perceptions of dragons and fish. Ordinary people, 
as well as those in lofty positions, strive to secure a place within their own sphere; 
other species may look upon this with suspicion, or may even give rise to doubtful 
thoughts. Thus, you should investigate the phrase ‘mountains flow’ with the 
Ancestors of the Buddha, and do not abandon the matter when you find yourself 
surprised or in doubt. Taken in one context, they flow; taken in another, they do not 
flow. One time round, they flow; another time round, they do not flow. If you do 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


153 


not investigate the matter in this way through your practice, it will not be the 
Tathagata’s Wheel of the True Teaching. 


A former Buddha once said, “If you would avoid incurring unrelenting, 
hellish karma, do not malign the Tathagata’s Wheel of the True Teaching.” You 
should engrave these words on your skin, flesh, bones, and marrow; you should 
engrave them on the outer circumstances and inner conditions of your body and 
mind; you should engrave them on what is immaterial; you should engrave them 
on what is material. They have already been engraved on trees and on stones; they 
have already been engraved on both cultivated fields and places of human 
habitation. 

Generally speaking, we say that mountains belong to some country or 
region, but it is to those who love mountains that they really belong. Invariably, 
when a mountain loves its Host, the lofty virtues of the saintly and wise enter the 
mountain. When those who are saintly and wise dwell in the mountains, the 
mountains belong to them; as a result, the trees grow luxuriant and boulders 
abound, the birds are wondrous and the animals are surpassing fine. This is 
because they are under the influence of the virtues of one who is saintly and wise. 
You need to recognize that the truth of the matter is that mountains are fond of 
those who are wise, and that they are fond of those who are saintly. 

From the past to the present, it has been a good example for us that emperors 
have often gone up a mountain to bow to a wise one and to respectfully question a 
great saintly one. At such a time, they show their respect with all the formalities 
due their teacher: they do not follow the ordinary ways of behaving towards 
people. When an emperor extends his loving influence over his subjects, he never 
uses it to coerce mountain sages, for clearly, mountains are separate from the world 
of human society. In the legendary times of the Chinese Flower Kingdom, on the 
occasion when the Yellow Emperor paid a respectful visit to Kuang-cheng, who 
was the guardian spirit on Mount Kung-tung, he crawled on his hands and knees, 
groveling obsequiously and begging the spirit for instruction. 

Also, once Shakyamuni Buddha had left the palace of His father the king, 
He entered the mountains. Even so, His royal father did not feel rancor towards the 
mountains. Nor did His royal father distrust those in the mountains who were 
teaching the prince. The twelve years that He trained in the Way were largely spent 
in the mountains. His realization as Lord of the Dharma also took place whilst in 
the mountains. Truly, even universal monarchs whose chariot wheels roll 
everywhere do not undertake to forcibly control the mountains. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


154 


To be sure, a mountain is not the realm of ordinary folk, nor is it the realm of 
those who dwell in lofty places. You cannot really perceive what a mountain is by 
means of the standards used by those who wander in ignorance. If mountains are 
beyond comparison with the everyday notion of ‘flowing’, who then, pray, can 
doubt that a mountain flows, and that a mountain does not flow, as well as 
whatever else a mountain may do? 

And, from distant times, there have been wise ones and saintly ones who 
were even wont to live on the water. Whilst living on the water, some caught fish, 
some caught humans, and some caught the Way. These are all in the traditional 
mainstream of ‘being in the Water’. Along with this, there will be those who catch 
themselves, those who catch the Hook, those who are caught by the Hook, and 
those who are caught by the Way. Long ago, no sooner had the monk Tokujo left 
his Transmission Master Yakusan to go live at the heart of the river than he became 
acquainted with the wise and saintly one of the Hua-tung River . 18 Was it not a fish 
he hooked? Was it not a person he hooked? Was it not the Water he hooked? Was it 
not someone from the Water he hooked? The one who can really ‘see’ Tokujo is 
Tokujo. Tokujo encountering of That One is his meeting ‘the True Person’. 


Not only is there water in the world, there is a world within the world of 
water. Not only is it like this in water, there is also a sentient world in clouds, and a 
sentient world in wind, and a sentient world in fire, and a sentient world in earth, 
and a sentient world in the realm of thoughts and things, and a sentient world in a 
blade of grass, and a sentient world in a monk’s traveling staff. Wherever there is a 
sentient world, there is, of necessity, a world of Buddhas and Ancestors in that 
place. Such a principle should be well explored indeed! Hence, the Water is the 
very palace of the True Dragon: It is beyond flowing or falling. If we recognize It 
only as something that flows, the word ‘flowing’ slanders the Water. One reason 
for this is that the use of the word forces It to be something not flowing. The Water 
is simply the Water as It is, in and of Itself. It is the natural functioning of the 
Water as the Water and is beyond ‘flowing’. As soon as you penetrate through your 
practice both the flowing of a single drop of water and its non-flowing, the 
complete penetration of all thoughts and things will immediately manifest before 
your very eyes. With mountains, too, there are mountains hidden within treasures, 


18. After Tokujo left his Master, he ferried a small boat across the river. He tried to teach Zen to 
those boarding his ferry boat. He often lifted his oar out of the water and said, “Do you 
understand?” One of those whom he met in this way later became his Dhanna heir. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Discourses of the Mountains and the Water 


155 


mountains hidden within marshes, mountains hidden within the sky, mountains 
hidden within mountains. And there is learning through practice that there are 
mountains which are hidden within That Which Is Hidden. 

The Old Buddha Ummon Bun’en once said, “Mountains are mountains; 
water is water.” What these words mean goes beyond saying that mountains are 
mountains: it is saying that Mountains are mountains. Therefore, you need to 
investigate Mountains through your practice. If you thoroughly investigate 
Mountains in your practice, this will be your effort in the mountains. In this way, 
the Mountains and the Water will naturally produce the wise as well as the saintly. 

Given to the assembly at Kannondori in Kdshohorin-ji Temple on the eighteenth day of the tenth 
lunar month in the first year of the Ninji era (November 3, 1240). 

I made this copy in the chaplain’s quarters at Kippo-ji Temple, Yoshida Province, Echizen 
Prefecture, on the third day of the sixth lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era 
(July 9, 1244). 

Ejo 



14 

On the Buddhas and the Ancestors 

(Busso) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this short discourse, Dogen presents the traditional Soto Zen 
Ancestral line up through Dogen’s Master, Tendo Nyojo. The Sanskrit fonns for the names of the 
Indian Ancestors are, in a few cases, the translator’s choice among several different possible 
reconstructions that have been offered by Asian and Western scholars. 


With deepest respect. 

The Buddhas and Ancestors manifest before our very eyes whenever we 
respectfully serve the Buddhas and Ancestors by bringing Them up through our 
presenting of Their story. They are not limited simply to some past, present, or 
future time, for They have undoubtedly gone beyond even ‘going beyond Buddha’. 
Once we have taken up what we truly know of the reputation of a Buddha or an 
Ancestor, we bow in respect as we meet That One face-to-face. Having made 
evident the spiritual virtues of a Buddha or an Ancestor and held them aloft, we 
take our abode in them and uphold them, embodying them that we may realize the 
Truth in them. 

The Seven Buddhas: 

The Great Monk Bibashi Buddha, called herein ‘the One 
Who Universally Proclaims the Dharma’ 

The Great Monk Shiki Buddha, called herein ‘the Fire’ 

The Great Monk Bishafu Buddha, called herein ‘the All 
Compassionate One’ 

The Great Monk Kuruson Buddha, called herein ‘the Hermit 
of Gold’ 

The Great Monk Kunagonmuni Buddha, called herein ‘the 
Golden Sage’ 

The Great Monk Kasho Buddha, called herein ‘the All- 
absorbing Light’ 

The Great Monk Shakyamuni Buddha, called herein ‘the 
Thoroughly Patient and Still One’ 


156 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddhas and the Ancestors 


157 


The Indian Ancestors: 

1. The Great Monk Makakasho 

2. The Great Monk Ananda 

3. The Great Monk Shonawashu 

4. The Great Monk Ubakikuta 

5. The Great Monk Daitaka 

6. The Great Monk Mishaka 

7. The Great Monk Bashumitsu 

8. The Great Monk Butsudanandai 

9. The Great Monk Fudamitta 

10. The Great Monk Barishiba 

11. The Great Monk Funayasha 

12. The Great Monk Ashvaghosa 

13. The Great Monk Kabimora 

14. The Great Monk Nagarjuna also called Lung-shu, 

Lung-sheng, or Lung-meng 

15. The Great Monk Kanadaiba 

16. The Great Monk Ragorata 

17. The Great Monk Sogyanandai 

18. The Great Monk Kayashata 

19. The Great Monk Kumorata 

20. The Great Monk Shayata 

21. The Great Monk Vasubandhu 

22. The Great Monk Manura 

23. The Great Monk Kakurokuna 

24. The Great Monk Shishibodai 

25. The Great Monk Bashashita 

26. The Great Monk Funyomitta 

27. The Great Monk Hannyatara 

28. The Great Monk Bodhidharma 

(The Chinese Ancestors:) 

The Great Monk Eka 
The Great Monk Kanchi Sosan 
The Great Monk Daii Doshin 
The Great Monk Daiman Konin 
The Great Monk Daikan Eno 
The Great Monk Seigen Gyoshi 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddhas and the Ancestors 


158 


The Great Monk Sekito Kisen 
The Great Monk Yakusan Igen 
The Great Monk Ungan Donjo 
The Great Monk Tozan Ryokai 
The Great Monk Ungo Doyo 
The Great Monk Doan Dohi 
The Great Monk Doan Kanshi 
The Great Monk Ryozan Enkan 
The Great Monk Daiyo Kyogen 
The Great Monk Tosu Gisei 
The Great Monk Fuyo Dokai 
The Great Monk Tanka Shijun 
The Great Monk Choro Seiryo 
The Great Monk Tendo Sokaku 
The Great Monk Setcho Chikan 
The Great Monk Tendo Nyojo of the twenty-third 
generation in China 


During the summer retreat in the first year of the Chinese Pao-ch’ing era 
(1225) in Great Sung China, whilst I, Dogen, was training and serving under my 
late Master, the venerable Buddha, Great Monk Tendo Nyojo, I came to know, 
through and through, the significance of making a full venerative bow to these 
Buddhas and Ancestors and of receiving Them upon my head. It was what each 
Buddha realized on His own, just as all Buddhas have done. 

Delivered to the assembly from a manuscript on the third day of the first month in the second 
year of the Ninji era (February 15, 1241) at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple, Uji 
Province, Yamashiro Prefecture, Japan. 

I copied this whilst in the chaplain s quarters at Kippo-ji Temple, Echizen Province, on the 
fourteenth day of the fifth month of the second year of the Kangen era (May 20, 1244). 

Ejo 



15 

On the Record of Transmission 

(Shisho) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this text which he wrote for his monks, Dogen takes up the topic 
of the shisho, the name of a Buddhist document which may literally be translated as ‘the record 
of the inheritors’. This record is usually written on silk, and it consists of a listing of the names 
of those in the Ancestral line from Shakyamuni Buddha up to the person receiving the record, all 
of whom are considered to be inheritors of the Dharma. In a narrow sense, this physical record 
pertains to the certification connected with formal Transmission. In the latter part of this text, 
Dogen describes various Transmission Silks that he saw during his sojourn in China. 

The Record of Transmission, however, has a deeper significance, one that goes beyond a 
conventional historical approach to the topic of ancestral succession. This spiritual significance, 
as Dogen tells us at the end of this work, was taught to him by his Master Tendo Nyojo, and it 
colors his whole discussion: namely, that the inheritance of the Dharma flows not only from 
Master to disciple but also from disciple to Master. This implies, among other things, that 
fundamentally there is no separate self that receives the Transmission, nor any other that gives It. 

In various other discourses, Dogen’s references to the Dharma that is inherited may have 
been intended to encompass the whole body of what the Buddha taught, while in this text the 
references could be intended to point in particular to the Precepts, since the receiving of the 
Precepts in the Soto tradition is an inheritance of Dhanna common to lay ordination, monastic 
ordination, and formal Transmission. 


I, Dogen, a mendicant monk of the fifty-first generation, now at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji 
Temple, who went to Sung China in order to receive and then Transmit the Dharma, have 
respectfully written down this document for those descendants in our lineage who desire 
that their attesting to the Truth be certified by means of the Record of Transmission of the 
Dharma that Buddhas inherit from Buddhas, and Ancestors inherit from Ancestors. 

Beyond doubt, Buddha after Buddha has inherited the Dharma from Buddha 
after Buddha and, beyond doubt, Ancestor after Ancestor has inherited the Dharma 
from Ancestor after Ancestor. This is Their direct experiencing of what has been 
promised. 1 2 It is the simple, direct, one-to-one Transmission and, because of this, it 


1. This opening statement prefaces the original text. 

2. This phrase translates Dogen’s highly truncated technical term for the direct experiencing of 
the fulfillment of Shakyamuni Buddha’s promise that all sentient beings, without exception, 
will—as He did—ultimately become Buddha. 


159 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


160 


is the unsurpassed state of enlightenment. If one is not a Buddha, one cannot give 
the seal of certification* to a Buddha, and no one ever becomes a Buddha without 
receiving a Buddha’s seal of certification. Who other than a Buddha could declare 
this state to be the most honored or certify it to be unsurpassed? 

When we receive the Buddha’s seal of certification, it is because we have 
spontaneously awakened, independent of a Master, and because we have 
spontaneously awakened, independent of a self. This is why it is said that Buddha 
after Buddha has inherited the certification and Ancestor after Ancestor has 
experienced what was promised. The fundamental meaning of this principle cannot 
be clearly resolved except between Buddha and Buddha. How could it possibly be 
like what is surmised by those at any of the various stages along the Bodhisattva* 
Path, to say nothing of what doctrinal teachers or mundane commentators on 
Scriptural texts reckon it to be! In whatever way we may try to explain it to others, 
they cannot really hear what is being said, because it is something that Buddhas 
inherit from Buddhas. 

The Buddha’s Way has been thoroughly mastered solely by Buddha after 
Buddha, and there has never been a time when there was not a succession of 
Buddha after Buddha. By way of analogy, there is the situation of ‘stones 
successively inheriting from stones’ and of ‘jewels successively inheriting from 
jewels’. The succession of Ancestors resembles ‘the mutual inheriting by 
chrysanthemums’ and ‘the giving of the seal of certification by pines’: in both 
cases, there is not the slightest gap between the previous chrysanthemums and the 
ones that follow, nor is there any gap between the previous pines and the ones that 
follow. 4 Those folks who are unclear about such things may indeed encounter the 
words and ways which Buddha after Buddha has correctly passed on, yet they do 
not have the slightest clue as to what they have heard, for they have never grasped 
the meaning of the phrase “Ancestor after Ancestor has experienced what was 


* See Glossary. 

3. The term ‘stones’ is often used to describe the dull, hard minds of those who have not yet 
awakened to Truth, whereas ‘jewels’ would be descriptive of the bright, clear minds of those 
who have awakened. In the present context, this would imply that what Buddha after 
Buddha has inherited is not the same as what people in ordinary, everyday society culturally 
inherit. 

4. From context, it is likely that ‘the mutual inheriting by chrysanthemums’ refers to the 
horizontal relationship of Master and disciple, wherein both are equal in their Buddha 
Nature. ‘The giving of the seal of certification by pines’ refers to the vertical relationship of 
senior Master and junior disciple. The Master-disciple relationship contains both of these 
aspects at the same time. 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


161 


promised, which is what Buddha after Buddha has been heir to.” Sad to say, even 
though such people may bear a superficial resemblance to the progeny of Buddhas, 
they are not disciples of the Buddha, nor are they Buddhas who have disciples. 


The Sixth Chinese Ancestor, while dwelling on Mount Sokei, once pointed 
out to his assembly, “From the Seven Buddhas* to me, Eno, there have been forty 
generations of Buddhas, and from me, Eno, to the Seven Buddhas, there have been 
forty generations of Ancestors.” This principle is clearly the correct doctrine of the 
succession of Buddhas and Ancestors. Among the Seven Buddhas, there are Those 
who manifested in the past Eon of the Sublime, and there are Those who 
manifested in the present Eon of the Wise and Virtuous. 5 In addition to this, that 
which links the Face-to-Face Transmission of the Forty Ancestors is the path of the 
Buddhas, the succession of Buddhas. 

Thus, when we proceed from the Sixth Chinese Ancestor to the Seven 
Buddhas, there is the succession of forty Ancestors. In proceeding from the Seven 
Buddhas to the Sixth Ancestor, there is the succession of forty Buddhas. Both the 
path of Buddhas and the path of Ancestors are just like this. If we do not 
experience what was promised, if we are not an Ancestor of the Buddha, then we 
will lack the spiritually wise discernment of a Buddha, and we will lack an 
Ancestor’s full realization of the True Nature of things. A Buddha lacking 
spiritually wise discernment would be a Buddha devoid of faith: an Ancestor 
without full realization of the True Nature of things would be an Ancestor lacking 
the experience of what was promised. The forty Ancestors whom I have referred to 
here are just the Ones who are in our specific lineage. 

In accord with what I have been saying, the process of succession of Buddha 
after Buddha is something that is extraordinarily profound. It is completely 
resolute, neither retreating nor deviating: it is unbroken in its continuity and has 
never died out. The fundamental point of this process is that, even though 
Shakyamuni Buddha had realized the Truth prior to the age of the Seven Buddhas, 
it was a long time before He inherited the Dharma from Kasho Buddha. Although it 
is said that He realized the Truth on the eighth day of the twelfth lunar month, 
thirty years after His birth, this was His realizing the Truth prior to all the various 
Buddhas, and it was His realizing the Truth shoulder-to-shoulder and 


5. The first three of these Buddhas (Bibashi, Shiki, and Bishafu) are said to have appeared in 
what is called the Eon of the Sublime, which precedes our own; the remaining four Buddhas 
(Kuruson, Kunagonmuni, Kasho, and Shakyamuni) are said to have appeared in our own 
eon, described as the Eon of the Wise and Virtuous. 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


162 


simultaneously with the various Buddhas; it was His realizing the Truth both prior 
to and subsequent to all the various Buddhas. 

Further, there is a principle that needs your meditative investigation: Kasho 
Buddha inherited the Dharma from Shakyamuni Buddha. Should you not know 
this principle, you will not clarify what the Buddha’s Truth is, and if you do not 
clarify what the Buddha’s Truth is, you will not be an heir of the Buddha. ‘An heir 
of the Buddha’ is the same as ‘a disciple of the Buddha’. 

Shakyamuni once inspired Ananda to ask, “Pray, whose disciples are the 
various Buddhas of the past?” Shakyamuni Buddha responded, “The various 
Buddhas of the past are My disciples.” All the various Buddhas behave in a similar 
Buddhist way. To respectfully serve these various Buddhas, to inherit the Buddha 
Dharma, and to bring this inheritance to fruition, this surely is the Way of the 
Buddhas for Buddha after Buddha. And, without fail, when someone inherits the 
Dharma of this Way of Buddhas, there will invariably be a record of inheritance. 6 

Anyone who has not inherited the Dharma will be a person outside the 
Buddhist Way, one who has not recognized what karmic* cause and effect are, but 
thinks that things are the way they are because of their inherent nature. If the Way 
of the Buddhas had not determined the succession of the Dharma, how could It 
possibly have come down to us today? For this reason, with Buddha after Buddha, 
there has been, beyond doubt, the passing on of a record of Buddha Transmitting 
Buddha, and there has been the acquiring of that record of Buddha Transmitting 
Buddha. The nature of that record of Transmission is, for one person, the inheriting 
of the Dharma by clarifying ‘sun, moon, and stars’, and, for another, the inheriting 
of the Dharma by obtaining Its Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow. Or it is the 
passing on of a kesa,* or the passing on of a traveling staff, or the passing on of a 
pine branch, or the passing on of a ceremonial hossu,* or the passing on of an 
udumbara blossom, or the passing on of a gold brocade robe. There has also been 
the passing on of a straw sandal and the passing on of a stick of bamboo. 

When these inheritances of the Dharma are passed on, the recipient may 
record the succession with blood taken from a finger or from the tongue. And the 
record may also be written with oil or milk. These are all records of Transmission. 
The one who passes It on and the one who receives It are both, indeed, heirs of the 
Buddha. When they fully manifest as Ancestors of the Buddha, their inheriting of 
the Dharma will undoubtedly fully manifest as well. When It manifested, It came 
even though they did not expect It, and many are the Ancestors of the Buddha who 


6. This would include not only those monks who had been Transmitted, but also all ordained 
monks and those of the laity who had committed themselves to the Buddhist Way by doing 
Jukai, the Ceremony of Receiving the Precepts. 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


163 


inherited the Dharma even though they did not deliberately seek It. Those who 
have inherited the Dharma are, beyond any doubt, Buddha after Buddha and 
Ancestor after Ancestor. 


Ever since our Twenty-eighth Ancestor Bodhidharma came from the West, 
we in eastern lands have correctly heard the fundamental point that within the 
Buddha’s Way there is an inheriting of the Dharma. Before then, this had not been 
heard of here in the eastern lands. It was something not yet realized or even known 
about by scriptural scholars and teachers of the Tripitaka* in India, as well as being 
beyond the realm of those who are ‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’.* Nor was its 
existence even suspected by those would-be teachers of mantric techniques, among 
others, who go searching for them through the Tripitaka . How sad that they have 
received a human body—which is a vessel of the Truth—and, at the same time, 
have vainly become enmeshed in the web of academic theories, ignorant of the 
method for attaining liberation and devoid of any expectation of a time when they 
might spring free. This is why we should, indeed, continually explore the Way 
through our training and should, indeed, wholeheartedly keep to the spirit of 
training. 

djb 

CX) 


When I was in Sung China, I was able to bow in reverence to various 
records of Transmission, for there were many styles of Transmission records. 
Among them was that of litsu, who was a retired Master living in the West Hall at 
Keitoku-ji Temple, 7 where he had finally hung up his traveling staff. He was a man 
from the Yiieh District and the former Abbot of Kofuku-ji Temple. He was from 
the same village as my late teacher. My late teacher was always saying, “You 
should go ask litsu in the West Hall about the customs of our region.” One day, 
litsu said to me, “Being able to look at ancient pieces of calligraphy is something 
that we humans prize very highly. How many have you already seen?” I replied, 
“I’ve just seen a few.” Then he said, “I have an old scroll of calligraphy somewhere 
among my belongings. It’s not much of a thing. But I’ll let you have a look at it, 
venerable brother.” When I looked at what he brought out, it was a Transmission 
record that had belonged to a ninth-century disciple of Hogen. It had been obtained 
from among the robes and alms bowl of some elderly master upon his decease. It 
was not Iitsu’s Transmission record. On it was written, “The First Ancestor 
Makakasho awoke to the Truth under Shakyamuni Buddha, and Shakyamuni 


7. The Abbot of Keitoku-ji Temple during this time was Tendo Nyojo, Dogen’s Master. 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


164 


Buddha awoke to the Truth under Kasho Buddha.” That was the way it was put. 
Having seen these words, I, Dogen, was convinced that there is a Dharma 
Transmission from a true heir to a true heir. It was Dharma that I had never seen 
before. This was an occasion when the Buddhas and the Ancestors, unseen, 
responded to the needs of one of Their offspring. My feelings of gratitude could 
not match the moment. 

The Venerable Master Shugetsu, while a senior monk at Keitoku-ji Temple, 
also showed me a Transmission record, one that he said belonged to Ummon’s 
lineage. The name of the Master just preceding the person who was receiving the 
Transmission record, along with those of the Indian and Chinese Ancestors of the 
Buddha, were arranged in columns, below which was the name of the person 
receiving the Transmission record. It made a link from all the Buddhas and 
Ancestors directly to the name of the new Ancestor. Thus, the names from the 
Tathagata through some forty generations all came down to the name of the new 
heir. It was as if he were being certified by each new Ancestor in turn. Some 
names, however, such as Makakasho and Ananda, were lined up as if they 
belonged to branches other than his. I then asked Senior Monk Shugetsu, 
“Venerable monk, when we list the lineages of the five Zen families today, there 
are a few differences from this. What is at the heart of this? If there has been a 
succession of heirs from India one after the other, how can there be any 
differences?” Shugetsu replied, “Even if the differences were far greater, still, we 
should simply pass on that the Buddhas of Mount Ummon are like this. Why is our 
Venerable Master Shakyamuni revered so deeply by others? He is deeply revered 
because He awoke to the Truth. Why is Great Master Ummon revered so deeply by 
others? He is deeply revered because he awoke to the Truth.” When I heard these 
words, I had a bit more understanding. 


Nowadays in the provinces of Kiangsu and Chekiang, the heads of the large 
temples, by and large, are Dharma heirs of Rinzai, Ummon, or Tozan. However, a 
bunch of fellows who proclaim themselves to be distantly related to Rinzai are up 
to something that is just not right. They join the assembly of some prominent 
Master, purportedly to train, and then earnestly beg him for a hanging portrait or a 
scroll inscribed with some Dharma saying, which they then store up for future use 
as proof of their being this Master’s Dharma heir. As if this were not enough, there 
are among such types those ‘dogs’ who, having earnestly requested, say, a Dharma 
inscription or a portrait from some venerable monk, hoard such objects until their 
store of them is quite large. Then, when they reach their later years, they bribe 
some official to get themselves a temple. At the time when they are appointed its 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


165 


chief monk, they are not Dharma heirs of the Master who gave them the Dharma 
inscription or the portrait. When they do inherit the Dharma, either from their 
contemporary monks who have become celebrities or from senior monks who have 
intimate connections with rulers and their ministers, they are not asking for the 
Dharma, but are only greedy for fame and reputation. What a pity that such wicked 
customs exist in these evil times when the Dharma is coming to an end! Among 
people like these, not even one has ever seen or heard of the Way of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors, even in his dreams. 

Customarily, as to a Master’s granting a monk something like a copy of a 
Dharma saying or a portrait, such things are also given to scholastic lecturers 
belonging to various branches of Buddhism and to householders, male and female. 
They are also granted to lay temple workers, tradesmen, and the like. The truth of 
this is clear from the records of the various branches. On the other hand, even those 
who are not sincere followers may implore a Master for a scroll of calligraphy 
because they crave evidence of their being a Dharma heir and, even though it is a 
situation that the Master, as one who has realized the Truth, deplores, he reluctantly 
takes brush in hand. In such a situation, he does not use the traditional way of 
expressing the matter, but signs it with some phrase like ‘your Master is me’. In 
recent times, the procedure is simply for some monk to inherit the Dharma as a 
Master as soon as he attains any degree of proficiency in his Master’s assembly. 
And many indeed are the fellows who have never received their Master’s seal, but 
who simply pay perfunctory visits to the Master’s quarters, enter the Lecture Hall, 
and occupy a place in the Meditation Hall. Even though the Master is residing in 
the temple, they do not make the time to receive his personal instruction, yet they 
claim that Master to be their Master, should they happen to break open the Great 
Matter. 8 

djb 


There was a monk known as Chief Librarian Den, who was a remote 
descendant of the Rinzai Meditation Master Butsugen, this Master also being 
known by the name of Seien of Ryumon Temple. Chief Librarian Den also carried 
a Transmission record with him. Near the beginning of the Chinese Chia-ting Era, 
when he became ill, he was nursed by a Japanese senior monk named Ryuzen. 
After his recovery, to show his appreciation for Ryuzen’s considerate care, he took 


8. That is, such persons may have had a genuine realization of the Truth, but they have not 
truly trained with the Master, to say nothing of having gone to the Master in order to have 
their understanding certified. 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


166 


out the Transmission record and let Ryuzen bow to it, saying, “This is something 
rare to see. I offer it to you that you may pay your respects to it.” 

Eight years later, in the autumn of the sixteenth year of the same era (1223), 
during my first sojourn on Mount Tendo, Senior Monk Ryuzen asked Den to show 
me his Transmission record. This Transmission record was such that the names of 
forty-five Ancestors, from the Seven Buddhas down to Rinzai, were written out in 
columns, while the names of the Masters following Rinzai formed a circle in which 
their inscribed Dharma names were sealed with their monograms. The name of the 
new heir was written at the end of the record, below the date. We need to recognize 
that the form of this record in no way differs from that of Rinzai’s other venerable 
disciples. 

djb 

CX) 


My late Master, the Abbot of Keitoku-ji Temple, strongly cautioned his 
assembly about speaking in an imprudent way about someone’s inheriting the 
Dharma. Truly, my late Master’s assembly was a veritable ‘assembly of the ancient 
Buddha’, a restoration of the Buddha’s ‘monastic forest’. My late Master did not 
personally wear multi-colored kesas. Although the variegated, patchwork kesa of 
Meditation Master Dokai of Mount Fuyo had been passed on to him, he did not use 
it, even when he sat in the teacher’s seat in the Lecture Hall. In short, he never 
wore a brocaded Dharma robe in his whole life as Abbot. Everyone, both the 
thoughtful and the naive, praised him for this and esteemed him as a true spiritual 
friend. 

When my late Master entered the Lecture Hall, he would admonish all those 
about him, saying, “Recently, a bunch who style themselves as ones who follow 
the Way of our Ancestor Bodhidharma irresponsibly go about wearing a Dharma 
robe along with their long hair and signing their name with the title of Master as 
their way of navigating themselves to prominence. How pitiful! Who will rescue 
them? I regret to say that there are senior monks, far and wide, who have no heart 
for the Way and so they do not investigate It or train in It. Even rarer—not one in a 
hundred thousand—are those who have seen or heard of the relationship between 
the Transmission record and inheriting the Dharma. This is indeed the decline of 
the Way of our Ancestor Bodhidharma!” He was constantly admonishing us in this 
way, but none of the senior monks ever took offence. Therefore, if trainees do their 
utmost to practice the Way with a sincere heart, they will see and hear that there is 
a Transmission record. This seeing and hearing will be part of their exploring the 
Way through their training. 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


167 


djb 

In a Rinzai Transmission record, the name of the Master is written first, and 
then the name of the disciple who came to train with him, followed by the phrase 
‘entered my assembly, entered my training hall, and was made my heir’, followed 
by the list of names of those Ancestors of the previous generations. This record 
also contains a bit of instruction on the Dharma which the Master has expressed in 
his own words. The basic import of this record is simply that an heir has 
encountered a genuine ‘good spiritual friend’: this is the truly fundamental point. 
There is no need to be concerned with whether these names come at the end or the 
beginning of the record. I saw one from the Rinzai tradition that was written in this 
manner. I put it down here just as I actually saw it: 9 

Chief Librarian Ryoha was a person of authority and military 
valor. He is now my disciple. 

I, Tokko, trained under and served Abbot Daie Soko of Mount 
Kinzan, 

Kinzan was an heir to Engo Kokugon of Mount Kassan, 

Engo was an heir to Goso Hoen of Mount Yogi, 

Hoen was an heir to Kaie Shutan of Mount Hakuun, 

Shutan was an heir to Hoe of Mount Yogi, 

Hoe was an heir to Jimyo Soen, 

Soen was an heir to Fun’yo Zensho, 

Zensho was an heir to Shonen of Mount Shuzan, 

Shonen was an heir to Ensho of Mount Fuketsu, 

Ensho was an heir to Nan’in Egyo, 

Egyo was an heir to Sonsho of Koke Temple, 

Sonsho was an heir to the Great Founding Ancestor Rinzai. 

Meditation Master Bussho Tokko wrote this whilst on Mount Ashoka and 
gave it to Musai Ryoha. When the latter became Abbot of Keitoku-ji Temple, 10 his 
junior disciple Chiko brought it out and showed it to me in private in the 
Dormitory of Clarity. I first saw it on the twenty-first day of the first lunar month 
in the seventeenth year in the Chia-ting Era of Great Sung China (February 11, 
1224). My joy was immeasurable! My seeing it was surely due to unseen help from 


9. The original text gives some Chinese names in abbreviated form; the translation has 
supplied fuller, Japanese forms for them. 

10. When Musai Ryoha was approaching death, he invited Nyojo to become the next Abbot of 
Keitoku-ji Temple on Mount Tendo. Nyojo accepted and became known as Tendo Nyojo. 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


168 


the Buddhas and Ancestors. After offering incense and respectfully bowing, I 
opened it and read it. 

My desire to be shown this Transmission record arose around the seventh 
lunar month of the previous year, when the temple comptroller Shiko told me about 
it in private while we were in the Hall of Serene Light. I asked the comptroller in 
passing, “In whose care is it at present?” The comptroller answered, “Apparently, it 
is in the venerable Abbot’s quarters. Later, if you were to ask him in a cordial way 
to show it to you, I am sure he would do so.” After I heard these words, my 
intention to make a request for it did not let up day or night. So, in the following 
year, and with some trepidation, I put my request to the Abbot’s junior disciple 
Chiko in a friendly way, placing my whole heart in it, and my request was indeed 
granted. 

The wrapper to which it was attached was covered with white silk on the 
inside and with red brocade on the outside. Its spindle was of jade. It was a scroll 
about nine inches high and over seven feet wide. As it was not something shown to 
the idle or the curious, I duly offered my thanks to Chiko, and forthwith went to the 
Abbot, made an incense offering, respectfully bowed, and gave my thanks to the 
Venerable Musai. Musai then said to me, “Those who get a chance to see and know 
this particular object are very few. You, my venerable elder brother, have now 
come to know it. This is the real refuge for exploring the Way through your 
training, and just so!” Nothing had ever surpassed the joy that I felt then. 


Later, around the time of the Chinese Pao-ching Era (1225-1227), when I 
was drifting like a cloud from monastery to monastery on such mountains as 
Tendai and Ganto, I came to Mannen Temple in the P’ing-t’ien region. The Abbot 
at the time was the Venerable Genshi of Fukushu. Upon the retirement of Abbot 
Shukan, the Venerable Genshi had been appointed to the post, and he was strongly 
encouraging the practice of seated meditation in the temple. Following the 
customary salutations, we took up the topic of the various customs and traditions 
of the Ancestors of the Buddha down through the ages. While I was proffering the 
story about Isan Reiyu asking Kyozan about the quality of the latter’s recent heirs, 
the Abbot asked, “Have you ever seen the Transmission record that I have here?” I 
replied, “How could I have seen it?” The Abbot then stood up and, holding up his 
Transmission record, he said, “Even if someone were a close friend, even if he 
were someone who had spent years as my attendant monk, I would not permit him 
to see this. This is, of course, the Dharma instruction of the Buddhas and the 
Ancestors. But, be that as it may,” Genshi said, “once when I was on my customary 
trip to the city with the intention of visiting the governor, I experienced a vision. In 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


169 


it, there was a distinguished monk who looked like Meditation Master Daibai Hojo. 
Holding aloft a branch of plum blossoms, he said, ‘If you should meet a Real 
Person who has already crossed over by ferry, do not begrudge him these flowers,’ 
and then he handed me the plum blossoms. In response, I spontaneously chanted, 
‘Before he even entered the boat, he deserved thirty blows.’ Not five days had 
passed, when I met you face-to-face, my venerable elder brother, and what is more, 
you have come by boat. And, in addition, this Transmission record of mine is 
written on damask that has a plum blossom pattern woven into it. Since you 
correspond to the one mentioned in the vision, you must be the one whom Daibai 
was instructing me about. Venerable elder brother, do you wish to be my Dharma 
heir? If you do, I would be delighted to Transmit you.” 

In no way could I ignore his feeling of trust. Although I could have received 
the Transmission, instead I simply lit incense, reverently bowed to the record, and 
gave the Abbot my deepest respect and veneration as an offering. At the time, there 
was an incense monk in attendance, one named Honei, who said that it was the first 
time that he had ever seen a Transmission record. 

I thought to myself, “Truly, were it not for the unseen help of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors, it would have been nigh on impossible for me to have seen or even 
heard about this sort of thing. What good fortune that I, a foolish and ignorant 
fellow from a remote country, have seen so many of them,” and tears of gratitude 
wet my sleeves. At that time, the Vimalakirti* Room for lay guests and the Chief 
Monk’s Hall, among others, were quiet and unoccupied. This Transmission record 
was written on white silk with a plum blossom pattern. It was over nine inches high 
and more than six feet wide. Its spindle was of topaz and its outer cover was of 
silk. 

On my way back from Mount Tendai to Mount Tendo, I was staying the 
night in the hall for traveling monks at Gosho-ji Temple on Mount Daibai, where I 
experienced a wondrous vision in which Ancestral Master Daibai came and offered 
me a branch of plum flowers in full bloom. The vision of an Ancestor is the most 
reliable thing there is. The blossoms on the branch were more than a foot in 
diameter. The plum blossom must surely be an udumbara flower! 11 What is seen in 
a vision and what is seen in a waking state will be equally real. While I was in 


11. The plum tree blooms in late winter and, as the first plant to blossom, is traditionally 
considered in the Far East as the harbinger of spring. In Buddhist texts, it is often associated 
with Shakyamuni Buddha. The udumbara tree is said to blossom only once every three 
thousand years. Its flower is often used in Buddhist writings as an illustration of how 
difficult it is to encounter the Dharma. Both types of blossoms are frequently used as 
symbols for the Transmission of the Dhanna. 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


170 


Sung China and since my return to this country, I have not told this to anyone 
before. 


At the present time, the writing of a Transmission record in our Tozan 
lineage is different from that in others, such as the Rinzai lineage. Our monastery’s 
Founding Ancestor Seigen, in front of the desk of his Master Daikan Eno, wrote 
out with blood that flowed from his finger that which had been kept under the robe 
of the Buddha’s Ancestor Eno. Tradition has it that the passing on of the record 
was done by Seigen mixing the blood from his finger with that of Eno. Tradition 
also has it that the ceremony of mixing blood also occurred in the case of our First 
Ancestor Bodhidharma and our Second Ancestor Eka. To refrain from writing such 
things as “My disciple So-and-so” or “So-and-so came to train with me” is the rule 
for Transmission records which various Buddhas, including the Seven Buddhas, 
have written and passed on. 

So, keep in mind that Eno graciously blended his blood and spirit with 
Seigen’s immaculate blood, and Seigen’s immaculate blood personally blended 
with the parental blood of Eno. Thus, our distinguished Ancestor, Venerable 
Seigen, and he alone, was the only one to so intimately receive Eno’s direct 
certification; it is not something that his other disciples attained. Folks who know 
about these matters are wont to say that Eno Transmitted the Buddha Dharma 
directly to Seigen, and to Seigen alone. 


The Record of Transmission 

My late teacher, an Old Buddha, the Great Master and Abbot of Keitoku-ji 
Temple, once said to me, “All the Buddhas have, beyond doubt, inherited the 
Dharma. That is to say, Shakyamuni Buddha inherited the Dharma from Kasho 
Buddha. Kasho Buddha inherited the Dharma from Kunagonmuni Buddha. 
Kunagonmuni Buddha inherited the Dharma from Kuruson Buddha. You must 
have faith that Buddha after Buddha has inherited It in this manner, reaching down 
to us now, for this is how we explore the Way of the Buddhas through our 
training.” 

I then said to him, “It was after Kasho Buddha had entered nirvana that 
Shakyamuni Buddha first emerged into the world and realized the Truth. Moreover, 
how could the Buddhas of the present Eon of the Wise and Virtuous have inherited 
the Dharma from the Buddhas in the previous Eon of the Sublime? What do you 
t hink ?” 



Shobogenzo: On the Record of Transmission 


171 


My late teacher responded, “What you have said is an interpretation based 
on your listening to scholarly theories. It is an expression of those who are thrice 
wise and ten times saintly. It is not something that those in the succession of 
legitimate heirs of the Buddhas and Ancestors say. Our way of Transmission from 
Buddha to Buddha is not like that. We have learned that Shakyamuni Buddha, 
beyond any doubt whatsoever, inherited the Dharma from Kasho Buddha. Through 
our spiritual exploring, we leam that after Shakyamuni Buddha inherited the 
Dharma, Kasho Buddha entered nirvana. If Shakyamuni Buddha had not inherited 
the Dharma from Kasho Buddha, He would have been the same as some non- 
Buddhist who denies cause and effect, so who then could have faith in Shakyamuni 
Buddha? Because the inheritance passes from Buddha to Buddha in this manner 
and has come down to us today, all the Buddhas, individually, are genuine heirs. It 
is not that They are lined up, one after the other, nor is it that They are gathered 
together in a mass. We just learn that the inheritance passes from Buddha to 
Buddha in this manner. Do not get all embroiled with the measurements of eons or 
the measurements of lifespans as spoken of literally in the various Agama 
Scriptures. If we say that the succession started just with Shakyamuni Buddha, that 
would merely be some two thousand or so years ago, which is not all that old. The 
Transmission would barely cover some forty generations. It could be said to be 
relatively new. The succession of Buddhas is not to be investigated in this manner. 
We leam that Shakyamuni Buddha inherited the Dharma from Kasho Buddha, and 
we learn that Kasho Buddha inherited the Dharma from Shakyamuni Buddha. 
When we leam the matter in this way, it will be the true succession of Buddha after 
Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor.” 

Then, for the first time, not only did I receive this serving of his spiritually 
nourishing rice, namely, that we have the Transmission of the Dharma from the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, but I also let go of some old cobwebs from my past. 

Written on the twenty-seventh day of the third lunar month in the second year of the Japanese 
Ninji era (April 9, 1241) at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple by me, the mendicant 
monk Dogen, who went into Sung China in order to receive and then Transmit the 
Dharma. 

Copied by me on the twenty-fifth day of the second lunar month in the fourth year of the Ninji 
era (March 17, 1243). 


Ejo, 

Abbot s Assistant 



16 


On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma 
Sets the Dharma’s Flowering in Motion’ 

(Hokke Ten Hokke) 

Translator’s Introduction: According to Dogen’s postscript to this discourse, he originally 
prepared it for a monk named Edatsu whom he had ordained. Edatsu’s decision to become a 
monk was apparently deeply influenced by his encounter with the Lotus Scripture, for the 
discourse is heavily laden with allusions to and quotations from that work. Indeed, most of the 
descriptive terms and phrases Dogen employs are taken from Kumarajlva’s well-known Chinese 
version of this Scripture, and someone familiar with that translation would quite likely recognize 
the various contexts from which these terms and phrases were borrowed. Some of these have 
been identified in this translation by the addition of some phrase, such as ‘which the Lotus 
Scripture calls’. 

The title of Dogen’s discourse does not derive directly from the Lotus Scripture, but is based 
on terms used by the Sixth Chinese Ancestor End in a koan story that Dogen recounts. These 
terms carry multiple meanings which often apply simultaneously throughout the discourse, so 
that no single English rendering can fully encompass what the Sino-Japanese text is conveying, 
though all the meanings are pointing to the general topic of the consequences from expressing 
the Dhanna. 

To begin with, hokke can equally be rendered as ‘the Flower of the Dhanna’ and ‘the 
flowering of the Dharma’, the latter in the sense of ‘the appearing or emerging of the Dharma’ as 
well as of ‘giving expression to the Dhanna’. It is also an allusion to Hokke Kyd, the abbreviated 
Sino-Japanese title for the Lotus Scripture. Ten primarily signifies such actions as ‘turning’, 
‘revolving’, ‘setting in motion’, ‘arousing’, and ‘giving rise to’. These two terms are combined 
into the two phrases hokke ten and ten hokke, which, according to Dogen, are of Eno’s coining. 
Hokke ten can be rendered by such phrases as ‘being set in motion by the flowering of the 
Dharma’, and ‘being turned by the Flower of the Dhanna’ (that is, by the Lotus Scripture itself 
and the Dhanna that is expressed in it). Ten hokke can be rendered in various ways, such as 
‘setting in motion a flowering of the Dhanna’, ‘revolving (that is, perusing) the Lotus Scripture', 
and ‘turning the Flower of the Dhanna’, this last being an alternate way of saying ‘turning the 
Wheel of the Dhanna’. All of these meanings are implicit within whichever term is used in the 
present translation. Hence, the title might also be rendered as “The Lotus Scripture Sets in 
Motion the Dhanna’s Flowering”. 

This discourse may prove to be one of the more difficult discourses in the Shobogenzo. It 
would be worth the reader’s while to go through the work slowly several times to catch the 
beauty of the underlying Teaching. 


172 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


173 


Expounded for a certain person from Koshohorin-ji Temple. 

What exists everywhere within all Buddhist lands is simply the flowering of 
the Dharma. Everywhere and at all times, all Buddhas—along with Their 
assemblies of those who would realize supreme, fully perfected enlightenment— 
experience the setting in motion of the flowering of the Dharma and They 
experience being moved by that flowering. This state is equivalent to what the 
Lotus Scripture describes by such phrases as ‘the Bodhisattva* Way as practiced 
from the very first, without retreating or deviating’, ‘the profundity and breadth of 
the wise discernment of all Buddhas, which is beyond measure’, as well as ‘the 
clear and calm samadhi* that is difficult to comprehend and difficult to enter’. 

Just as with Manjushri* Buddha in the Lotus Scripture, this state has the 
aspect of ‘being just what one is’, which is a characteristic of each individual 
Buddha, just as it is of all the other Buddhas, all of Whom take the Great Ocean as 
their Buddha Land. 

On the other hand, Shakyamuni Buddha emerged in the world with His 
realizing that, as He put it, “Only I recognize the genuine character of things, as do 
all Buddhas everywhere.” This is equivalent to the time when He said, “Having 
fully awakened to the One Great Matter,* I alone desire to help sentient beings 
open up to It, manifest It, awaken to It, and enter It, just as all Buddhas have done.” 

And these phrases from the Lotus Scripture also refer to Samantabhadra,* 
for He has succeeded in helping the Dharma’s flowering to arise in others in ways 
that are beyond the intellective mind’s ability to grasp or fathom. Also, He has 
succeeded in causing the profound, vast, and far-reaching supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment to flow throughout Jambudvipa.* In that He has done this, the earth 
is able to produce the three kinds of grasses and the two kinds of trees, large and 
small, and the rain is able to moisten them all. 1 He alone accomplishes the 
exhaustive practice of helping the Dharma’s flowering to arise in others in ways 
that are beyond our ability to know. Samantabhadra’s proclaiming of the Dharma 
had not yet reached an end when the great assembly gathered on the Divine Vulture 
Peak to hear the Buddha give voice to the Dharma. The Venerable Shakyamuni 


* See Glossary. 

1. This is a reference to “The Parable of the Herbs” in the Lotus Scripture, where ordinary, 
conventional human beings are likened to small grasses, the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas 
who follow the Lesser Course to various shrubbery, and the bodhisattvas who follow the 
Greater Course to three types of vegetation: tall grasses (such as bamboo), small trees, and 
large trees. In the parable, the rain is likened to the rain of Dharma which the Buddha 
showers down upon them so that they may all come to their spiritual fruition. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


174 


gave proof of Samantabhadra’s comings and goings throughout the universe by 
means of the radiance emanating from the white hairs between His eyebrows. “ 

Shakyamuni’s meeting with those in His assembly had not yet reached its 
midpoint when they experienced a flowering of the Dharma, which was set in 
motion by Manjushri’s affirmation that Maitreya* would imminently realize 
Buddhahood. When they experienced this flowering of the Dharma, which was 
good through and through—beginning, middle, and end—Samantabhadra, the 
various Buddhas, Manjushri, and all the great assembly must surely have been 
carried to the Other Shore. This is why the flowering of the Dharma has manifested 
in the world as the fulfillment of the One Great Matter for which we train by 
relying on the One Vehicle. 

Because this manifestation is the One Great Matter, each Buddha, on His 
own, fully realizes the aspect of Truth within all thoughts and things, just as all 
other Buddhas have done. This Teaching is, beyond doubt, what the Lotus 
Scripture calls ‘the One Vehicle to Buddhahood, which Buddhas alone confirm and 
which They help all future Buddhas to fully realize’. The various Buddhas, 
including the Seven Buddhas,* have each helped Buddha after Buddha to fully 
realize the Truth, just as They helped Shakyamuni Buddha to fulfill His mission. 

The lands from India in the west to China in the east are among the Buddhist 
lands throughout the ten directions. What has been fully realized in these lands, 
even up through the Thirty-third Ancestor, Meditation Master Daikan Eno, is the 
One Vehicle which was taught by each and every Buddha. It is the One Vehicle of 
all Buddhas. Our reliance solely upon It is, without doubt, the One Great Matter. It 
manifests in the world now: It manifests right here. Seigen’s Buddhist modes of 
deportment have been handed down to us today and Nangaku’s gates to the 
Dharma are still open in the world, all due to the Tathagata’s knowing and seeing 
the True Nature of the world. 1 Surely, we are being aroused by the flowering of the 
Dharma when we say that this is what each Buddha on His own, together with all 
other Buddhas, have truly realized in full. It is what Those who succeeded 
Shakyamuni Buddha and what the Buddhas who have been Their successors have 
all opened up to, manifested, awakened to, and entered. 


2. That is, there was a radiance that seemed to pour forth from Shakyamuni’s brow. Those who 
saw this radiance associated it with the manifesting of Samantabhadra, whose name means 
‘Universal Goodness and Loving-kindness’. 

3. Seigen and Nangaku were Eno’s two Dharma heirs. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


175 


djb 

We also call this Scripture the Scripture on the Lotus Flower of the 
Wondrous Teaching , for it is the Teaching that trains bodhisattvas. Because this 
Scripture contains all thoughts and things, both the Divine Vulture Peak and the 
vast sky exist, as well as the great ocean and the great earth, with the Flower of the 
Dharma as their native land. As such, this Scripture describes how Truth appears: It 
is ‘just what is, as it is’. It is ‘the abode of the Dharma’ and ‘the invariable state of 
the Dharma’. It is ‘the impermanence of all actions’. It is ‘the reason for the One 
Great Matter for which we train’. It is ‘what the Buddha experienced directly’. It is 
‘what is abiding within the world of appearances’. It is ‘what is real’. It is ‘the 
lifespan of a Tathagata’. It is ‘what is profound and immeasurable’. It is ‘the 
meditative state of the flowering of the Dharma’. It is ‘Shakyamuni Buddha’. It is 
‘setting the Flower of the Dharma in motion’. It is ‘the Flower of the Dharma 
moving’. It is ‘the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching’ and ‘the 
Wondrous Heart of Nirvana’. It is ‘manifesting in physical form in order to ferry 
sentient beings to the Other Shore’. And we have the Scripture’s promise that “All 
will ultimately realize Buddhahood,” and we have the charge to preserve It. 


During the time of the great T’ang dynasty, a monk named 
Hotatsu once came to visit the assembly of Meditation Master Daikan 
Eno at Horin-ji Temple on Mount Sokei, which is in the region of the 
eastern road in South China . 4 He said of himself, “I have already read 
the Lotus Scripture aloud three thousand times.” 

Our Ancestor replied, “Even though you were to recite It ten 
thousand times, if you have not grasped what It is teaching, you won’t 
even reach the point where you know what your shortcomings are.” 

Hotatsu responded, “Student that I am, what a ninny I’ve been. 
Up till now, I have just recited It, merely sticking to the words. So, 
how could I possibly have grasped what they mean?” 

Eno replied, “Just as an experiment, recite It, and I will explain 
It for you.” 


4. Underlying this narrative of the encounter between Hotatsu and Eno is the fact that Eno had 
had a kensho when, as a very young man, he overheard a passage from the Diamond- 
Cutting Scripture being recited by someone. He himself was illiterate, but had the ability to 
understand the import of Scriptural passages when they were read to him. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


176 


Hotatsu then began to recite the Scripture. When he reached the 
section on skillful means, Eno said, “Stop here. The basic point of this 
Scripture is to tell us the reason behind the Buddha’s originally 
coming into this world. Even though It sets forth many allegories, 
none ever goes beyond this basic point. And if we ask what was 
behind this, it was simply the One Great Matter for which we train. 
‘Just the One Great Matter’ is, of course, ‘what the Buddha came to 
know directly’. It was ‘His opening up to It, manifesting It, awakening 
to It, and entering It’. This Matter is, naturally, what a Buddha comes 
to know directly. Anyone who is equipped with this direct knowing is 
already a Buddha. By all means, you should have faith here and now 
that what a Buddha directly knows is right within your very own 
heart.” Eno then added a poem to set this forth: 

When the mind wanders onto deluded paths, 

It is being set in motion by the flowering of the Dharma; 

When the heart awakens, 

The Dharma s flowering is set in motion. 

However long you recite this Scripture, should it be while 
still unawakened to the Self that is true, 

You will then create an enemy to Its meaning. 

To read It without opinion s bonds is the proper way, 

But read It bound to fixed ideas, and It becomes error s 
way. 

When you cease to judge whether you are bound or not, 

You ride forever long within the cart by the White Ox 
drawn. 

When Hotatsu heard this poem, he said the following to Eno, 
“It says in this Scripture that even if all beings—from the greatest 
shravakas* to the bodhisattvas—were to exhaust the resources of their 
thinking in measuring the Buddha’s spiritually wise discernment, they 
could not fathom it. Now, you seem to be saying that, if even ordinary 
people who wander through life in ignorance were to inquire into the 
Matter for which we train, it could lead them to spiritually awaken 
their own minds, and that this is precisely what a Buddha realizes 
through direct experience. But it is difficult for those of us who are 
not as highly gifted as you to escape from our doubts and skepticism. 
Further, in this Scripture it speaks of three vehicles, but what is the 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


177 


distinction between the large ox-cart and the cart drawn by a white 
ox ? 5 I pray that you, venerable monk, will once more favor us with 
your comments on these matters.” 

Eno responded, “The intent of the Scripture is clear. It is just 
that you are wandering off on your own and thereby turning your back 
on it. Your worry that those of the Three Vehicles* are incapable of 
fathoming the Buddha’s spiritually wise discernment is due to your 
own way of measuring things. Even though their intellectual resources 
are being exhausted through their speculations, somehow they will 
arrive from however far away they may be. As the Lotus Scripture 
says, ‘Right from the start, the Buddha explained this for the benefit 
of ordinary people who are wandering in ignorance; He did not 
explain it for the benefit of Buddhas.’ Although they are not really 
turning their backs on their faith in this principle, people sometimes 
do leave their seat of training. But even so, unbeknownst to them, they 
are sitting in the cart drawn by the White Ox, even while they 
continue their search for the Three Vehicles outside the gate. In 
relation to what you have asked, the words of the Scripture clearly 
state that ‘There are not two vehicles, nor are there three.’ How come 
you have not realized this? ‘The Three Vehicles’ refers to expedient 
teachings, for it refers to a time that has passed; ‘The One Vehicle’ 
refers to the genuine Teaching, for it refers to the present moment in 
time. You should simply leave behind what is expedient and come 
back to what is genuine. When you return to the genuine, the Genuine 
will not be just a name. You need to recognize that what you have is a 
wondrous and rare Treasure, and that It is fully passed on to you so 
that It may proceed from you to others, that they may receive It for 
their use. What is more, even though there is no notion of ‘my father’ 
or of ‘my son’, nor any attribute of ‘being useful’, this is what we call 
‘being set in motion by the Lotus Scripture ’. From one eon to the next, 
day and night, the Scripture never leaves our hand, and there is no 
time when we are not reciting It.” 


5. The present allusion, as well as many which follow, derive from the parable of the burning 
house in the Lotus Scripture. In that parable, a father attempts to rescue his three children 
who are playing within a burning house by promising them that they can play with three 
vehicles—a small sheep-drawn cart, a medium-sized deer-drawn cart, and a large ox-drawn 
cart—which he says lay outside the gate. When the children go outside the gate they find 
but one cart, which is drawn by a white ox. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


178 


Hotatsu had, by now, opened up to the Truth and, bouncing up 
and down with joy, he offered Eno a poem of praise: 

The three thousand times that I have recited this 
Scripture 

Have been surpassed by End’s solitary verse. 

Because I was not yet clear as to the purpose of my 
coming into this world, 

How was I to halt the folly of my troubled life? 

‘Sheep ‘deer ’, and ‘ox ’provide but expedient means. 

At beginning, middle, and end, they promote the virtuous 
and the good. 

Who within the burning house know 

That, from the first, they are lords within the Dharma? 

Having been offered this poem, the Ancestor said, “After this, you 
would do well to call yourself the monk who esteems the Lotus 
Scripture .” 

That is how the account of Meditation Master Hotatsu’s encounter with 
Daikan Eno went. The term ‘flowering of the Dharma’ in such phrases as ‘the 
flowering of the Dharma sets in motion’ and ‘being set in motion by the Dharma’s 
flowering’ began to be used from the time of this event; such phrases had not been 
heard before then. Truly, the ones to clarify the meaning of ‘what a Buddha directly 
knows’ will be those belonging to the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching: they will be Buddhas and Ancestors. This is beyond what can be 
understood by those textual scholars who vainly count words as if they were 
pebbles or grains of sand, as we can see from Hotatsu’s past. 

To clarify for yourself the fundamental meaning of ‘the flowering of the 
Dharma’, you need to realize fully what the Ancestral Master Eno opened up and 
revealed as the One Great Matter for which we train. Do not try to amuse yourself 
by inquiring into the other Buddhist vehicles. Now, what the Ancestral Master set 
forth is the True Nature of the real appearance, real innate nature, real embodiment, 
real strength, real cause, and real effect of what is set in motion by the flowering of 
the Dharma. Before the Ancestral Master’s time, this was something not yet heard 
of or even existing in China. 

djb 


When we speak of ‘what is set in motion by the flowering of the Dharma’, 
we are referring to the mind’s wandering off onto deluded paths. And the mind’s 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


179 


delusive wandering, accordingly, refers to what is set in motion by the flowering of 
the Dharma. That is to say, our mind’s wandering off is precisely what is set in 
motion by the Dharma’s flowering. What this means is that, even though the 
mind’s delusions are synonymous with the myriad thoughts and things that arise, 
the form their True Nature takes is what is aroused by the flowering of the Dharma. 
This ‘being set in motion’ is not something to rejoice in, or watch for, or obtain, or 
arrive at; even so, what the Dharma’s flowering sets in motion is precisely ‘neither 
two things nor three’. Since the flowering of the Dharma is our having only One 
Vehicle to Buddhahood, because it is the flowering of the form of things as they 
really are, we speak of ‘being able to set in motion what moves’. Even so, it is just 
the One Vehicle to Buddhahood, just the One Great Matter for which we train, just 
the ever-moving about of the mind as it is, and nothing more. So, do not reproach 
yourself for your mind’s delusions. As the Scripture says, “Whatever is done by 
you is the way of bodhisattvas,” and “The fundamental practice of the Bodhisattva 
Way is our serving and paying homage to all the Buddhas.” Our opening up to this 
Way, manifesting It, awakening to It, and entering It are, all together, what is set in 
motion by the Dharma’s flowering each and every time. There are our delusions 
about what is within the burning house, and our delusions about being at the 
threshold of the gate, and our delusions about what lies outside the gate, and our 
delusions about what being on the other side of the gate is like, and our delusions 
about being within the gate . 6 Because, in our delusion, we give rise to such notions 
as ‘being within the gate’ and ‘being beyond the gate’, to say nothing of ‘being at 
the threshold of the gate’ and ‘being within a burning house’, we will, of necessity, 
open up to It, manifest It, awaken to It, and enter It whilst upon the cart drawn by 
the White Ox. 

When you consider entering the gate from the burning house while riding 
upon this finely adorned cart, will it be because you are looking hopefully towards 
the open fields beyond as the place you need to enter, or because you recognize the 
burning house as the place you need to leave, or because you realize that the 
threshold of the gate is merely a point to be passed through? You certainly need to 
realize that when you are within this cart an opening up to, manifesting, awakening 
to, and entering the burning house may occur, and that when you are within the 
open fields beyond the gate an opening up to, manifesting, awakening to, and 
entering the burning house may occur, and that at the threshold of any gate an 


6. To paraphrase, people, as a matter of course, speculate on, and thus harbor delusions about, 
what defiling passions are, what turning one’s heart around and vowing to train is, what 
nirvana is, what the fulfillment of training and practice means, and what doing the training 
and practice is. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


180 


opening up to it, manifesting it, awakening to it, and entering it may occur, and that 
at any single gate to the Universal Gate an opening up to It, manifesting It, 
awakening to It, and entering It may also occur. At each instance of opening up, 
manifesting, awakening, and entering, there is an opening up to, manifesting, 
awakening to, and entering the Universal Gate. There is set in motion an opening 
up to, manifesting, awakening to, and entering a gate. There is an opening up to, 
manifesting, awakening to, and entering what lies outside the gate. And, within the 
burning house, there is an opening up to, manifesting, awakening to, and entering 
the open fields beyond. 

As a result, the burning house is beyond the intellective mind’s ability to 
fully grasp, and the open fields are beyond that mind’s ability to completely know. 
Who will make into a conveyance the three mundane worlds through which they 
spin and ride it as the One Vehicle? Who will go back and forth through their 
opening up, manifesting, awakening, and entering as though such events were a 
gate? When we seek conveyance from the burning house, how many times the 
wheel of samsara must turn! When we look upon the burning house from the open 
fields, how very distant it appears to be! Have you fully realized that the Divine 
Vulture Peak rests serenely in the open fields? Have you incorporated into your 
training and practice that open fields are flat and level on the Divine Vulture Peak? 
That place where ‘sentient beings take their delight and play’ has continually 
existed as the Buddha’s Pure Land, which can never be destroyed . 7 We must 
meticulously make this our fundamental practice. 

In our wholehearted desire to meet Buddha, do we pursue through our 
spiritual exploration and practice that Buddha is ourself, or do we pursue through 
our spiritual exploration and practice that Buddha is some other? There have been 
times when the Truth was realized as an individual entity, and there have been 
times when the Truth was realized as the Whole Body. Our appearing together with 
the Buddha on the Divine Vulture Peak is due to our not begrudging even our own 
lives. There is an opening up, manifesting, awakening, and entering which is the 
Buddha’s continually abiding here, voicing the Dharma, and there is an opening 
up, manifesting, awakening, and entering which is the Buddha’s skillful means in 
manifesting what nirvana is. It is our not seeing Buddha, though Such is near; so 
who, pray, lacks the faith to wholeheartedly grasp That Which Is Beyond Our 
Grasp? The place that is ever filled with both celestial and human beings is none 
other than the Realm of Shakyamuni and Vairochana,* a realm that is continually 


7. This is taken from “The Immeasurable Life of the Tathagata” section of the Lotus Scripture. 
One translation of this can be found in Buddhist Writings on Meditation and Daily Practice, 
(Shasta Abbey Press, 1994), pp. 27-38. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


181 


tranquil and radiant. We who are naturally installed in the Four Realms do, indeed, 

o 

dwell in the Buddha Realm that is the All. When we are looking at some dust 
particle, it does not mean that we do not see the whole realm of the universe, and, 
in our affirming the whole realm of the universe, it does not mean that we are 
denying any dust particle. So, when all the Buddhas affirm the realm of the 
Dharma, it does not mean that They exclude us from Their affirmation, which is 
good in the beginning, middle, and end. Thus, not only is the present moment an 
aspect of Their affirming that things are just what they are, but also any alarm, 
doubt, fear, or awe that we may experience in response to Their affirmation can in 
no way deny the innate nature of what They are affirming. Simply, these responses 
are only the difference between looking at dust particles with the directness of a 
Buddha and our sitting down amidst these particles. When we seat ourselves down 
within the realm of the Dharma, it is not spacious; when we sit amidst dust 
particles, they are not confining. As a result, without the Buddha’s promise of our 
realizing Buddhahood, there would be no need to sit and, in that all Buddhas 
promise it, there is no need for alarm or doubt due to spaciousness or limitations, 
because all the Buddhas have already fully realized the substance and strength of 
the flowering of the Dharma. 

So, should we consider that our present characteristics and innate nature are 
practicing within the realm of the Dharma or within dust particles? Our 
characteristics and nature have no alarm or doubt, nor do they have any fear or 
awe, for they are simply what is profound and enduring: they are that which the 
basic practice sets in motion within the realm of the Dharma. Our looking at this 
universe of dust particles and seeing the realm of the Dharma is beyond anything 
we could ever create or measure. That which we measure and create should also 
take lessons from what is measured and created by the flowering of the Dharma. 
When we hear the phrase ‘opening up, manifesting, awakening, and entering’, we 
should understand it in relation to a Buddha’s desire to help sentient beings. We 
should take as our model a Buddha’s manifesting what a Buddha knows directly, 
His awakening to what a Buddha knows directly, and His entering into what a 
Buddha knows directly, all of which is called ‘the flowering of the Dharma setting 


8. ‘The Four Realms’ is a Tendai Buddhist technical term for certain spiritual stages. The first 
is the Realm of Dualistic Thinking, where ordinary, conventional people are seen as living 
side-by-side with those who are saintly. The second is the Realm of Skillful Means, where 
inhabitants are guided by the Dharma but have not yet fully realized Its import. The third is 
the Realm of Bodhisattvas, where marked spiritual results have been achieved and 
hindrances have been removed. The fourth is the Realm of Continual Tranquility and 
Radiance. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


182 


in motion our opening up to, manifesting, awakening to and entering that which a 
Buddha knows directly through experience’. In this way, the Dharma Flower’s 
setting in motion our opening up, manifesting, awakening, and entering will be our 
path to full realization. 

In other words, our crossing over to what all the Buddha Tathagatas came to 
know directly is what is set in motion by the flowering of the Dharma, which is, as 
the Scripture says, ‘great, vast, profound, and far-reaching’. The prediction of our 
ultimately realizing Buddhahood is, therefore, our own opening up to what a 
Buddha directly knows, and it is what the flowering of the Dharma sets in motion, 
which is beyond anything that others teach. This is what is referred to by the 
statement, “The mind’s wandering off onto deluded paths is what is set in motion 
by the flowering of the Dharma.” 

djb 


What is called “The mind’s awakening sets the flowering of the Dharma in 
motion” is synonymous with the turning of the flower-like Dharma Wheel. That is 
to say, when the flowering of the Dharma has thoroughly exerted its influence in 
arousing us, we, in turn, manifest its influence, just as it is, in arousing ourselves. 
Our making this manifest is our setting the Flower of the Dharma in motion. Even 
though what was set in motion by the flowering of the Dharma in the past has 
continued on, unceasingly, even up to the present, we are, in turn, naturally setting 
the Flower of the Dharma in motion. Even though our donkey work has not yet 
come to an end, our horse work will present itself . 9 

Through our reliance on just the One Vehicle, we will accomplish the One 
Great Matter for which we train as It manifests right here before us. The multitudes 
of bodhisattvas in the thousands of worlds had long been greatly venerated saintly 
ones of the Dharma Flower. They poured out from the land upon hearing the 
Buddha turn the Wheel of the Dharma on the Divine Vulture Peak. They poured 
forth from the land, being aroused by themselves, and they poured forth from the 
land, being aroused by some other. We should not make our turning of the Dharma 
Flower be only for what pours forth from the earth: we should also make it be for 


9. In several earlier texts Dogen has alluded to the saying by Meditation Master Reiun Shigon 
that one should not wait until the donkey work is done before beginning to do the horse 
work. In the Zen Buddhist tradition, ‘donkey work’ is associated with ceasing from evil by 
using our will to cut through our spiritual fetters, which are the source of our suffering; 
‘horse work’ is associated with doing good by our giving voice to the Dharma to help others 
to realize the Truth. In the present context, Dogen gives this traditional understanding a 
twist, by asserting that doing one’s training, in itself, helps others to realize the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


183 


what pours forth from open space. And it is not only the earth and open space that 
can pour forth. We should also discern with a Buddha’s wise discernment the 
pouring forth of the flowering of the Dharma. 

Generally speaking, the time of the Dharma’s flowering is inevitably one in 
which, as the Lotus Scripture puts it, “The parent is young and the child is old.” 
This does not mean that the child is not a child, nor does it mean that the parent is 
not a parent: you should simply explore this as “The child is the one who is old and 
the parent is the one who is young.” Do not follow worldly disbeliefs and thereby 
be disconcerted, and that which is a worldly disbelief is also a time of the 
Dharma’s flowering. On account of this, we should make our turning of the 
Dharma Flower be ‘that singular time when the Buddha was dwelling in the 
world’. We come pouring forth from the earth when we are aroused by opening up 
to, manifesting, awakening to, and entering It, and we come pouring forth from the 
earth when we are aroused by what a Buddha knows through direct experience. At 
this time of turning the Flower of the Dharma, there is the mind’s awakening due to 
the Flower of the Dharma, and there is the flowering of the Dharma due to the 
mind’s awakening. 

And, the description of the bodhisattvas as ‘coming from down below’ is 
synonymous with their ‘coming from within space’. This ‘down below’ and this 
‘within space’ are nothing but the turning of the Dharma Flower, and they are 
nothing but the lifespan of a Buddha. We should do our turning of the Dharma 
Flower so that the Buddha’s life, the flowering of the Dharma, the realm of the 
Dharma, and our wholeheartedness manifest both ‘down below’ and ‘within 
space’. For this reason, what we call ‘down below’ and ‘within space’ are nothing 
but manifestations before our very eyes of the turning of the Dharma Flower. 
Generally speaking, in our turning of the Dharma Flower at this time, there is that 
which causes ‘the three kinds of grasses’ and ‘the two kinds of trees’ to come to 
their fruition. This does not mean that we should expect to realize the Truth, nor 
does it mean that we should be skeptical if we do not. 

When we arouse ourselves and give rise to enlightenment, this is what 
constitutes the southern quarter . 10 This fulfilling of the Way, from the first, was 
present on the Divine Vulture Peak, where the assembly originally convened in the 
southern quarter. And there are Buddha Lands in all ten quarters where an 
assembly has convened in open space, and each is a separate body that sets in 
motion the flowering of the Dharma. This body of bodhisattvas is already making 
their turning of the Dharma Flower into the Buddha Lands in all ten quarters, and 


10. In the Lotus Scripture, the southern quarter is associated with being free of all impurities. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


184 


there is no place within those lands where even a single dust particle can enter. 
There is the turning of the Dharma Flower as “All forms are, in fact, devoid,” 
which means ‘being beyond anything’s seeming to disappear or emerge’. There is 
the turning of the Dharma Flower as “That which is devoid is, in fact, any form,” 
which means ‘being beyond anything’s having birth or death’. We cannot call it 
‘existing in the world’, much less would it be simply ‘annihilation’. The One who 
is an intimate friend to me is an intimate friend to you, me, and everyone else. 
Because we must not neglect to respectfully bow to our Intimate Friend, we must 
take care to clearly recognize the times when the pearl in the king’s topknot is 
bestowed and the times when the pearl in the robe is bestowed . 11 There was the 
turning of the Dharma Flower wherein the jewel-encrusted stupa,* which was five 
hundred yojanas* high, appeared before the Buddha, and there was the turning of 
the Dharma Flower wherein a Buddha sat within the stupa, which measured two 
hundred and fifty yojanas wide. There was the turning of the Dharma Flower as ‘a 
stupa springing forth from the earth and taking up its abode in the sky’, wherein 
the mind was without obstructions and form was without restrictions, and there 
was the turning of the Dharma Flower as ‘a stupa springing forth from the sky and 
taking up its abode in the earth ’, 12 which was restricted by the mind and restricted 
by the body. The Divine Vulture Peak existed within the stupa, and the jewel- 
encrusted stupa existed on the Divine Vulture Peak. The jeweled stupa made a 
jeweled stupa of the sky: the sky made an unbounded sky of the jeweled stupa . 13 
With the former Buddha within the stupa sitting alongside the Buddha of the 


11. References to two parables in the Lotus Scripture. In the first, the giving of the Dharma is 
likened to a king taking the pearl from his topknot and openly bestowing it upon his valiant 
and capable servant. In the second, it is likened to a rich man who, after serving his 
impoverished friend a sumptuous meal, slips a precious pearl into the man’s robe while the 
man is sleeping. In the former situation, the servant is aware of the value of what has been 
bestowed upon him, whereas in the latter, the poor man does not realize what has been given 
him, much less recognize its value, and he continues through life suffering from feelings of 
deprivation, even while truly being rich beyond his wildest dreams. 

12. The four preceding descriptions of aspects of the turning of the Flower of the Dharma are 
related to another chapter in the Lotus Scripture, wherein a stupa of enormous height and 
width appears in the sky before the Buddha whilst He is turning the Wheel of the Dharma on 
the Divine Vulture Peak. Seated within the stupa is a Buddha of long ago, Prabhataratna 
Buddha, ‘The Buddha Who Abounds in Jewels’. The stupa that settles upon the earth is 
Dogen’s addition. 

13. This sentence is difficult to render into readily comprehensible English, since Dogen uses 
the words ‘jeweled stupa’ and ‘sky’ not only as nouns but also as verbs: “The stupa stupas in 
the sky, and the sky skies the stupa.” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


185 


Divine Vulture Peak, the Buddha of the Divine Vulture Peak experienced the 
realization of Truth along with the Buddha within the stupa. When the Buddha of 
the Divine Vulture Peak experienced this realization upon entering the stupa, He 
entered into the turning of the Dharma Flower, while the physical world and His 
own body remained intact. When the Buddha within the stupa emerged on the 
Divine Vulture Peak, He emerged while still in the domain of former Buddhas, and 
He did so despite His having been extinct for ever so long. Do not follow the views 
of those ordinary people who wander in ignorance or those of the two Lesser 
Courses* concerning the meaning of the emergence of the former Buddha and the 
meaning of the Buddha of the Divine Vulture Peak commencing to turn the Wheel 
of the Dharma, but just concentrate on setting in motion the flowering of the 
Dharma. 

‘Being extinct for ever so long’ is an epithet for someone who has 
experienced the Truth directly. Only those who have the perspective of a Buddha 
are endowed with this epithet. What the Scripture calls ‘within the stupa’ and 
‘before the Buddha’, as well as ‘the stupa’ and ‘unbounded space’, are beyond a 
literal understanding of ‘the Divine Vulture Peak’, beyond ‘the realm of Dharma’, 
beyond ‘a halfway stage’, beyond ‘the whole universe’. Nor are they concerned 
with ‘some place within the Dharma’. They are simply different from any form of 
discriminatory thought. 

djb 

CX) 


Not only is there the turning of the Flower of the Dharma by manifesting in 
the form of a Buddha for the sake of giving voice to the Dharma, there is also the 
turning of the Flower of the Dharma by manifesting in the form of a sentient being 
for the sake of giving voice to the Dharma. There is the turning of the Flower of 
the Dharma which manifested as ‘Devadatta ’, 14 and there is the turning of the 
Flower of the Dharma which manifested as ‘their departing is also fine ’. 15 Do not 
measure your waiting as being ‘sixty eons long’, while you look up to the Buddha 
for help with hands in gassho.* By cutting short your measuring of your 
wholehearted waiting, what will arise after a while is what is called ‘so many 


14. The name of a chapter in the Lotus Scripture. Devadatta was Shakyamuni’s cousin and 
disciple. While a senior monk, he caused a schism in the assembly, with five hundred 
novices following him. Although maintaining that he was still Shakyamuni’s disciple, he 
attempted to kill Shakyamuni. Despite these acts, Shakyamuni predicts in this chapter that 
Devadatta too will ultimately attain Buddhahood. 

15. A reference to what Shakyamuni Buddha said when a group of monks and lay persons left 
the Divine Vulture Peak midway in His discourse, thinking that they already ‘knew it all’. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


186 


immeasurable eons’, but even so, it is still impossible to put a measurement on the 
Buddha’s wise discernment. How much, pray, does this wholehearted waiting serve 
as a gauge of the Buddha’s wise discernment? Do not think of this turning of the 
Dharma Flower as simply the Bodhisattva Way as practiced from the very first. 
The turning of the Dharma Flower at that sole sitting on the Divine Vulture Peak is 
a turning of the Dharma Flower in the form of the Tathagata giving voice to the 
Greater Course* this very day. The Flower of the Dharma is the Flower of the 
Dharma right now; should you not perceive or recognize It, It will be beyond your 
mind’s ability to fully grasp or fully understand . 16 Thus, what is ‘five hundred ink 
drops’ for some is but the smallest fraction of time in the turning of the Dharma 
Flower, for It expounds that the lifetime of Buddha is the ever-flowing of Mind as 
It is . 17 

djb 


In conclusion, in the several centuries since this Lotus Scripture was 
transmitted to China and employed to set in motion the flowering of the Dharma, 
those folks who have fashioned commentaries and interpretations for it have 
abounded. And, due to this Scripture, some of those who have obtained the Dharma 
have been eminent people. But none of them has caught the meaning of ‘the 
Flower of the Dharma turning’ or made use of the import of ‘setting the Flower of 
the Dharma in motion’ as our exalted Ancestor, the Old Buddha Daikan Eno, did. 
Now we hear this teaching, now we encounter it: we can encounter an Old Buddha 
meeting an Old Buddha. How could this fail to be the Land of Old Buddhas! What 
a joy it is that the Flower of the Dharma has existed for eon after eon! What a joy it 
is that there is a flowering of the Dharma day and night! Because the Flower of the 
Dharma continues from eon to eon and flowers throughout both day and night, 
even though our own bodies and minds wax and wane in strength, this very waxing 
and waning is also the flowering of the Dharma. Everything, just as it is, is a rare 
treasure, a luminous radiance, a place for training in the Way. Everything, just as it 
is, is great, vast, profound, and far-reaching in its influence; everything is the 
profound, vast, and far-reaching supreme, fully perfected enlightenment; 
everything is the mind’s wandering off into delusion at the turning of the Dharma 
Flower; everything is the mind’s awakening which turns the Flower of the Dharma; 


16. A reference to the children in the burning house who were so absorbed in their play that they 
did not perceive or recognize what was really going on. 

17. In the Lotus Scripture, ‘five hundred ink drops’ constitutes the time it takes to let five 
hundred drops fall at the rate of one drop per every thousand lands traveled through. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma... ’ 


187 


everything is truly the Flower of the Dharma setting in motion the Dharma’s 
flowering. 

The mind’s wandering is its being turned by the Flower 
of the Dharma: 

The mind’s awakening is its turning of the Flower of the 
Dharma. 

If what we fully realize is like this, 

It is the Flower of the Dharma setting in motion the 
flowering of the Dharma. 

When we make offerings to It, bow in respect to It, honor It, and praise It, 
the Flower of the Dharma is the flowering of the Dharma. 


I have written this on a day during the summer retreat in the second year of 
the Ninji era (1241) to present to a meditator named Edatsu. I am overjoyed that he 
is leaving lay life behind in order to train in the Way. Just to shave one’s head once, 
even that, is a precious act. To shave one’s head again and again: this is to be a true 
child who has left lay life behind. His leaving lay life behind today is a karmic* 
recompense, in and of itself, arising solely from the influence of his revolving the 
Flower of the Dharma in the past. The flowering of the Dharma today must 
certainly be a flowering which brings to fruition the Flower of the Dharma. It is not 
Shakyamuni’s Dharma Flower, nor is it the Dharma Flower of the Buddhas: it is 
the Dharma Flower’s flowering of the Dharma. Edatsu’s being set into motion by 
the flowering of the Dharma in the past habitually revolved around his not 
perceiving or recognizing the characteristics of things as they really are. But the 
flowering of the Dharma today is no longer beyond his mind’s ability to fully grasp 
or understand. In times long past, he breathed It out and breathed It in: at the 
present time, he breathes It out and breathes It in. This is what we should expect 
for a flowering of the Dharma that is so marvelously exquisite we cannot even 
begin to imagine It. 

Written by the founder of Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple, the mendicant monk who went to 
Sung China in order to receive and then transmit the Dharma. 

Dogen 


Copied on the third day of midsummer in the second year of the Ninji era (June 13, 1241). 

Ejo 



17 

On ‘The Mind Cannot Be Held Onto’ 

(Shin Fukatoku) 

ORAL VERSION 

Translator’s Introduction: The Shobogenzo contains two versions of this discourse. The 
present one is based on a talk Dogen gave to his disciples. The second, which follows this one, 
was composed as a written document. While the overall theme and some of the passages are the 
same, the two versions are sufficiently different to justify including both. 

The title and opening line come from the Scripture on the Diamond-Sharp Wise Discernment 
That Leads One to the Other Shore, often referred to simply as the Diamond-Cutting Scripture. 
As with other phrases that Dogen takes from the Scriptures and from the remarks or writings of 
Zen Masters, he often expands on their meaning so that no single translation suitably fits all 
contexts. In the present instance, the meaning of the title phrase shifts from a concern with the 
transiency of the mind (‘the mind cannot be held onto’), to the inability of the intellect to 
comprehend Buddha Mind (‘the mind cannot grasp It’), to the intangible nature of the all- 
encompassing Mind (‘Mind cannot be grasped’). In this translation, where the word shin appears 
in the original, it is rendered as ‘Mind’ when the reference appears to refer to the Buddha Mind 
(Buddha Nature), and as ‘mind’ when referring to the conventional functioning of the intellect. 
The phrase fukatoku is rendered in a variety of ways depending on what seems relevant to the 
context. 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “The mind of the past cannot be retained; 
the mind of the present cannot be held onto; the mind of the future cannot be 
grasped.” This is what the Buddhas and Ancestors have thoroughly explored 
through Their practice. From within this ‘cannot be held onto’, They have 
fashioned the niches and baskets of Their own past, present, and future. Even so, 
They have made use of the niches and baskets of others in Their tradition. 1 What I 
call ‘Their tradition’ is synonymous with Their ‘being unable to hold onto the 
mind’. Our cogitating and discriminating at this very moment is synonymous with 
our ‘being unable to hold onto the mind’. The whole of our physical existence 
which we use every hour of the day is indeed synonymous with our ‘being unable 
to hold onto the mind’. Once we have entered the private quarters of an Ancestor 


1. That is, They have structured Their daily lives from within That which is ungraspable, and 
They have sometimes borrowed from Their predecessors’ ways of spiritually fashioning 
Their lives. 


188 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto oral version 


189 


of the Buddha, we comprehend what ‘not being able to hold onto the mind’ refers 
to. But before we have entered the quarters of an Ancestor of the Buddha, no 
questions about ‘Mind cannot be held onto’ arise, nor have we made this ‘Mind’ 
manifest, nor is It anything we have personally seen or heard about. Those fellows 
who are engaged in the worldly teaching of texts and the scholarly study of 
commentaries, as well as those folks who hear but do not apply the Teaching and 
those who are only interested in their own awakening, exist here and now, without 
having encountered It even in their dreams. Evidence of this is near at hand, as the 
following narrative illustrates. 

djb 

<X> 


Before Meditation Master Tokusan Senkan’s awakening, he used to brag 
about his skill in elucidating the Diamond-Cutting Scripture, even boasting 
sometimes about his being the Fully Perfected Lord of that Scripture (since his 
family name Chou meant ‘fully perfected’). He claimed to be particularly well up 
on the commentaries on this Scripture composed by the Chinese scholar Ch’ing- 
lung. What is more, he had made compilations of a ton of books. And there was no 
lecturer who could stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the likes of him. But at the 
same time, he was one of the last in line among those purely academic teachers 
who were concerned only with analyzing written texts word by word. 

One day, he heard that there was an unsurpassed Buddhist Teaching in the 
South that was being passed on from successor to successor. Inflamed with 
indignation and armed with Scriptures and other doctrinal texts, he went forth to 
the South, crossing mountains and rivers. As it happened, he heard about the 
assembly of Meditation Master Ryutan Soshin (who had been Transmitted under 
Sekito Kisen). Whilst on his way to this assembly with the intention of joining it, 
he stopped by the wayside to catch his breath. At that moment, an old woman came 
up beside him, also stopping by the side of the road to rest a bit. Lecturer Tokusan 
casually asked her who she was. 

The old woman replied, “I’m just an old woman who sells rice 
cakes.” 

Tokusan asked her if she would sell him some for his personal 

use. 

The old woman replied, “Reverend monk, what use would you 
have for buying them?” 

Tokusan said, “I want to buy them to refresh my mind.” 

The old woman then remarked, “Reverend monk, that load 
you’re carrying with you is really something!” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto oral version 


190 


Tokusan replied, “Have you not heard of me? I am the Fully 
Perfected Lord of the Diamond-Cutting Scripture. I have so mastered 
this Scripture that there is nothing in It that I do not understand. What 
I am carrying with me are my commentaries on the Diamond-Cutting 
Scripture .” 

Upon hearing him say this, the old woman asked, “Reverend 
monk, would you permit an old woman like me to put a question to 
you?” 

Tokusan replied, “You now have my permission to ask 
whatever you may wish.” 

The old woman said, “I once heard the part in the Diamond- 
Cutting Scripture where it says, ‘The mind of the past cannot be held 
onto; the mind of the present cannot be held onto; the mind of the 
future cannot be held onto.’ Which mind do you think you will refresh 
with these rice cakes? If the reverend monk is able to say, I will sell 
you some rice cakes. If the reverend monk is unable to say, I will not 
sell you any.” 

Tokusan, at this moment, was so flabbergasted that he did not 
recall how he would have customarily responded, whereupon the old 
woman dismissed him with a flick of her wrist and departed without 
selling Tokusan any of her rice cakes. 

How regrettable that a commentator on hundreds of documents, one who has been 
a lecturer for decades, was seen through by a poor old woman and could not come 
up with a response when posed one measly question. It is like the vast difference 
between, on the one hand, meeting a true teacher, paying heed to a true teacher, 
and being able to hear the True Teaching and, on the other, not yet having heard 
the True Teaching nor having encountered a true teacher. This was the occasion 
when Tokusan first said, “A rice cake painted in a picture cannot satisfy one’s 
hunger.” Nowadays, he is admired as one who inherited the Dharma from Ryutan. 

When we reflect deeply upon what is going on in this encounter between the 
old woman and Tokusan, what Tokusan had not clarified in the distant past can be 
clearly heard today. Even after he met Ryutan, he still must have had nightmares 
about this old woman. He was a latecomer to learning through practice and not 
some ancient Buddha who had gone beyond being enlightened. Although the old 
woman had, on that occasion, succeeded in shutting Tokusan’s mouth up, it is 
difficult to establish whether she was, in fact, ‘such a person’.* The reason is that, 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto oral version 


191 


upon hearing the phrase ‘the mind cannot be held onto’, she may have thought 
simply that the mind is not something to be obtained or something to be possessed, 
and therefore spoke to him as she did. If Tokusan had been a solid fellow, he 
would have had the ability to see through to what the old woman was really getting 
at. Had he seen through to that, it would have been clear whether she was truly 
‘such a person’. But Tokusan had not yet become the awakened ‘Tokusan’, so he 
was not yet able to know whether she was ‘such a person’ or not. 


In Great Sung China today, among the novices garbed in the patched robes 
and broad sleeves of monks, there are those who laugh at Tokusan’s inability to 
respond appropriately and who esteem what they take to be the old woman’s sharp 
wit. This is something that is surely quite pitiful and befuddled, since there are 
reasons for us to have doubts about the old woman. For instance, at the very 
moment when Tokusan was unable to speak, the old woman could have turned to 
him and said, “The reverend monk is unable to respond now, so he should go on 
and put the question to this old woman, and she, in response, will say something 
for the reverend monk’s benefit.” By speaking in this manner, it would be evident 
that the old woman was what we call ‘such a person’ if, in response to Tokusan’s 
question, she spoke true. Even though she had a question for him, she had not yet 
expressed the Matter* herself. Ever since ancient times, no one has been called 
‘such a person’ who has not uttered at least a single word to express It. We can see 
from Tokusan’s past that there is no benefit in constantly bragging about oneself. 
We can realize by means of the old woman that a person who has not yet expressed 
It cannot be acknowledged as having realized the Truth. 

As an experiment, let us say something in Tokusan’s stead. Were the old 

woman really posing her question from ‘that frame of mind’, Tokusan might have 

2 

said to her, “If you are in ‘that frame of mind’, do not sell me any rice cakes.” 
Had Tokusan spoken in this way, he might have been someone of sharp wit who 
had learned something through the practice of spiritual training. 

Tokusan might have asked the old woman, “The mind of the past cannot be 
retained; the mind of the present cannot be held onto; the mind of the future cannot 
be grasped; so which mind do you propose to refresh with your rice cakes?” Were 
she asked in this way, then she might have responded to Tokusan by saying, “If the 


2. ‘That frame of mind’ is a non-literal rendering of the Japanese immo (C . jen-mo), a term 
used in Zen Buddhist writings in relation to someone who is operating from the spiritual 
certainty of an awakened mind. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto oral version 


192 


reverend monk only knows that rice cakes do not refresh the mind, then he does 
not know that Mind refreshes the rice cakes or that Mind refreshes the mind.” 

Were she to speak thus, Tokusan would definitely have had the doubt arise. 3 
Then, at that very moment, she should select three rice cakes and hand them over 
to Tokusan. Just as Tokusan is about to take them, the old woman should say, “The 
mind of the past cannot be retained; the mind of the present cannot be held onto; 
the mind of the future cannot be grasped.” On the other hand, if Tokusan does not 
reach out to take them, she might take one of the rice cakes and hit him with it, 
saying, “You gutless wonder, don’t be such a ninny!” Were she to speak like this, 
should Tokusan respond, then well and good. If he were still unable to say 
anything, the old woman should say something more for Tokusan’s sake. But she 
only gave him a flick of her wrist and left. Maybe there was a bee in her sleeve. 

Tokusan, for his part, does not even say, “I’m unable to say anything. Old 
woman, will you say something in my stead?” So, not only did he fail to say what 
he should have said, he also did not ask what he should have asked. What a pity! 
The old woman’s and Tokusan’s questions and answers concerning the mind of the 
past and the mind of the future are merely their mind of the present being unable to 
grasp It. 

Although Tokusan afterwards succeeded in bringing about his awakening to 
the Light, he did not give the appearance of one who had done so; he was simply 
someone whose outward demeanor was consistently gruff. 4 5 Since he trained under 
Ryutan for some time, the horns on his head must surely have gotten knocked off, 
and the pearl from under the dragon’s chin would have been authentically 
Transmitted to him. To merely see the blowing out of a paper candle ? is 
insufficient for the Transmission of the Torch. 6 

So, novices who are learning through their training should, beyond doubt, be 
diligent in their explorations. Those who have treated their training lightly are not 
right. Those who have been diligent in their explorations are Ancestors of the 


3. That is, he would have doubted that what he had been able to comprehend intellectually was 
all that there is to realizing spiritual Truth. 

4. One effect of a kensho in an erudite person is their becoming humble and modest. 

5. A reference to the account of Tokusan’s spiritual awakening, which Dogen retells in another 
of his writings called the Shinji Shobogenzo. Written entirely in a Japanese form of Chinese, 
it consists of three hundred koan stories. A translation of Tokusan’s story (from Book 2, 
Koan 4) is given in the Addendum which follows at the end of this discourse. 

6. That is, to be a true Ancestor of the Buddha takes more than having a kensho; it also 
requires ceaseless spiritual training and practice. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto oral version 


193 


Buddha. In sum, saying that ‘the mind cannot grasp It’ is the same as saying that 
someone has bought a painting of a rice cake, then chewed it all up in one 
mouthful, savoring its flavor. 

Delivered to the assembly during the summer retreat in the second year of the Ninji era (1241) 
at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple, Uji Prefecture, Yamashiro Province. 


Translator’s Addendum from 
Book 2, Koan 4 of Dogen’s Chinese Shinji Shobogenzo 

For a long time, the monk Tokusan had made a career of lecturing on the 
Diamond-Cutting Scripture. Later on, having heard that the Zen tradition had 
begun to flourish widely in the South, he could not let the matter rest. Finally, he 
stopped lecturing and, dismissing his students, headed for the South, armed with 
manuscripts. For a start, he proceeded to Ryutan Monastery. He had barely crossed 
the threshold of the monastery when he said, “For a long time, I have looked for 
Ryutan. Now that I have finally arrived, the Abbot himself is nowhere in sight.” 
Ryutan said, “My child, you have arrived at Ryutan in person.” Tokusan then 
bowed in respect and withdrew. 

When night came on, Tokusan entered the Abbot’s quarters, intent on 
attending upon the Abbot. As the time had grown late, Ryutan said, “My child, 
why don’t you retire?” At length, Tokusan, setting great store in the Abbot, raised 
the bamboo curtain and went out. Seeing how dark it was outside, he returned and 
said, “It is pitch black outside.” 7 Ryutan then took a paper candle and proffered it 
to Tokusan. Just as Tokusan touched it, Ryutan blew out the flame, whereupon 
Tokusan suddenly had a great awakening and immediately bowed in respect. 
Ryutan asked. “My child, upon seeing such a thing as this, why did you 
immediately bow?” Tokusan replied, “From now on, I will not doubt the tongue of 
our country’s venerable monk again.” 

The next day, Ryutan said in the Lecture Hall, “You have here this ‘real 
person’. His teeth are like swords; his mouth resembles a basin of blood. Though 


7. That is, Ryutan encourages Tokusan to go (‘retire’) into meditation (‘raise the bamboo 
curtain’). Deep in meditation (‘going out’ of the intellective mind), Tokusan confronts his 
spiritual ignorance (“It is pitch black outside [of my intellect].”), which is what he reports to 
Ryutan. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto oral version 


194 


you may strike him with a stick, he does not turn his head. At a later time, he will 
turn towards the peak of the solitary mountain and leave here to establish my 
Way.” 

At length, Tokusan took his manuscripts before the Dharma Hall and made a 
bonfire of them, expressing the matter by saying, “Though I have penetrated all 
manner of obscure ways of speaking, it has been like sending a single hair into the 
great void of space. Although I have fully done what the world considers 
important, it has resembled letting a single drop of water fall into a vast canyon.” 
As he put the manuscripts into the fire, they were forthwith consumed. Thereupon, 
he made a respectful obeisance. 



18 

On ‘The Mind Cannot Be Grasped’ 

(Shin Fukatoku) 

WRITTEN VERSION 

Translator’s Introduction: This discourse was not incorporated into the Shobogenzo until some 
time after Dogen’s death. It is likely that he intended the work for his senior monks, since it 
contains some cautionary remarks about well-known Chinese Meditation Masters that might be 
misunderstood by novices or lay disciples. These remarks were made as part of a traditional style 
of Buddhist debate which is undertaken, not as a fonn of one-upmanship, but as a form of 
dialectic intended to ferret out the deepest possible Truth. Dogen’s point in refuting these 
Masters is not that what they said was incorrect, but simply that they did not go far enough in 
their exploration of the Matter. 


At Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple 

The Mind that cannot be grasped is what all Buddhas are, for They 
personally rely upon It as supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. As the 
Diamond-Cutting Scripture says, “The mind of the past cannot be retained; the 
mind of the present cannot be held onto; the mind of the future cannot be grasped.” 
This expression points to the Buddha’s reliance upon the Mind that cannot be held 
onto, which is what all Buddhas do. It is what They have come to rely upon, saying 
that It is the unretainable mind of past, present, and future, and that It is the 
ungraspable Mind of all thoughts and things. If you do not leam from the Buddhas 
what They are relying upon, which is what makes this matter clear, you will not 
directly experience It, and if you do not learn from the Ancestors what They are 
relying upon, you will not be truly Transmitted. ‘To leam’ means ‘to leam from the 
sixteen-foot-tall body’ and ‘to leam from a single blade of grass’. 1 2 ‘Learning from 
the Ancestors’ means ‘to leam from Their Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow’ and 
‘to leam from the face that broke into a broad smile’. What all this fundamentally 


1. The first allusion is to learning from the Buddha’s standing up from His meditation posture 
after having realized enlightenment. The second is to learning from all things, no matter how 
small, since all things express the Dhanna. 

2. The first phrase alludes to Bodhidharma’s passing on of the Dhanna. The second alludes to 
the Buddha’s disciple Makakasho smiling in response to the Buddha’s holding aloft the 
udumbara blossom of His enlightenment. 


195 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


196 


means is that you should study the Matter* by seeking answers to your questions 
from a Master to whom the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching has 
been clearly and correctly Transmitted. This Master has had directly passed on to 
him what the Mind seal * of Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor has 
directly and precisely pointed out. Then, beyond question, that Master’s Bones and 
Marrow, Face and Eyes will be passed on to you, and you will receive the Master’s 
Body, Hair, and Skin. If you do not leam the Way of the Buddhas and do not enter 
the private quarters of an Ancestor, you will not see or hear about It, nor will you 
understand It. The method for asking about It will be beyond you, and you will not 
understand the means for expressing It, even in your dreams. 


When Tokusan, in his earlier days, was still not a solid fellow, he had 
excelled in the Diamond-Cutting Scripture. People at that time called him Chou, 
the Fully Perfected Lord of the Diamond-Cutting Scripture. He was king among 
more than eight hundred scholars. Not only was he well versed in the 
commentaries, particularly those by the Chinese scholar Ch’ing-lung, but he had 
also edited a ton of writings, and there was no lecturer who could stand shoulder- 
to-shoulder with him. When he happened to hear that there was an unsurpassed 
Buddhist Teaching in the South, a Teaching that was being passed on from 
successor to successor, he went there, crossing mountains and rivers, loaded down 
with his own manuscripts. He had stopped to catch his breath by the side of the 
road that led to Master Ryutan’s temple, when an old woman came by. Tokusan 
asked her who she was. 

The old woman replied, “I am an old woman who sells rice 
cakes.” 

Tokusan asked her, “Will you sell me some rice cakes?” 

The old woman said, “Reverend monk, why would you want to 
buy them?” 

Tokusan replied, “I would buy your rice cakes so that I might 
refresh my mind.” 

The old woman remarked, “Reverend monk, that load you’re 
carrying with you is really something!” 

Tokusan replied, “Have you not heard of me? I am the Fully 
Perfected Lord of the Diamond-Cutting Scripture. I have so mastered 
this Scripture that there is nothing in It that I do not understand. What 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


197 


I am carrying with me are my commentaries on the Diamond-Cutting 
Scripture .” 

Upon hearing him say this, the old woman asked, “Reverend 
monk, would you permit an old woman like me to put a question to 
you?” 

Tokusan replied, “Yes, ask whatever you may wish.” 

She said, “I once heard the part in the Diamond-Cutting 
Scripture where it says, ‘The mind of the past cannot be held onto; the 
mind of the present cannot be held onto; the mind of the future cannot 
be held onto.’ Which mind do you think you are going to refresh with 
these rice cakes? If the reverend monk is able to say, I will sell him 
some rice cakes. If the reverend monk is unable to say, I will not sell 
him any rice cakes.” 

Tokusan, at this moment, was so flabbergasted that he could not 
recall how he would have customarily responded, whereupon the old 
woman dismissed him with a flick of her wrist and left without selling 
Tokusan any of her rice cakes. 

How regrettable that a commentator on hundreds of documents, one who had been 
a lecturer for decades, was seen through by a poor old woman posing one measly 
question. It is like the vast difference between someone having a true teacher and 
someone not having one, between someone seeking answers to one’s questions in 
the private quarters of a true teacher and someone not entering the private quarters 
of a true teacher. There are people who, upon hearing the phrase ‘cannot be 
grasped’, have simply assumed that there is nothing to be attained in either case, 
for these people lack the living pathway of practice. Further, there are those who 
say that It cannot be grasped because it is said that we already possess It from the 
first. How does that hit the mark? 

It was on this occasion that Tokusan understood for the first time that a rice 
cake in a picture does not slake one’s hunger. He also realized that, in training and 
practicing in the Way of the Buddhas, one by all means needs to meet ‘such a 
person’.* In addition, he realized that someone who is uselessly caught up only in 
commenting on the Scriptures cannot attain true spiritual strength. Ultimately, he 
trained under Ryutan, and after the path of Master and disciple manifested before 
his very eyes, he unquestionably became ‘such a person’. Nowadays, he is 
recognized not only as an Ancestral predecessor of Ummon and Hogen, but also as 
a teacher and guide both of ordinary people and of those in loftier positions. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


198 


djb 

When we consider this narrative today, we can see that Tokusan, long ago, 
had not yet clarified the Matter. Although nowadays we say that the old woman 
had succeeded in shutting up Tokusan’s mouth, it is difficult to establish whether 
she was, in fact, ‘such a person’. We may conjecture that, having heard the phrase 
‘the mind cannot be grasped’ much earlier, she may have simply thought that the 
mind was something that could not be possessed, and therefore asked him about it 
in the way that she did. If Tokusan had been a solid person, he would have had the 
spiritual strength to be prudent in his responses. Had he been prudent, he would 
have been able to discern whether the old woman was ‘such a person’, but, since it 
was at a time when Tokusan was not yet the awakened ‘Tokusan’, he was not yet 
able to recognize whether the old woman was indeed ‘such a person’. 

What is more, we today are not short of reasons for having doubts about the 
old woman. When Tokusan was unable to speak, why didn’t the old woman 
question him further? She could have said, “You, my reverend monk, are unable to 
respond now, so you should go ahead and put the question to this old woman, and 
I, in response, will say something for the reverend monk’s benefit.” Then, upon 
hearing her own question from Tokusan, if she had some response for him, it 
would be evident whether or not the old woman had the ability to speak true. 

In this way, someone who has the Bones and Marrow, Face and Eye of those 
who trained in the past, as well as the radiance and vivacity of the old Buddhas— 
all of which are due to having the wherewithal from doing the same spiritual 
practice as They did—will not be concerned about either holding onto or letting go 
of such notions as ‘Tokusan’, ‘the old woman’, ‘not being able to grasp’, ‘being 
able to grasp’, ‘rice cakes’, or ‘Mind’. 


What we call ‘Buddha Mind’ is synonymous with the three temporal worlds 
of past, present, and future. This Mind and the three temporal worlds are not 
separated from each other by so much as one single hair’s breadth. Even so, when 
we are discussing the two as things that are distinct and separate from each other, 
then they are farther apart than eighteen thousand breadths of hair. Thus, if I were 
asked what the phrase “This is the mind of the past” means, I would have to say in 
response, “This cannot be grasped.” If I were asked what the phrase “This is the 
mind of the present” means, I would have to say in response, “This cannot be 
grasped.” If I were asked what the phrase “This is the mind of the future” means, I 
would say in response, “This cannot be grasped.” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


199 


As to the mind of which I am speaking, if I say that there is Mind, which at 
the present moment is described as ‘Mind that cannot be grasped,’ then I say, “At 
the present moment, It cannot be grasped.” I do not say, “The mind cannot be 
grasped,” I say in all earnestness, “It cannot be grasped.” I do not say, “The mind 
can be grasped,” I say in all earnestness, “It cannot be grasped.” Further, should 
you ask me, “What is the mind of the past which cannot be grasped?” I would say, 
“It is synonymous with being born and dying, going and coming.” Should you ask, 
“What is the mind of the present which cannot be grasped?” I would say, “It is 
synonymous with being born and dying, going and coming.” Should you ask, 
“What is the mind of the future which cannot be grasped?” I would say, “It is 
synonymous with being bom and dying, going and coming.” 

In sum, there is Buddha Mind, which is the fences and walls, tiles* and 
stones, and all the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds directly experience It as 
something that cannot be held onto. There are only the fences and walls, tiles and 
stones, which are Buddha Mind, and all Buddhas directly experience It in the three 
temporal worlds as ungraspable. What is more, That which is ungraspable within 
the great earth with its mountains and rivers exists there by Its very nature. That 
which is ungraspable in grasses and trees, wind and water, accordingly, is Mind. 
Also, It is what is ungraspable in “Letting our mind abide nowhere and giving rise 
to the Mind.” 3 And also, the Mind Beyond Grasping, which gives voice to the 
eighty thousand Gates by means of all the Buddhas throughout all generations 
everywhere, is the same as this. 

djb 

To cite another example, during the time of National Teacher Echu, 
Tripitaka Master Daini arrived at the capital from far-off India, letting it be known 
publicly that he had the ability to read the minds of others. 4 When the T’ang 
Emperor Su-tsung charged the National Teacher to examine this claim, no sooner 
had the Tripitaka Master laid eyes on the National Teacher than he immediately 
made a full prostration before the National Teacher and then stood to his right. 5 


3. This quotation is the line from the Diamond-Cutting Scripture which triggered Eno’s 
realization of Truth before he left lay life. 

4. ‘National Teacher’ is a Chinese imperial title conferred upon a monk whose devotion to 
spiritual life has been exemplary. Echu served as the emperor’s personal spiritual advisor. 
‘Tripitaka Master’ is a secular title which might be comparable to the present-day ‘professor 
of Buddhology’; it does not imply that the person was necessarily a monk or even a 
practicing Buddhist. The Tripitaka is the general name for the canon of Buddhist Scriptures. 

5. That is, in the position that is least confrontational. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


200 


Thereupon, the National Teacher asked him, “Do you have the 
ability to read the minds of others or not?” 

The Tripitaka Master replied in a humble tone, “I would not 
dare to make such a claim.” 

The National Teacher then said, “Speak! In what place is this 
old monk now?” 

The Tripitaka Master responded, again with a humble tone, 
“The reverend monk is indeed the teacher of this nation, so why does 
he go to the Western River and watch people racing around in their 
boats ?” 6 7 8 

After a rather long time, the National Teacher asked him again, 
“Speak! In what place is this old monk now?” 

The Tripitaka Master replied all humbly, “The reverend monk 
is the teacher of this nation, so why does he go to Tientsin Bridge and 

n 

watch people playing with their pet monkeys?” 

The National Teacher again asked, “Speak! In what place is this 
old monk now?” 

Although the Tripitaka Master remained there quite a long time, 
he did not know what to say. 

The National Teacher rebuked him, saying, “O you wild fox 
spirit, where is your ability to read minds now?” 

o 

The Tripitaka Master still had no response. 


6. ‘The Western River’ flows through the Western Paradise. The Tripitaka Master is saying, in 
effect, “Why do you, who are so saintly that you are already in the Western Paradise, bother 
to pay any attention to us ordinary people who are engaged in worldly, competitive 
pursuits?” 

7. While Tientsin is the name of a major Chinese metropolis, ‘Tientsin Bridge’ literally means 
‘the bridge that leads into the Harbor of Heaven’. The Tripitaka Master is saying in effect, 
“Why do you, who are standing on the very bridge of Heaven, concern yourself with us 
worldly people who are preoccupied with playing around with our everyday minds?” Both 
this and the previous statement are offering seemingly flattering but spiritually meaningless 
remarks in response to the National Teacher’s deeply spiritual question, all the while still 
hinting that he could, indeed, read the minds of others. 

8. Evidently, the Tripitaka Master realized that what he was being asked for required 
something beyond ‘parlor Zen’ responses, but because he did not know what the True Mind 
of the National Teacher was, he was unable to reply. ‘A wild fox spirit’ is a term used 
negatively in Zen Buddhism for a clever and manipulative person who gives teachings that 
are false and misleading. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


201 


Not to know about such matters is bad enough, but not to have heard about 
them, what a pity! The Ancestors of the Buddha and those who are academic 
scholars of the Tripitaka are not equal; they are as different as heaven and earth. 
The Ancestors of the Buddha, having clarified what the Buddha Dharma is, are in 
That Place; academic scholars of the Tripitaka have not yet clarified what It is. 
Truly, when it comes to scholars of the Tripitaka, even ordinary people have been 
scholars of the Tripitaka. They are comparable, for instance, to those who seek for 
position in the literary world. So, even though the Tripitaka Master may have had a 
broad comprehension of the languages of India and China, as well as having been 
trained in reading the minds of others, nevertheless, when it came to ‘Body and 
Mind in the Way of the Buddhas’, he had never seen a thing even in his dreams . 9 
As a result, in his interview with the National Teacher, who had directly 
experienced the level of the Ancestors of the Buddha, the Tripitaka Master was 
seen through. In learning what ‘Mind in the Way of the Buddhas’ means, we need 
to know that the myriad thoughts and things are Mind, and the three worlds of 
desire, form, and beyond form are nothing but Mind. It will be a matter of nothing 
but Mind being nothing but Mind: it will be a matter of this Buddha being your 
very mind. Be there a self, be there an other, neither must be mistaken for the 
‘Mind in the Way of the Buddhas’. Do not vainly drift down the Western River; do 
not stroll about on Tientsin Bridge. Whoever would preserve and accept 
responsibility for ‘Body and Mind in the Way of the Buddhas’ needs to learn how 
to function from the spiritually wise discernment of the Buddha’s Way. 

What we call ‘in the Way of the Buddhas’ means that the whole world is 
Mind, without Its being changed by anything that arises or disappears. And it 
means that the whole of the Dharma is Mind. And we also need to experience the 
whole of Mind as the functioning of spiritually wise discernment. The Tripitaka 
Master had not seen this before, for he was simply a wild fox spirit. So, even the 
first two times that the National Teacher said to him, “Speak!” he had not seen the 
Mind of the National Teacher, for he had not penetrated to the Mind of the 
National Teacher. He was a wild fox cub who was idly playing around with the 
Western River and Tientsin Bridge, with boat races and monkeys, so how could he 
possibly have seen the National Teacher? 

Further, the reason is quite clear why he could not see the place where the 
National Teacher was. When asked three times, “In what place is this old monk 
now?” he did not listen to these words. If he had listened, he would have been able 
to answer, but, since he did not listen, he overlooked it. Had the Tripitaka Master 


9. The phrase ‘Body and Mind in the Way of the Buddhas’ can be understood as a reference to 
the True Nature of Body and Mind as seen from the perspective of an enlightened mind. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


202 


directly experienced the Buddha Dharma by doing his training, he would have 
understood what the National Teacher was saying, and he would have seen the 
Body and Mind of the National Teacher. Because he had not directly experienced 
the Buddha Dharma through undertaking spiritual training in daily life, he had let a 
chance to hear It vainly slip by, even though it might be said that he had been born 
to meet one who was a teacher and guide both of ordinary people and of those in 
loftier positions. How sad and pitiful! 

Speaking in general, how could a worldly scholar of the Tripitaka possibly 
match the everyday practice of the Buddhas and Ancestors, or recognize the 
whereabouts of the National Teacher? And what is more, Indian academic students 
of the Tripitaka could never recognize the everyday practice of the National 
Teacher . 10 But any academic teacher or arrogant scholar could surely understand 
what the Tripitaka Master knew. How could what pedestrian teachers or arrogant 
scholars know possibly match the powers of wise discernment of bodhisattvas* 
about to realize Buddhahood, or even of those ‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’?* 
The Body and Mind of the National Teacher cannot be recognized by an arrogant 
scholar. Indeed, It is not yet clearly comprehended even by bodhisattvas about to 
realize Buddhahood. 

Comments about Body and Mind in our various Buddhist traditions are like 
those in the following discussions. You need to understand them and trust in them, 
for the Dharma of our great teacher, the Venerable Shakyamuni, has never been 
like the teachings of the wild foxes following the Lesser Two Courses* or non- 
Buddhist ways. This is why, from olden times, this one story has been thoroughly 
examined by venerable Masters in various generations. 


There was a monk who once asked Joshu, “Why didn’t the 
Tripitaka Master see where the National Teacher was the third time?” 
Joshu replied, “He did not see where the National Teacher was 
because he was right on the tip of the Tripitaka Master’s nose.” 

Also, there was a monk who once asked Gensha Shibi, “Since 
the National Teacher was already right on the tip of the Tripitaka 
Master’s nose, why didn’t he see it?” Shibi replied, “Simply because 
he was just too close.” 

Kaie Shutan once commented on Shibi’s reply, “If the National 
Teacher was right on the tip of the Tripitaka Master’s nose, why was 


10. Namely, his practice of devoting himself to helping all sentient beings realize the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


203 


he having such difficulty seeing it? After all, he did not recognize that 
the National Teacher was right inside the Tripitaka Master’s Eye.” 

Also, Shibi, as if challenging the Tripitaka Master, once 
remarked, “You, say! Did you even see It the first two times?” 

Setcho Juken later commented on that remark, “Seen through 
the first time! Seen through the second time!” 

Also, there was a monk who once asked Kyozan, “Why didn’t 
the Tripitaka Master see the whereabouts of the National Teacher the 
third time, since he was there a rather long time?” Kyozan replied, 

“The first two times, the National Teacher’s mind was in the realm of 
externals. He then entered the meditative state of delight in the True 
Self, so the Tripitaka Master could not perceive his whereabouts.” 

Although these five venerable Masters were all clearly on the mark, they 
overlooked the National Teacher’s everyday practice. That is, they only discuss the 
Tripitaka Master’s failure to know the third time, so it looks as though they were 
conceding that he knew the previous two times. So, this is something that these 
former worthies have overlooked. 

The concerns that I now have about these five venerable Masters are 
twofold. The first is that they do not recognize the intent behind the National 
Teacher’s way of examining the Tripitaka Master. The second is that they do not 
recognize the National Teacher’s Body and Mind. 

First of all, as to my saying that they apparently did not recognize the intent 
behind the National Teacher’s way of examining the Tripitaka Master, there is the 
question of what the National Teacher intended when he exclaimed, “Speak! In 
what place is this old monk now?” At the time, he was inquiring into whether or 
not the Tripitaka Master understood the Buddha Dharma. If the Tripitaka Master 
had ever heard the Buddha Dharma, he would have been able to see how the words 
he heard as “In what place is this old monk now?” conformed to the Buddha 
Dharma. As to being in conformance with the Buddha Dharma, the National 
Teacher’s saying, “In what place is this old monk now?” is asking, in effect, “Is It 
here? Or is It there? Is It unsurpassed enlightenment? Or is It the wisdom that 
ferries others to the Other Shore? Is It dependent on unbounded space? Or is It 
standing on solid ground? Is It the hermit’s grass hut? Or is It the Treasure 
House?” The Tripitaka Master did not recognize this intent, so he proffered the 
opinion of, say, an ordinary person who wanders through life in ignorance or one 
who follows the two Lesser Courses. The National Teacher again asked, “Speak! 
In what place is this old monk now?” Hereupon, the Tripitaka Master again 
proffered idle words. Again the National Teacher asked, “Speak! In what place is 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


204 


this old monk now?” The Tripitaka Master now said nothing, though a 
considerable time passed. His mind was blank. The National Teacher then rebuked 
him, saying, “O you wild fox spirit, where is your ability to read minds now?” 
Upon the National Teacher’s speaking in this way, the Tripitaka Master still had 
nothing to say. 

When we consider this story carefully, the former worthy Masters all held 
the view that the National Teacher was rebuking the Tripitaka Master because, 
even though he had known the National Teacher’s whereabouts the first two times, 
he did not know it the third time. But this is not the case. In brief, he rebuked the 
Tripitaka Master for being merely a wild fox spirit, someone who had not 
encountered the Buddha Dharma even in his dreams. He did not say that the 
Tripitaka Master did or did not know it the first two times. His rebuke was 
intended for the Tripitaka Master in general. As to the National Teacher’s intent, 
he was wondering in the first place whether one could call the Buddha Dharma the 
ability to read the minds of others. Further, the National Teacher was thinking that, 
even though one may speak of the ability to read the mind of another, one would 
need to understand ‘other’, ‘mind’, and ‘the ability to read’ according to the Way 
of the Buddhas. But what the Tripitaka Master was saying was not in accord with 
the Way of the Buddhas, so how could it possibly be called the Buddha Dharma?” 
As to his examining the Tripitaka Master, even if the latter were to have said 
something the third time, if it was anything like the first two times, it would not 
reflect the principles of Buddha Dharma or the National Teacher’s intent—which 
is why the National Teacher needed to rebuke him. As to the National Teacher’s 
asking three times, he asked again and again in order to find out whether, at any 
time, his words were understood by the Tripitaka Master. 

Second, as to my saying that the five worthy Masters did not recognize the 
Body and Mind of the National Teacher, the Body and Mind of the National 
Teacher was beyond the Tripitaka Master’s ability to recognize, beyond his ability 
to read. The ten times saintly and thrice wise are not up to it, and it is beyond both 
those who are about to become Buddhas and those who have just awakened, so 
how could an ordinary Tripitaka Master possibly recognize it ? 11 You must 
determine what this principle is so that you have no doubts about it. Anyone who 
would hold that the Tripitaka Master could recognize what the Body and Mind of 
the National Teacher was—and be a match for it—is, accordingly, someone who 
does not in the least recognize the Body and Mind of the National Teacher. If you 
were to say that those folks who pursue the ability to read the minds of others can 


11. ‘Those who have just awakened’ is a rendering of a technical Buddhist term for someone 
who has just had a kensho but does not recognize the full import of that experience. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


205 


recognize the Body and Mind of the National Teacher, then can those of the two 
Lesser Courses also recognize it? Because this is not so, people involved in the two 
Lesser Courses cannot possibly reach even the environs of the National Teacher. 
Nowadays, there are many in the two Lesser Courses who read the Mahayana* 
Scriptures, but they too cannot recognize the Body and Mind of the National 
Teacher, and, furthermore, they cannot see the Body and Mind of Buddha Dharma 
even in their dreams. Although they may imitate those who read and recite the 
Mahayana Scriptures, you must clearly recognize that they are, through and 
through, persons of the Lesser Courses. In short, the Body and Mind of the 
National Teacher is beyond anything that can be recognized by those folks who 
chase after spiritual abilities or who practice in order to have ‘a spiritual 
experience’. The Body and Mind of the National Teacher might be difficult even 
for the National Teacher himself to gauge or fathom. And why is that? His 
everyday practice had long been free of any designs to ‘become a Buddha’, so even 
the Eye of a Buddha could not spot it. In his everyday comings and goings, he had 
clearly let go of his cobwebs and dark places, and was beyond anything that a cage 
could imprison or a net ensnare. 

djb 


We can now look at what each of the five worthy Masters was getting at. 

Joshu said, “He did not see where the National Teacher was because he was 
right on the tip of the Tripitaka Master’s nose.” What does this remark mean? 
Errors are likely to occur when we state a conclusion without making clear its 
source. How could the National Teacher possibly be right on the tip of the 
Tripitaka Master’s nose? The Tripitaka Master had not yet recognized that he had a 
Nose . 12 Further, even though it would appear that the National Teacher and the 
Tripitaka Master had a connection that would allow them to ‘see each other’, there 
was no pathway near enough on which they could approach each other. Those who 
are clear-eyed will surely be able to discern this. 

Shibi said, “Simply because he was just too close.” Truly, his being ‘just too 
close’ may well have been the case, but the phrase misses the point. What is it that 
he is calling ‘just too close’? What does he understand as being ‘just too close’? 
Shibi had not yet recognized the Tripitaka Master’s being ‘just too close’, nor had 
Shibi thoroughly examined his being ‘just too close’. For, when it comes to 
Buddha Dharma, the Tripitaka Master was the farthest of the far off. 


12. That is, the Tripitaka Master had not yet seen his Buddha Nature, which is as immediate as 
if It were on the tip of the nose. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


206 


Kyozan replied, “The first two times, the National Teacher’s mind was in the 
realm of externals. He then entered the meditative state of delight in the True Self, 
so the Tripitaka Master could not perceive his whereabouts.” In India, Kyozan 
would have been acclaimed far and wide as a veritable ‘Little Shakyamuni’ for this 
reply, but his remark is not entirely accurate. If he is saying that the place of their 
meeting each other face-to-face was, indeed, in the realm of externals, this is 
tantamount to asserting that the place where Buddhas and Ancestors meet each 
other face-to-face does not exist. That assertion would make it look as if Kyozan 
had not learned the spiritual merits of realizing Buddhahood as the Buddha 
predicted. Kyozan is saying that the first two times the Tripitaka Master truly knew 
the whereabouts of the National Teacher; he should have said that the Tripitaka 
Master did not recognize even a single hair of the spiritual merits of the National 
Teacher. 

Shibi, in challenging the Tripitaka Master, remarked, “Did you even see It 
the first two times?” Though his phrase, “Did you even see It?” seems to say what 
needs to be said, it does imply that what the Tripitaka Master saw resembled That 
which goes beyond seeing. Therefore, it is not right on the mark. 

Hearing of this remark, Clearly Enlightened Meditation Master Setcho 
commented, “Seen through the first time! Seen through the second time!” When 
Setcho took what Shibi said to be the correct way to put it, he could quite rightly 
speak like this. But had he recognized that it was not the correct way to put it, he 
would not have spoken as he did. 

Kaie Shutan said, “If the National Teacher was right on the tip of the 
Tripitaka Master’s nose, why was he having such difficulty seeing it? After all, he 
did not recognize that the National Teacher was right inside the Tripitaka Master’s 
Eye.” This, too, is discussing only the third time. In that Shutan is not looking at 
the first two times, he is not rebuking the Tripitaka Master for the right reason. So, 
even though the National Teacher was on the tip of the Tripitaka Master’s nose and 
within his very eyeballs, how would Shutan know it? 

Every one of these five worthy Masters was blind to what the National 
Teacher had spiritually achieved; their diligent efforts to practice the Buddha 
Dharma seem not to have approached his. You need to realize that the National 
Teacher was none other than a first generation Buddha, for he had clearly had 
Transmitted to him the Buddha’s Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. 
Moreover, people such as Lesser Course academic commentators on the Tripitaka 
do not recognize the whereabouts of the National Teacher, and this story that we 
have been discussing is the proof. What those in the Lesser Course call ‘the ability 
to read the mind of another’ should be called ‘the ability to read the intention of 
another’. It is a mistake to imagine that the ability of a Tripitaka Master of the 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


207 


Lesser Course to read the minds of others is strong enough for such a one to 
recognize a single hair, or even a half a hair, of the National Teacher. One thing to 
earnestly learn from this is that a Tripitaka Master of the Lesser Course is totally 
unable to see where the spiritual accomplishments of the National Teacher are 
located. If, for example, the Tripitaka Master knew the whereabouts of the National 
Teacher the first two times but did not know it the third time, this would have been 
two times out of three, and he ought not to have been rebuked. But, even if he were 
rebuked, it would not have been for a total lack of ability. Had he been rebuked for 
this, who would have any confidence in the National Teacher? The National 
Teacher’s intention was to rebuke the Tripitaka Master for being altogether lacking 
in the Body and Mind of the Buddha Dharma. In that the five worthy Masters did 
not at all understand the everyday practice of the National Teacher, they are, to that 
extent, similarly inaccurate. For this reason I have now let you hear about ‘the 
mind not being able to grasp If in the Way of the Buddhas. Although it may be 
hard for you to believe that people who are unable to thoroughly understand this 
one aspect of the Teaching are apt to understand all the rest of the Teaching, you 
need to realize that ancient Ancestors may also make mistakes and compound 
them, as in this case. 

djb 

A monk once asked the National Teacher, “Just what is the 
mind of the past Buddhas?” 

The National Teacher replied, “Fences and walls, along with 
their tiles and stones.” 

This is also ‘the mind cannot be grabbed hold of’. 

Another time, a monk asked the National Teacher, “Just what is 
the constant mind of all Buddhas?” 

The National Teacher replied, “How fortunate that you have 
bumped into this old monk on his way to pay a visit to the emperor’s 
palace!” 

This also thoroughly explores ‘the Mind that cannot be grasped’. 

On another occasion, a veritable Lord Indra asked the National 
Teacher, “How can we possibly get free of the effects of karma?”* 

The National Teacher replied, “O Heavenly One, you can free 
yourself from the effects of karma by training in the Way.” 

This Lord Indra then asked, “What could this ‘way’ you speak 
of possibly be?” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Mind Cannot be Held Onto written version 


208 


The National Teacher responded, “Your mind at this very 
moment is the Way.” 

The Lord Indra then asked, “And what is this mind of mine at 
this very moment?” 

The National Teacher, pointing with his finger, said, “It is the 
very pedestal of enlightenment: It is the very net of pearls.” 

The Lord Indra bowed in respect. 

In sum, you will often meet with talk about ‘Body and Mind in the Way of the 
Buddhas’ in the assemblies of Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor. 
When we leam of both Body and Mind together, through our training, They are 
beyond what ordinary people, as well as the wise and the saintly, imagine or 
perceive Them to be. “The Mind cannot be held onto” is to be thoroughly 
examined through your practice. 

A day during the summer retreat in the second year of the Ninji era (1241). 



19 

On the Ancient Mirror 

(Kokyd) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen explores a number of metaphorical 
references to mirrors as they appear in various writings from Zen Buddhism and Shinto, the 
native religion of Japan. In particular, he identifies three types of mirror—the Great Round 
Mirror, the Clear Mirror, and the Ancient Mirror—and discusses how these three are interrelated, 
while still distinguishable from each other. 

It may be helpful to keep in mind that kokyd can be rendered not only as the Ancient Mirror 
but also as the Mirror of Old and the Mirror of Former Buddhas. 

Further, Dogen’s references to physical mirrors are to those made from metal that was cast in 
a flat, circular mold and then highly polished on one side. It was not uncommon for such mirrors, 
in time, to be broken up and recast into Buddhist statuary, which was left unpolished. 

As with a few of Dogen’s earlier discourses, some readers may find it useful to read this one, 
in particular, more than once, since there are a number of places where the import of what Dogen 
is saying only becomes clear when later passages are encountered. I have refrained from making 
explanatory comments at these places, lest such remarks undennine the effects of Dogen’s 
particular ‘alogical’ manner of presentation. 

What all Buddhas and Ancestors accept, preserve, and individually pass on 
is the Ancient Mirror. It is Their same view and Their same face: It is Their same 
image and Their same casting, for They have done the same training and have 
realized the same Truth. When foreigners come, foreigners appear in It, be they 
eight thousand or a hundred thousand; when Han come, Han appear in It, be it for a 
single moment or for all of time . 1 When things of the past come, things of the past 
appear in It; when things of the present come, things of the present appear in It. 
When a Buddha comes, a Buddha appears in It; when an Ancestor comes, an 
Ancestor appears in It. 


1. This statement is based on one made by the Chinese Zen Master Seppo, which Dogen 
discusses later in this discourse. ‘Han’ is the name that the Chinese use to refer to 
themselves, as distinct from ‘foreigners’. In Zen texts, it is also used as a term for those who 
are enlightened to their Buddha Nature, as well as for Buddha Nature in general. In addition, 
‘Han and foreigner’ carries the connotation of what we consider to be part of us and what we 
view as separate from ourselves. ‘A hundred thousand’ is often used to express the idea of 
one hundred percent of all the various kinds of something; ‘eight thousand’ would, by 
contrast, convey the notion of a small sampling of those things. 


209 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


210 


djb 

The Eighteenth Ancestor, the Venerable Kayashata, was a person from the 
state of Magadha in the western region of India. He was of Udraka’s clan . 2 3 His 
father’s name was T’ien-kai and his mother’s was Fang-sheng. His mother once 
saw in a dream what she described as a great deity who was carrying a large mirror 
and who had come to greet her. She associated this with her being pregnant. Seven 
days later, she gave birth to the Master. At the time of his birth, his body was like 
lustrous porcelain. Before he had even been bathed, his body was sweet smelling 
and clean. From his earliest days, he was fond of quietude, and his way of putting 
things differed from that of ordinary children. 

From the time he was bom, a clear and bright round mirror naturally 
appeared along with him—the round mirror being the Completely Perfect Mirror— 
a rare occurrence in any generation. Saying that the round mirror appeared along 
with him does not mean that the mirror was born from his mother. The Master was 
in her womb, and then, at the same time that he emerged from her womb, the round 
mirror showed up, spontaneously manifesting itself right near him, as if it were 
some everyday household object. The significance of this term ‘round mirror’ goes 
beyond the conventional meaning. Whenever the child approached anyone, it was 
as if he was holding a round mirror up in front of him with his two hands —yet it 
did not conceal the child’s face. As the child departed, it was as if he was leaving 
with the round mirror carried upon his back—yet it did not conceal the child’s 
body. When the child was sleeping, the round mirror hung above him, resembling a 
canopy of flowers. When the child was sitting upright, the round mirror was right 
before his face. In sum, the two accompanied each other, regardless of his 
demeanor or his behavior, whether he was active or still. 

Not only that, but by looking into this round mirror he was able to see all the 
activities of Buddhas past, present, and future. Also, at no time were any of the 
everyday doings of either ordinary people or those in lofty positions clouded from 
his sight as they floated across the round mirror. For example, by looking in this 
mirror, he could clarify what had been illumined both in the past and in the present 
better than others could by resorting to Scriptural texts or secular writings. 
Nevertheless, when the child left home to be a monk and took the Precepts, the 
round mirror ceased to manifest before the eyes of others from that time on . 4 

2. Udraka Ramaputra was one of Shakyamuni Buddha’s teachers before His enlightenment. 

3. Tien-kai means ‘He Who is a Heavenly Canopy of Light’; Fang-sheng means ‘She Who is 
Saintly in All Ways’. 

4. That is, he ceased to appear as someone different or special. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


211 


Thus it was that people in nearby villages, as well as those from a 
considerable distance, all praised this manifestation as something rare and 
wondrous, for truly, its like is rarely encountered in this everyday world of ours. 
Even so, we should be prudent and not be surprised if there are similar offspring in 
families elsewhere. Beyond doubt, we should recognize that there are passages 
from the Scriptures that have been transformed into such things as trees and stones, 
and that there are spiritual friends who are spreading the Teaching through field 
and town. These too must surely be round mirrors. And the Scripture scrolls we 
have today, with their yellowed paper and their red spindles, are also round 
mirrors. 

Then one day, while he was out and about, Kayashata came upon the 
Venerable Sogyanandai. He immediately stepped forward and went up to the 
Venerable Sogyanandai. The venerable one asked the child, “That which you have 
in your hands, is it truly what the What shows?” Once you realize that he is not 
asking, “What does that which you have show?” you should examine his remark 
carefully. Kayashata replied in verse: 

The Great Round Mirror of all Buddhas 
Is neither flawed within nor beclouded without. 

We two can see It the same way, 

For we are alike in both Mind and Eye. 

Since what he said is so, how could the Great Round Mirror have been born 
at the same time as Kayashata? Kayashata’s life, from the time he was bom up to 
that very moment, was the brightness of the Great Round Mirror. All Buddhas train 
alike and see alike: all Buddhas are cast images of the Great Round Mirror. The 
Great Round Mirror is not sagacity, nor is It intellectual reasoning; It is not one’s 
Tme Nature or Its outer form. Although the term ‘the Great Round Mirror’ exists 
within the Teaching of the ‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’,* it is not the same as 
‘the Great Round Mirror of all Buddhas’ that he just spoke of. Because all Buddhas 
are unquestionably beyond sagacity, all Buddhas have wise discernment, and wise 
discernment is not to be taken as what all Buddhas are. 

Talking about wisdom is not the best way to voice what the Buddha taught. 
You need to realize this by investigating it through your training and practice. Even 
if we experience the Great Round Mirror of all Buddhas as having been bom at the 
same time that we were, there are the following facts. This Great Round Mirror of 
which we are speaking might not be experienced in your life or in the life of 
another. It is not a mirror made from jewels, or a mirror made from copper, or a 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


212 


mirror made from flesh, or a mirror made from marrow. Was the poem what the 
Round Mirror voiced, or was the poem what the child spoke? The child’s giving 
voice to this four-line poem was not something that he had ever learned through 
scholarly study with anyone, or through perusing works of Scripture, or through 
following a spiritual friend: he spoke as he did whilst holding the Round Mirror 
aloft. From the time he was a child, he was always accustomed to facing the 
Mirror. It was as if he had been bom with the knowledge of how to put wise 
discernment into expression. Was the Great Round Mirror born at the same time as 
the child, or was the child bom at the same time as the Great Round Mirror? Surely 
it is possible that one was bom before the other. The Great Round Mirror is neither 
more nor less than the meritorious actions of all Buddhas. 

When we say that this Mirror is unstained both within and without, we mean 
that It is not an inside that depends upon something outside, or an outside blurred 
by something inside. It has never had a front and a back: both perspectives can be 
viewed alike, for the Mind and Eye of Sogyanandai and Kayashata resembled each 
other. ‘Resembling each other’ means that ‘a person’ has encountered another 
‘person’. Even the forms and images within have minds and eyes, and can likewise 
see: even the forms and images without have minds and eyes, and can likewise see. 
Both their outer, objective world and their inner, subjective being, as they now 
appeared, resembled each other within and resembled each other without. They 
were beyond ‘I’, beyond ‘other’—this is just two ‘persons’ looking at each other, 
two ‘persons’ being alike. The one who is ‘other’ also speaks of himself as ‘I’, and 
your ‘I’ is also his ‘other’. 

In his statement “We are alike in both Mind and Eye,” the Mind of the one 
was like the Mind of the other, and the Eye of the one was like the Eye of the other. 
The likeness was of Mind and Eye . 5 It is, for instance, as though Kayashata had 
said that both the Mind and the Eye of each of them were alike. What does it mean 
that the Mind of one is like the Mind of another? It is in the sense of the Third 
Ancestor and the Sixth Ancestor . 6 What does it mean that the Eye of one is like the 
Eye of another? It is in the sense of an Eye for the Way being hindered by one’s 
eyes. 


5. That is, their understanding and view of things were the same. 

6. Not only were the Third Ancestor and the Sixth Ancestor of like mind spiritually, their 
religious names were also connected. The former was called Kanchi, ‘He Who is the 
Mirror’s Wise Discernment’, and the latter Daikan, ‘He Who is the Great Mirror’. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


213 


Such is the import of what Kayashata was now enunciating. This was the 
fundamental means by which he first paid his respects to the Venerable 
Sogyanandai. When you undertake to express what the import of this is, you 
should examine through your training the face of Buddhas and the face of 
Ancestors in your Great Round Mirror, for They are akin to the Ancient Mirror. 


Once while the Thirty-third Ancestor, Meditation Master Daikan Eno, was 
training hard in doing seated meditation in the monastery on Mount Obai, he 
composed a poem for his Master, Daiman Konin, which he wrote on the wall: 

Enlightenment really has no tree it abides in, 

Nor is the Clear Mirror a mirrored dressing-stand. 

From the first not a single thing exists, 

7 

So from where is dust or dirt to arise? 

We need to explore what this is saying. People in his generation called Great 
Ancestor Eno the Old Buddha. Meditation Master Engo said, “The Old Buddha 
Daikan Eno is the one 1 bow to in deepest respect.” Thus, you need to recognize 
that Great Ancestor Daikan Eno displayed the Clear Mirror through his saying, 
“From the first not a single thing exists, so from where is dust or dirt to arise?” 

“Nor is the Clear Mirror a mirrored dressing-stand.” This statement contains 
the very lifeblood that we should strive hard to comprehend. All that is clear and 
bright is the Clear Mirror; thus it is said, “When a bright-headed one comes, a 
bright-headed one responds in kind.” Because It is beyond being any ‘where’, there 
is no ‘where’ for It to be in. What is more, can there possibly be a single dust mote 
anywhere in the universe that is not in the Mirror? Can there possibly be a single 
dust mote on the Mirror that is not of the Mirror? Keep in mind that the whole 
universe is beyond being merely ‘lands as numerous as dust motes’. As a 
consequence, the universe is the face of the Ancient Mirror. 


7. The allusions in this poem are to another poem written by Daiman Konin’s chief disciple, 
whom monks at the monastery thought would be Konin’s Dharma heir: 

Our body is a bodhi tree, 

Our mind like a dressing-stand with its clear mirror; 

Time upon time let us strive to wipe it clean 
And let not dust or dirt abide thereon. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


214 


djb 

A monk once asked Meditation Master Nangaku Ejo, “Just as 
with a mirror that has been melted down and recast into a religious 

o 

statue, where does a monk’s previous brightness go to?” 

The Master replied, “Reverend monk, after you left home to 
become a monk, where did your various facial expressions go off to?” 

The monk responded, “After someone has fully realized the 
Truth, why does he not shine like a mirror?” 

The Master said, “Although he may not shine like a mirror, he 
cannot in the least deceive anyone as to what he has realized.” 

If you are not clear about what these myriad images now before us are, you 
would do well to inquire into the matter. Should you do so, you have the words of 
the Master about realizing the brightness that has already been cast into the Mirror. 
The Mirror is not of gold or of jewels, and It is not Its brightness or Its images, yet 
no sooner is Its form cast than the Mirror is, beyond doubt, completely clear. 

“Where does a monk’s previous brightness go to?” is a way of saying that it 
is a form like that of a recast mirror in the monk’s remark, “It is like a mirror that 
has been melted down and recast into a religious statue.” In other words, images go 
back to the place of images, and casting can make a mirror. 

Asking where the facial features of the reverend monk went off to after he 
left home to become a monk was the Master’s holding up of the Mirror and letting 
his Face shine. Right now, from among all the faces, which is your own True Face? 

When the Master said, “Although he may not shine like a mirror, he cannot 
in the least deceive anyone as to what he has realized,” he meant that he cannot 
force the Mirror to shine and that he cannot deceive others about Its shining. You 
need to inquire into the saying that, even were the ocean to dry up, it would not 
reach the state where its bed is completely exposed. Do not attempt to shatter It; do 
not let yourself be agitated by It. Even so, you need to inquire into the principle of 
‘picking out images and casting mirrors’. At this very moment, within the hundreds 
of myriad shining facets of the Mirror, one may be deceived by bit after bit. 


8. That is, someone whilst still in lay life may exhibit a spontaneous brightness which 
dissolves after the person begins to train as a monk, as was the case with Kayashata. The 
monk’s question, however, implies a distinction between ‘us monks’ and ‘those lay people’. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


215 


djb 

Great Master Seppo Shinkaku once told his assembly, “If you 
want to understand this matter, our here-and-now existence is just like 
one face of the Ancient Mirror. When a foreigner comes, a foreigner 
appears in It; when a Han comes, a Han appears in It.” 

Gensha Shibi then came forth and asked, “How about when you 
suddenly encounter a Clear Mirror coming towards you?” 

The Master replied, “Both foreigner and Han disappear.” 

Shibi commented, “It is not that way with this one.” 

Seppo asked, “How is it with you?” 

Shibi replied, “Please put my question to me, Reverend Monk.” 

Seppo said, “How about when you suddenly encounter a Clear 
Mirror coming towards you?” 

Shibi answered, “It is shattered into hundreds of pieces!” 

‘This matter’ of which Seppo is speaking in the present instance should be 
examined through your training and practice as ‘this matter of the What’. 9 Let’s 
begin by looking at and investigating Seppo’s ‘Ancient Mirror’. In his saying that 
our here-and-now existence is just like one face of the Ancient Mirror, ‘one face’ 
means that boundaries have long been eliminated and that ‘within and without’ 
have also been passed beyond; it is our being as a pearl rolling about on a flat 
board. 

Now, “When a foreigner comes, a foreigner appears in It” is an allusion to 
one of the red beards. 10 As to “When a Han comes, a Han appears in It,” although 
the Han have been so called since primeval times—that is, after the time of P’an- 
ku, when they first showed up in a physical form 11 —the ‘Han’ of which Seppo is 
now speaking is the Han who appears through the functioning of the Ancient 
Mirror. 


9. Buddha Nature is sometimes referred to in Chinese Zen texts as ‘the What’. It is called this 
because all specific names tend to limit That Which is Beyond All Limits to something that 
the intellect can handle. 

10. All those who are not of Han descent have long been considered by the Chinese to be 
foreigners and red-bearded barbarians, regardless of their actual physical appearance or how 
long they or their ancestors have lived in China. 

11. P’an-ku is the Chinese legendary ‘first human’, born from primordial chaos. Upon his death, 
other humans came into being, and were considered to be either Chinese (Han) or 
barbarians. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


216 


Since ‘Han’ in the present instance does not refer to the Han people, he 
speaks of ‘the Han coming’. One might add to Seppo’s statement, “Both foreigner 
and Han disappear,” that the Mirror also disappears from one’s sight. Although 
Shibi’s statement, “It is shattered into hundreds of pieces,” is the very way it 
should be put, what he meant was, “When I previously asked you to hand me back 
a concrete fragment, why did you give me your Clear Mirror?” 


12 

In the time of the Yellow Emperor, there were twelve mirrors. A traditional 
explanation is that Heaven bestowed them on him. It is also said that they were 
given to him by the Taoist hermit Kuang-cheng-tsu on Mount Kung-tung. The 
procedure for using these twelve mirrors was that one was used for each of the 
twelve two-hour periods of a day. Also, one was used for each of the twelve 
months of every year, and they were used, one after the other, for each year in a 
twelve-year cycle. It is said that the mirrors were Kuang-cheng-tsu’s scriptural 
texts. In bestowing these texts on the Yellow Emperor, the twelve two-hour 
periods and so forth became mirrors. In this way, they illumined the past and 
illumined the present. If the twelve two-hour periods of a day were not mirrors, 
how could they possibly illumine the past? If the twelve periods were not mirrors, 
how could they possibly illumine the present? ‘The twelve two-hour periods’ are 
twelve surfaces; the twelve surfaces are twelve mirrors. What is called ‘past and 
present’ are reflected by the twelve time periods, and they display this principle. 
Although this is a mundane explanation, the Han appears within the twelve periods 
of each day. 

The Yellow Emperor Hsien-yuan climbed Mount Kung-tung on 
his hands and knees to ask Kuang-cheng-tsu about the Tao. At the 
time Kuang-cheng-tsu said, “Mirrors are the source of yin and yang; 
they are ever what regulate the body. By nature, there are three kinds 
of mirror: one called ‘the Mirror of Heaven’, one called ‘the Mirror of 
Earth’, and one called ‘the Human Mirror’. These ‘mirrors’ are 
invisible and inaudible. When you become calm by being self- 
possessed, your body will naturally be upright. Beyond question, they 
will quiet you and purify you, so that nothing will trouble your body 


12. The legendary third emperor of China. 

13. That is, they were not actual mirrors but writings that the Emperor could look into in order 
to help him see how to handle various aspects of ruling. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


217 


and nothing will perturb your spirit. Thus, you will be able to live a 
long life.” 

In the distant past, emperors used these three mirrors to govern the people 
and attend to the Greater Path. Someone who was clear about this Greater Path was 
considered Lord of Heaven and Earth. A secular work says, “The T’ang dynasty 
Emperor T’ai-tsung regarded people as mirrors, whereby he illumined and 
comprehended situations, so that he might defuse what was dangerous and regulate 
what was disorderly.” He was using one of the three mirrors. Hearing that he 
treated people as mirrors, you may think that, by his consulting highly literate 
persons about matters past and present, he was able to know how and when to 
make use of wise and sage ones, as, for example, in his procuring the services of 
ministers like Wu-cheng and Fang-hsuan-ling. To understand the situation in this 
manner is far from the principle enunciated by the statement “T’ai-sung regarded 
people as mirrors.” ‘To regard people as mirrors’ means to regard a mirror as a 
mirror, to regard oneself as a mirror, to regard the five elements as a mirror, 14 and 
to regard each of the five Confucian virtues of justice, politeness, wisdom, fidelity, 
and benevolence as a mirror. The principle of the Human Mirror is used in looking 
at the comings and goings of human beings, and is said to be, “Of their coming, 
there is no trace; of their departing, there is no quarter to which they go.” This 
principle encompasses all the myriad thoughts and deeds of the clever and the 
inept: it is like the ever-changing conditions in the sky. Truly, it is the very woof 
and warp of things. It is the face of humans and the face of the Mirror, the face of 
the sun and the face of the moon. The vitality of the five peaks and the vitality of 
the four long rivers have cleansed the four seas for ever so long, for this is the 
custom of mirrors. 15 To be clear about human beings and to evaluate the woof and 
warp of things is said to be T’ai-sung’s way. And it did not merely consist of 
consulting persons of learning. 

djb 

Ever since the Age of the Divine Beings, Japan has had three 
mirrors which, along with the sacred jewels and the sacred sword, 
have been passed on up to the present day. One mirror is in the Great 
Shrine at Ise, one is in the Hinokuma Shrine in Kinokuni, and one is 
in the Imperial Sanctuary of the Emperor’s Palace. 

14. The five elements are earth, water, fire, wind and space. 

15. The five peaks are Mount Heng in the north, Mount Ho in the south, Mount Tai in the east, 
Mount Hua in the west, and Mount Sung in the center. The four rivers are the Yangtze, the 
Yellow, the Huai, and the Chi. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


218 


It is clear that all nations pass down and preserve a mirror. Those who 
possess the mirror possess the country. We have inherited what people have passed 
on to us, namely, that these three mirrors have been handed down along with the 
Imperial Divine Throne, and that they were introduced by the Heavenly Deity 
Amaterasu-Omikami. Even so, their finely tempered copper is also something 
wrought from materials partaking of yin and yang. 16 When the present comes, the 
present may well appear in them; when the past comes, the past may well appear in 
them. The mirror that illumines and commands a view of past and present, this will 
be the Ancient Mirror. 

djb 


The principle that Seppo recounted earlier can also be stated as, “When a 
Korean comes, a Korean appears in It; when a Japanese comes, a Japanese appears 
in It,” and as, “When a lofty being comes, a lofty being appears in It; when an 
ordinary person comes, an ordinary person appears in It.” Through our training and 
practice, we explore the matter of their coming and appearing in this manner, but 
even so, it is beyond us to know, at present, the cause of these appearances; it is 
simply a matter of their coming into view. Undoubtedly, you are not to explore 
comings and appearances as something to be known about, something to be 
comprehended. Is the principle that is now being expressed saying that the 
foreigner who comes is the foreigner who appears? The coming of a foreigner will 
be one instance of a foreigner coming, and the appearing of a foreigner will be one 
instance of a foreigner appearing. And yet, such a one does not come for the sake 
of appearing. This is what you should have for your investigation, even though the 
Ancient Mirror may be for you the Ancient Mirror. 

When Shibi came forth and asked, “How about when you suddenly 
encounter a Clear Mirror coming towards you?” what he was saying is something 
that we need to inquire into and clarify. How much weight should we give to the 
term ‘clear’ that he is using at present? We might put it this way, “In that its 
coming is not necessarily that of a foreigner or of a Han, it is a Clear Mirror; 
further, it need not manifest before our very eyes as either a foreigner or a Han.” 
The coming of the Clear Mirror is simply the coming of the Clear Mirror, and it is 
not a matter of there being two Mirrors, one Clear and one Ancient. Although there 
are not two Mirrors, ‘the Ancient Mirror’ refers to the Ancient Mirror, and ‘the 
Clear Mirror’ refers to the Clear Mirror. Directly experiencing that there is the 
Ancient Mirror and that there is the Clear Mirror is what Seppo and Shibi were 


16. That is, despite their legendary origin, these sacred shrine mirrors are physical objects, 
unlike the Ancient Mirror that Dogen has been discussing. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


219 


expressing through words. According to the Buddha’s Way, we should consider 
these mirrors respectively as the True Nature and how the True Nature manifests. 
Shibi’s speaking of a Clear Mirror coming should be understood as being totally 
penetrating and as clear as a bell. In meeting someone, he would probably display 
It forthwith; by the directness of his displaying It, he would probably have a 
positive influence on the person. So, are the ‘clear’ of the Clear Mirror and the 
‘ancient’ of the Ancient Mirror the same, or are they different? Does the Clear 
Mirror have the nature of being ancient or not? Does the Ancient Mirror have the 
nature of being clear or not? Do not understand from the words ‘the Ancient 
Mirror’ that It must be clear. The main point is that the principle of “I too am like 
this, you too are like this, and all the Indian Ancestors are also like this” should be 
quickly cultivated. In the words of Shibi’s disciple, Ancestral Master Kinkazan 
Koto, “The Ancient Mirror is polished.” Might it also be so for the Clear Mirror? 
We should by all means have as our investigation through training and practice an 
exploration that broadly spans the sayings of all the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Seppo’s statement, “Both the foreigner and the Han disappear,” means that 
foreigner and Han will both disappear the moment that the Clear Mirror has 
appeared. What is the meaning of this principle of ‘both disappearing’? Since the 
foreigner’s and the Han’s having already come and appeared does not get in the 
way of the Ancient Mirror, why should they both disappear now? Even though, 
from the perspective of the Ancient Mirror, “When a foreigner comes, a foreigner 
appears in It; when a Han comes, a Han appears in It,” from the perspective of the 
Clear Mirror, the foreigner and the Han that appeared in the Ancient Mirror both 
disappear because of the natural coming of the Clear Mirror. Thus Seppo’s 
statement also implies that the Ancient Mirror has Its face and the Clear Mirror has 
Its. You definitely need to be clear about the principle that when the Clear Mirror 
duly comes, It will not impede either the foreigner or the Han that appeared in the 
Ancient Mirror. The function of the Ancient Mirror about which we are now 
speaking, such that “When a foreigner comes, a foreigner appears in It; when a 
Han comes, a Han appears in It,” is not saying that they come and appear upon the 
Ancient Mirror, or within the Ancient Mirror, or apart from the Ancient Mirror, or 
along with the Ancient Mirror. We need to listen carefully to what is being said 
here. At the time of the foreigner and the Han coming and appearing, the Ancient 
Mirror is causing foreigner and Han to appear. If you were to say, “At the time 
when both foreigner and Han disappear, the Mirror will continue to remain there,” 
you would be in the dark about ‘appearing’ and would not be paying attention to 
‘coming’. Even calling you confused would not reach the mark. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


220 


Shibi commented, “It is not that way with me.” 

Seppo asked, “How is it with you?” 

Shibi replied, “Please put my question to me, Reverend Monk.” 

Do not idly stumble past the words, “Please put my question to me,” which 
Shibi is now uttering. Were there not full and sweet accord between ‘parent’ and 
‘child’, how could the coming forth of the reverend monk’s question and the 
request for the reverend monk to ask the question in turn take the form they did? At 
the time when Shibi was saying, “Please put my question to me, Reverend Monk,” 
he would surely have been ‘such a person’* and thus would have already reached 
the place from which his Master’s question arose. When there is a thundering forth 
from the place of the question, there is no time to escape from it. 

Seppo asked, “How about when you suddenly encounter a Clear 

Mirror coming towards you?” 

The place of this question is the one Ancient Mirror which both ‘parent’ and 
‘child’—that is, Master and disciple—are mastering together. 

Shibi replied, “It is shattered into hundreds of pieces!” 

This statement shatters It into hundreds of myriad bits. “When you suddenly 
encounter a Clear Mirror coming towards you” is equivalent to Its being shattered 
into hundreds of pieces. That which experiences being shattered into hundreds of 
pieces is the Clear Mirror, because when you give expression to the Clear Mirror, It 
is shattered into hundreds of pieces. What the shattered pieces are dependent on is 
the Clear Mirror. Do not take the narrow view that there was an earlier time when 
It was not yet shattered and there will be a later time when It will no longer be 
shattered. It is, simply, shattered into hundreds of pieces. When someone comes 
face-to-face with any of these hundreds of fragments, it will be with just one 
isolated fragment. Despite this, do you describe the hundreds of shattered pieces 
that we are speaking of now as the Ancient Mirror or do you describe them as the 
Clear Mirror? You should ask again for a single word of clarification to turn things 
around for you. At the same time, such a word will be beyond your describing 
these pieces as the Ancient Mirror, and beyond your describing them as the Clear 
Mirror. Even though Shibi was able to bring forth the question about the Ancient 
Mirror and the Clear Mirror, when we discuss his way of putting the Matter,* 
might it be that the words which come to the tip of our tongue to describe that 
which manifests before our very eyes simply as ‘walls and fences with their stones 
and tiles’ * probably was, for him, ‘hundreds of shattered pieces’? 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


221 


And what form do the shatterings take? Myriad deep pools the color of 
antique jade, with the moon in the realm of unbounded space. 


While Great Master Seppo Shinkaku and Meditation Master 
Sansho Enen were traveling together, they saw a group of red-faced 
apes, whereupon Seppo said, “Each of these red-faced apes is carrying 
the Ancient Mirror upon its back.” 

We need to consider these words of his very carefully. The term ‘red-faced apes’ 
customarily refers to a particular type of monkey. The red-faced apes that Seppo 
saw, of what sort would they have been? You need to inquire in this manner, and 
make further diligent effort to understand. Pay no attention to how long it takes. 

His words “Each of them is carrying the Ancient Mirror upon its back” mean 
that, even though the Ancient Mirror is the face of all the Buddhas and Ancestors, 
the Ancient Mirror is the Ancient Mirror, even from Their higher perspective. His 
saying that all the red-faced apes were carrying mirrors on their backs means that 
there were no larger or smaller mirrors, but that each was the one Ancient Mirror. 
The phrase ‘carrying on their backs’ means ‘being backed by’ in the sense, for 
instance, of the backing material used behind pictures and statues of the Buddha. 
When the backs of the red-faced apes are backed, they are backed by the Ancient 
Mirror. “What kind of glue have they come to use?” you may ask. To try to put it 
into words, “The back of the apes is backed by the Ancient Mirror. But is the back 
of the Ancient Mirror backed by red-faced apes? It is we who back the back of the 
Ancient Mirror with an Ancient Mirror. It is we who back the back of the ape with 
an ape.” The phrase ‘one mirror for each back’ will not be an empty teaching, for it 
is a statement that fully expresses the Truth. 

So, which is it, red-faced ape or Ancient Mirror? Ultimately, how should we 
put it? Are we just red-faced apes? Are we not red-faced apes? To whom are we to 
put the question? Whether we are red-faced apes is beyond our own knowledge and 
beyond the knowledge of others. Whether we are ourselves is beyond our ability to 
discover. 

Enen replied, “For eons beyond measure, It has been nameless, 
so why are you expressing It as ‘the Ancient Mirror’? 

This is one aspect, one facet, whereby Enen certified his realization of the Ancient 
Mirror. His phrase ‘for eons beyond measure’ means ‘before any single moment of 
consciousness, any single thought, has sprouted up’; it means ‘within any span of 
time, nothing has exposed its head’. His term ‘nameless’ means ‘the face of the 
Sun, the face of the Moon, and the face of the Ancient Mirror for eons beyond 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


222 


measure’. If the Nameless were not truly nameless, the eons beyond measure 
would not yet be for eons beyond measure. If the eons beyond measure were not 
entirely eons beyond measure, Enen’s expression could not express It. Even so, the 
phrase ‘before any single thought has sprouted up’ means ‘today’. So, cultivate 
yourself, without letting yourself stumble past today. Truly, the fame of this epithet 
‘nameless for eons beyond measure’ has been heard on high. 

And what do I call the Ancient Mirror? The Head of the Dragon, the Tail of 
the Snake! 

At this time, Seppo might have turned to Enen and said, “The Ancient 
Mirror! The Ancient Mirror!” but that is not how he replied. 

Seppo responded, “A flaw has emerged!” 

What he meant by this was that a scratch has appeared. We may think, “How 
could a flaw have possibly been produced in the Ancient Mirror?” but the Ancient 
Mirror’s yielding a flaw must mean that Enen’s saying “It is nameless for eons 
beyond measure” is indeed a scratch. ‘The Ancient Mirror’s yielding a flaw’ refers 
to the whole Ancient Mirror. Enen had not yet emerged from the dark realm of 
“Oh, the Ancient Mirror has produced a flaw!” so the understanding that he 
expressed through his words was neither more nor less than a flaw in the Ancient 
Mirror. Thus, we examine through our training and practice that flaws appear even 
in the Ancient Mirror, and that even those things from which flaws are produced 
are also the Ancient Mirror; this is our learning through our practice what the 
Ancient Mirror is. 

Enen responded, “What has such deadly urgency? Besides, I 

don’t even know what the topic of our conversation is.” 

The main point of what he said is “What is so deadly urgent?” You need to 
apply yourself unremittingly and investigate through your training and practice 
whether ‘deadly urgency’ refers to today or to tomorrow, to oneself or to others, to 
the whole universe or to some place within the land of Great T’ang China. As to 
the topic alluded to in the phrase ‘not even knowing what the topic of our 
conversation is’, there is the topic that is being expressed, the topic that has not yet 
been expressed, and the topic that has already been completely expressed. The 
principle of these topics is ever manifest before our very eyes. For instance, the 
topic is also one’s realizing the Truth simultaneously with the great earth and all its 
sentient beings. It is beyond being ‘mended brocade’. This is why it is ‘not 


17. Being beyond ‘mended brocade’ is a metaphor for the Truth being seamless, as It is not 
something composed of bits and pieces of this and that sewn together. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


223 


known’. It is ‘the one who faced His Imperial Majesty and said that he did not 

1 o 

personally know That One’. It is our not knowing That which is right before our 
face. It is not that the Topic does not exist, it is simply that It is beyond our 
knowing. His ‘not knowing It’ is a manifestation of his sincerity; it is also his not 
seeing his own brightness and clarity. 

Seppo said, “The old monk has made a blunder.” 

This turn of phrase is usually said with the meaning of “I have put it badly,” 
but it need not have this intent. ‘The old monk’ refers to the Old One who is Lord 
of the House. Do not undertake to study other matters; just examine ‘the Old 
Monk’ through your training. Though He has a thousand changes and ten thousand 
transformations, be they the face of a god or the countenance of a demon, what you 
examine is the Old Monk’s ‘just one move at a time’. And though He comes as a 
Buddha or comes as an Ancestor, be it for a single moment or for all of time, what 
you examine is the Old Monk’s ‘just one move at a time’. ‘Making a blunder’ 
refers to the One who is Master of the Temple having lots to do. When you think 
about it, Seppo was an outstanding disciple of Tokusan, and Enen was a wondrous 
supporter of Rinzai. Neither of these two venerable veterans sprang from humble 
lineage: the former was a distant descendant of Seigen, the latter was in the long 
line from Nangaku. How they came to reside in, and keep to, the Ancient Mirror is 
as given above. They should be paragons for trainees in later ages. 


Seppo, in addressing his assembly, once said, “When the width 
of the world is ten feet, the width of the Ancient Mirror will be ten 
feet; when the width of the world is one foot, the width of the Ancient 
Mirror will be one foot.” 

At that time Shibi pointed to the hearth and said, “Can you tell 
us just how wide our charcoal burner is?” 19 


18. An allusion to Bodhidharma’s interview with Emperor Wu of Liang. When the emperor 
asked him who it was that was facing His Imperial Majesty, Bodhidharma replied, “I do not 
personally know that one,” because he was already rid of any false, socially conventional 
sense of a self. 

19. On a literal level, the charcoal burner is a cauldron-shaped brazier around which monks 
customarily sat to warm themselves. It was also sometimes used in preparing such foods as 
rice and dumplings. The term is also sometimes used to refer to the hara, i.e., the belly, as 
the furnace for heating up our training, so that we are able to dissolve the ice-like hardness 
of our egoistic desires and to make palpable what spiritually sustains us. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


224 


Seppo replied, “It resembles the width of the Ancient Mirror.” 

Shibi responded, “The venerable Han has not let even a heel 

touch the ground!” 

If we say that the width of our world is ten feet, our world will be ten feet wide; if 
we treat the width of our world as one foot, our world will be one foot wide. 
Moreover, the ‘ten feet’ we are speaking of now and the ‘one foot’ we are speaking 
of now are not some arbitrary linear measurements in feet. In examining this 
dialogue, people customarily speak of the width of the world as being ‘the three- 
thousand great-thousandfold worlds, immeasurable and boundless’ or as being ‘the 
world of inexhaustible thoughts and things’, but this is like our own self of small 
measure pointing to other villages in our vicinity. When worlds like these are 
proposed, they measure ‘ten feet’. This is why Seppo said, “When the width of the 
Ancient Mirror is ten feet, the width of the world is ten feet.” In examining this 
‘ten feet’, you will catch a glimpse of one part of ‘the width of the world’. 

Further, in hearing the term ‘the Ancient Mirror’, one may envisage a sheet 
of thin ice, but It is not so. Although Its width of ten feet is at one with the width of 
the world being ten feet, does It necessarily stand shoulder-to-shoulder in form and 
likeness with the limitlessness of the world? Or are the Ancient Mirror and the 
world’s limitlessness like fellow trainees, side by side? You should make a diligent 
effort to consider what this is saying. 

What is more, the Ancient Mirror is not like a single pearl. Do not view It as 
being bright or dark; do not visualize It as being square or round. Even though the 
whole universe in all ten directions is the One Bright Pearl, this is not to be equated 
with the Ancient Mirror. Accordingly, the Ancient Mirror does not depend on the 
comings and appearances of foreigners or Han, for It is every single thing’s being 
as unobstructed as a bell’s clear resounding in all directions. It is beyond being 
many, beyond being large. 

‘Width’ refers to Its measurements, and the term goes beyond what is meant 
by ‘broad’ or ‘narrow’. That latter use of ‘width’ is like conventionally speaking of 
‘two inches’ or ‘three inches’, or counting ‘seven things’ or ‘eight things’. In the 
Buddhist way of counting, we use the term ‘two ounces’ to describe those who 
have had a great awakening and ‘three ounces’ to describe those who have gone 
beyond having awakened. 20 In counting Buddhas and Ancestors, we express the 
matter as their being of the ‘fifth generation’ or ‘tenth generation’ from 


20. To paraphrase, those who have had a great awakening have realized a bit of the Truth; those 
who have gone beyond having awakened have realized a bit more of the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


225 


Shakyamuni Buddha. Ten feet is the width of the Ancient Mirror; the width of the 
Ancient Mirror is one span. 

Shibi’s asking about the width of the charcoal burner is an expression that is 
out in the open; you should explore it till you are a thousand or ten thousand years 
old. In looking at the charcoal burner now, from what perspective do we view it? 
When we look at the charcoal burner, it is not something that is ‘seven feet’ or 
‘eight feet’. This question of his was not posed during the time when he was still 
wavering and attached. It was his way of displaying, from his new perspective, 
what is meant by the statement, “What is It that comes like this?” When he came 
out with the words ‘how wide’, the ‘how’ that he had employed up to that time to 
refer to quantity is not his current ‘how’. We should have no doubts about the fact 
that he had already realized liberation at that time. We should listen to Shibi’s 
words as to the fundamental point that our ‘charcoal burner’ is beyond form and 
measure. Do not idly let the dumpling that is now right before you fall on the 
ground! Tear it open! This is what diligent effort is! 

We need to reflect on and illumine Seppo’s statement, “It is like the width of 
the Ancient Mirror.” He put it this way because the situation was beyond the point 
where he could state that the width of the charcoal burner was ten feet. It is not the 
case that his answering ‘ten feet’ would have expressed the situation more 
accurately than his saying Tike the width of the Ancient Mirror’. We need to 
consider the daily activities of ‘being like the width of the Ancient Mirror’. Many 
people consider his omitting to say that the width of the charcoal burner is ten feet 
to be an inaccuracy in his expressing the Matter. Such folks need to consider the 
freedom of his ‘width’, to reflect on the undiluted nature of the Ancient Mirror, and 
to not stumble past the day-to-day operating of That Which is Real. In the words of 
Meditation Master Kyogen Chikan, they need to advance along the ancient path 
with a smiling countenance, without lapsing into periods of despondency. 

The intent behind Shibi’s response, “The venerable Han has not let even a 
heel touch the ground!” is that whether he said ‘venerable Han’ or ‘venerable 
monk’, it is certainly not ‘Seppo’, since Seppo must surely be ‘a Venerable Han ’. 21 
You also need to ask in what place his heel is; you need to investigate thoroughly 
what ‘heel’ means. What I mean by ‘investigating thoroughly’ is asking yourself, 
“Is ‘heel’ an allusion to the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, or to 


21. The term ‘venerable Han’, like ‘venerable monk’, would have been understood 
conventionally as a polite expression for ‘you’. In Zen, ‘Venerable Han’ was also used to 
refer to someone who had dropped off the false self, to a Buddha, to ‘such a one’. Seppo, 
having already awakened, was no longer ‘Seppo’ in a conventional sense, but was ‘such a 
one’. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


226 


unbounded space, or to the whole of the great earth, or to the clear and bright life 
stream of the Buddhas and Ancestors?” And you need to be diligent in your 
exploration of just how many heels could be involved: is it just one heel, or half a 
heel, or hundreds of thousands of myriad heels? 

In his phrase ‘not yet touched the ground’, what sort of thing is this ‘ground’ 
he is talking about? The ground that we nowadays refer to as the great earth, some 
provisionally call ‘the ground’ in conformity with one way of looking at things. 
Again, among these various ways, there are some that see ‘the ground’ as the mind- 
boggling Dharma Gate to liberation, and some that see it as what all Buddhas do 
and say. So, what sort of thing is this ‘ground’ that one should touch one’s heel 
down upon? Is this ‘ground’ our real being? Or is it beyond our real being? Further, 
in sum, can even the tiniest bit of that which we call ‘the ground’ not exist within 
the Great Way? Let the question arise, let the question pass; talk about it with 
others, talk about it with yourself. Is the heel touching the ground the way it should 
be, or is the heel not touching the ground the way it should be? Since “Why?” is 
the question, why did Shibi state that not even a heel had touched the ground? 
When there is not the tiniest bit of ground on the Great Earth, then, of necessity, 
neither ‘touching the ground’ nor ‘not yet touching the ground’ will come about. 
Thus, “The venerable Han has not let even a heel touch the ground!” is the 
Venerable Han’s very breathing in and breathing out, the very functioning of His 
heels. 

djb 

Meditation Master Kinkazan Koto of Kokutai-in Temple in the 
Wu-chou district was once asked by one of his monks, “What is the 
Ancient Mirror before It has been polished?” 

The Master answered, “The Ancient Mirror.” 

The monk then asked, “What is It after It has been polished?” 

The Master answered, “The Ancient Mirror.” 

You need to recognize that even though there is a time when the Ancient 
Mirror, as now spoken of, is being polished, a time when It has not yet been 
polished, and a time after It has been polished, It is one and the same Ancient 
Mirror. Thus, when we are polishing It, the Ancient Mirror polishes the whole 
Ancient Mirror. We do not polish It by adding something that is not the Ancient 
Mirror, such as quicksilver. This is neither ourselves polishing ourselves nor the 
self doing the polishing, but our polishing the Ancient Mirror. Before we have 
polished ourselves, the Ancient Mirror is not dull. Even though some may describe 
It as being black, It will never be dull, for It is the living Ancient Mirror. Generally 
speaking, in polishing a mirror, we may make it into a mirror, and in polishing a 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


227 


roof tile, we may make it into a mirror, and in polishing a tile, we may make it into 
a tile, and in polishing a mirror, we may make it into a tile. There are times when 
we polish something and make nothing, and there are times when we can make 
something, even though we are not able to polish it. The traditional activities of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors are all the same as this. 


A long time ago, when Baso of Kiangsi Province was training under 
Nangaku, Nangaku on one occasion privately imparted the Mind seal* to him. This 
occurred just before the incident concerning the polishing of the roof tile. While 
staying in Chuan-fa Temple, Baso had been doing seated meditation day in and day 
out for some ten years or more. We can imagine what his thatched hut was like on 
a rainy night, and it is said that he never abandoned its freezing floor even when it 
was enveloped in snow. 

One day when Nangaku came to Baso’s hut, Baso stood up to 
receive him. Nangaku asked him, “What have you been doing 
recently?” 

Baso replied, “Recently I have been doing the practice of seated 
meditation exclusively.” 

Nangaku asked, “And what is the aim of your seated 
meditation?” 

Baso replied, “The aim of my seated meditation is to achieve 
Buddhahood .” 22 

Thereupon, Nangaku took a roof tile and began rubbing it on a 
rock near Baso’s hut. 

Baso, upon seeing this, asked him, “Reverend monk, what are 
you doing?” 

Nangaku replied, “I am polishing a roof tile.” 

Baso then asked, “What are you going to make by polishing a 
roof tile?” 


22. The translation may not clearly convey the contradiction in Baso’s statement. The particular 
practice of seated meditation he specifically mentions is chih-kuan ta-tsuo (J. shikan taza ), a 
Chinese colloquial phrase that literally translates as ‘just control yourself and sit there’. This 
implies sitting in meditation without deliberately thinking of anything, or holding on to 
anything that naturally arises, or pushing away anything that naturally arises, and without 
trying to suppress any thoughts from arising. However, in reply to Nangaku’s question, Baso 
indicates that, in fact, he has something he is deliberately holding in his mind, namely, the 
goal of realizing Buddhahood, literally ‘making himself into a Buddha’. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


228 


Nangaku replied, “I am polishing it to make a mirror.” 

Baso said, “How can you possibly make a mirror by rubbing a 

tile?” 

Nangaku replied, “How can you possibly make yourself into a 

Buddha by doing seated meditation?” 

For hundreds of years now, many people have held the view that, in this 
story, Nangaku is earnestly endeavoring to encourage Baso in his practice. This is 
not necessarily so, for, quite simply, the daily activities of the great saintly teacher 
were far removed from the realm of ordinary people. If great saintly teachers did 
not have the Dharma of polishing a tile, how could they possibly have the skillful 
means to guide people? Having the strength to guide people is the Bones and 
Marrow of an Ancestor of the Buddha. Even though the tile was the thing that 
came to hand, still, it was just an everyday, household object . 23 If it were not an 
everyday object or some household utensil, then it would not have been passed on 
by the Buddha’s family. What is more, its impact on Baso was immediate. Be very 
clear about it, the functioning of the True Transmission of Buddhas and Ancestors 
involves a direct pointing. We should truly comprehend that when the polished tile 
became a mirror, Baso became Buddha. And when Baso became Buddha, Baso 
immediately became the real Baso. And when Baso became the real Baso, his 
sitting in meditation immediately became real seated meditation. This is why the 
saying ‘polishing a tile to make a mirror’ has been preserved in the Bones and 
Marrow of former Buddhas. 

Thus it is that the Ancient Mirror was made from a roof tile. Even though the 
mirror was being polished, it was already without blemish in its unpolished state. 
The tile was not something that was dirty; it was polished simply because it was a 
tile. On that occasion, the virtue of making a Mirror was made manifest, for it was 
the diligent effort of an Ancestor of the Buddha. If polishing a tile did not make a 
Mirror, then even polishing a mirror could not have made a Mirror. Who can 
surmise that in this act of making, there is the making of a Buddha and there is the 
making of a Mirror? 

Further, some may wonder, “When the Ancient Mirror is polished, can It 
ever be polished into a tile?” Your state of being—your breathing in and breathing 
out—when you are engaged in polishing is not something that you can gauge at 
other times. And Nangaku’s words, to be sure, express what is expressible. As a 
result, in the final analysis, he was able to polish a tile and make a Mirror. Even we 


23. This is a reference to the common practice among Zen Masters of employing everyday 
objects to help their disciples realize the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On The Ancient Mirror 


229 


people of the present time should try to pick up today’s ‘tile’ and give it a polish, 
for ultimately it will become a Mirror. If a tile could not become a Mirror, people 
could not become Buddha. If we belittle tiles as being lumps of clay, we will also 
belittle people as being lumps of clay. If people have a Heart, then tiles too will 
have a Heart. Who can recognize that there is a Mirror in which, when a tile comes, 
the Tile appears? And who can recognize that there is a Mirror in which, when a 
mirror comes, the Mirror appears? 

Delivered to the assembly at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple on the ninth day of the ninth 
lunar month in the second year of the Ninji era (October 15, 1241). 

24 

Recopied in the Sandalwood Grove “ on the thirteenth day of the first month in the fourth year 
of the same era (February 3, 1243). 


24. The nickname for a Zen monastery in which the monks are doing outstanding training. 



20 

On Reading Scriptures 

(Kankin) 

Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen takes up both the literal and the non-literal 
meanings of ‘reading Scriptures’, as well as various fonns of ceremonial involved with the 
reading of Scriptures in monastic life. 


The training that we undertake to directly experience supreme, fully 
perfected enlightenment sometimes makes use of our good spiritual friends and 
sometimes makes use of sutras. ‘Our good spiritual friends’ refers to the Buddhas 
and Ancestors, those who have completely realized their True Self. ‘Sutras ’ is a 
technical term for Scriptural texts, which are spiritually complete in and of 
Themselves. Because Self Nature is what all Buddhas and Ancestors are and 
because Self Nature is what all Scriptures are, this is the way all things are. We 
speak of Their ‘Self’, but It is a Self that is beyond any adherence to ‘self and 
other’, for It is Their penetrating Eye, Their emancipating Fist . 1 

At the same time, there is the practice of calling the Scriptures to mind, of 
reading Them, chanting Them, copying Them, accepting Them, and preserving 
Them, which all together comprise the training to directly experience what the 
Buddhas and Ancestors experienced. Nonetheless, encountering the Buddha’s 
Scriptures is no easy matter. As they say, “In countless lands, not even as much as 
Their names can be heard,” and “Even among Buddhas and Ancestors, not even 
Their names can be heard,” and “Within the lifeblood of our Ancestral line, not 
even Their names can be heard.” When we are not a Buddha or an Ancestor, we do 
not see or hear the Scriptures, read or chant Them, or explain Their meaning. As 
soon as we have begun to investigate the Buddhas and Ancestors through our 
training, then, with some considerable difficulty, we begin to explore and train with 
Scriptural texts. At this time, what manifests before us are the hearing, keeping to, 
accepting, and expounding of the Scriptures that we experience within our ears, our 
eyes, our tongue, our nose, our body, our mind, no matter what place we go to, or 


1. The eyes of Masters were commonly associated with seeing the essence of the Dharma, 
whereas the raising of a fist was often used by Masters to show that ‘That Which Is’ is 
beyond words or conceptual thought. 


230 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


231 


listen from, or speak at. Because those folks who expound non-Buddhist theories 
and interpretations are seeking a name for themselves, they cannot put the 
Buddha’s true purpose into practice. That is why the Scriptures have been passed 
on and preserved on trees and on rocks, why They have spread through field and 
town, why They are presented to us by worlds of dust motes, and why They are 
opened up and lectured on by boundless space. 


Great Master Igen, our ancient Ancestor of Yakusan Mountain, 
absented himself from the Dharma Hall for a long time. So the 
temple’s Prior said to him, “Venerable Monk, the whole assembly has 
for ever so long looked forward to your compassionate instruction.” 

Yakusan said, “Ring the summoning bell.” 

The Prior rang the bell. The whole assembly had barely 
gathered together when Yakusan entered the hall. No sooner had he 
taken his seat, than he forthwith got up and returned to the Abbot’s 
quarters. Following after him, the Prior said, “Venerable Monk, just a 
moment ago you promised to give voice to the Dharma for the sake of 
the assembly, so why have you not conferred a single word on us?” 

Yakusan replied, “The Scriptures have teachers of Scripture and 
the commentaries have teachers of commentary. So, how can you 
possibly have doubts about the old monk ?” 2 

Whenever the Great Master gave compassionate instruction, the Fist had Its Fist 
teacher and the Eye had Its Eye teacher. Be that as it may, what the Prior should 
have respectfully put to the Great Master at that moment was, “It is not that I have 
had doubts arise about the Venerable Monk, but rather, I wonder what the 
Venerable Monk is a teacher of?” 


In the assembly of the lofty Ancestor Eno, founder of the monastery on 
Mount Sokei in Shin-chou Province, a monk named Hotatsu, who could recite the 
whole of the Lotus Scripture by heart, had come to train under the Master. The 
Founding Ancestor gave voice to the following poem for Hotatsu’s benefit: 


2. Yakusan’s question has a double meaning: “What makes you doubt that your Abbot is doing 
his job?” and “Why do you doubt that Buddha Nature (The Old Monk) has Its teachers, just 
as the Scriptures and the commentaries have theirs? ” 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


232 


When the mind wanders onto deluded paths, 

It is being set in motion by the flowering of the Dharma; 

When the heart awakens, 

The Dharma s flowering is set in motion. 

However long you recite this Scripture, should it be while 
still unawakened to the Self that is true, 

You will then create an enemy to Its meaning. 

To read It without opinion s bonds is the proper way, 

But read It bound to fixed ideas, and It becomes error s 
way. 

When you cease to judge whether you are bound or not, 

You ride forever long within the cart by the White Ox 
drawn. 

Thus, the deluded mind is turned around by the Flowering of the Dharma, and the 
awakened mind sets the flowering of the Dharma in motion. And further, when we 
leap beyond ‘deluded versus awakened’, the Flowering of the Dharma sets the 
flowering of the Dharma in motion. 

When Hotatsu heard this poem, he leapt for joy and presented the following 
poem in praise of it: 

The three thousand times that I have recited this 
Scripture 

Have been surpassed by End s solitary verse. 

Because I was not yet clear as to the purpose of my 
coming into this world, 

How was I to halt the folly of my troubled life? 

‘Sheep ’, ‘deer ’, and ‘ox ’provide but expedient means. 

At beginning, middle, and end, they promote the virtuous 
and the good. 

Who within the burning house know 

That, from the first, they are lords within the Dharma? 

The Founding Ancestor then said, “From now on, it would be good to refer to you 
as ‘the Monk Who Calls the Lotus Scripture to Mind.’” 

You should recognize that in the Buddha’s Way there is the monk who calls 
the Lotus Scripture to mind. This is directly pointed to by Eno, our Old Buddha of 
Sokei. The ‘calling to mind’ in this ‘monk who calls the Lotus Scripture to mind’ 
points to one who is beyond ‘holding to opinions’ and beyond ‘being free of 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


233 


opinions’. He is no longer involved in measuring by means of ‘holding to’ or 
‘being free’. This means, simply, that as the Founding Ancestor once said, “From 
eon to eon, we do not let this Scripture book out of our hands, and, both day and 
night, there is no time when we do not call this Scripture to mind.” In other words, 
from Scripture to Scripture, there is no time when we are not This Scripture. 


The Twenty-seventh Ancestor, the Venerable Hannyatara of 
eastern India, was once invited to dine with an eastern Indian king. 

After the meal, the king asked her, “All the other monks have recited 
Scriptures to me, so why have you alone not recited them?” 

The Ancestor replied, “In my humble way, what I breathe out 
does not conform itself to external conditions and events, and what I 
breathe in does not take up residence in the realm of my skandhas. * 

The Scriptures that I recite are always like this. Thus they are 
comprised of hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of scrolls, 
not just one or two scrolls.” 

The Venerable Hannyatara was a seedling that sprouted up in a kingdom in eastern 
India. She was a direct descendant of the twenty-seventh generation from the 
Venerable Makakashyo. She had had properly Transmitted to her all the necessary 
equipment of the Buddha’s family, having in her charge a monk’s Head, Eye, Fist, 
Nose, traveling staff, alms bowl, robe, Dharma, Bones, and Marrow. She is our 
Founding Ancestor, and we are her distant descendants. What the Venerable One is 
now putting her full strength into saying is that not only does what she exhales not 
conform itself to external conditions, but external conditions do not conform 
themselves to what she exhales. Even though external conditions comprise her 
head and eyes, her whole body, and her whole heart and mind, her carrying them 
about when she comes, when she departs, and when she comes back again are 
simply her ‘not conforming herself to external conditions’. ‘Not conforming 
oneself’ means going along with completely; thus, it means participating in the 
rough and tumble of daily life . 3 4 Even though her breathing out was an external 
condition, it was her not conforming herself to external conditions. Innumerable 


3. There is a long-standing Indian tradition which holds that Hannyatara was a female monk 
who was renowned for her extraordinary spiritual prowess. 

* See Glossary. 

4. That is, Buddhism is not a fonn of quietism or stoicism, nor is it the trainee’s goal to become 
a doormat. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


234 


eons have come and gone, but people have not yet understood the ebb and flow of 
breathing in and breathing out. Be that as it may, the moment has come, right now, 
when you can understand it for the first time, so pay attention to ‘not taking up 
residence in the realm of one’s skandhas’ and to ‘not conforming oneself to 
external conditions’. This is the moment when external conditions, for the first 
time, permit the exploration of such things as ‘breathing in’. This moment has 
never been before, and it may never be again: it is just now . 

‘The realm of the skandhas’ refers to our five skandhas, namely, our physical 
form, our sensory perceptions, our mental conceptions, our volition, and our 
consciousness. The reason why she does not reside in these five skandhas is 
because she is in a realm that the five skandhas have not yet reached. Because she 
chose the right key to unlock this, the Scriptures that she recited were not merely 
one or two scrolls; they were hundreds of thousands of millions of billions of 
scrolls which she was continually reciting. Although ‘hundreds of thousands of 
millions of billions of scrolls’ gives us the general idea of ‘many’, it is not just 
some measurement of ‘many’. Her ‘not taking up residence in the realm of her 
skandhas’ made her exhalation of a single breath equivalent to hundreds of 
thousands of millions of billions of scrolls. At the same time, this is not something 
which can be measured by discernment that is either tainted or untainted, nor is it 
to be found in the realm where thoughts and things are either tainted or untainted. 
As a consequence, it is beyond the measurements of what one having intelligence 
knows, beyond the conjectures of what one having knowledge discerns, beyond the 
considerations of what one lacking intelligence knows, and beyond the reach of 
what one who is ignorant discerns. It is what Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor 
after Ancestor trained to realize: it is Their Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow, 
Their Eye and Fist, Their Head and Nose, Their traveling staff* and ceremonial 
hossu,* Their leaping beyond and Their every little bit of behavior. 


Once when Great Master Joshu was at Kannon-in Temple, there was an old 
woman who sent the Great Master an offering of monetary alms along with a 
request that he recite the whole of the Tripitaka* for her. 

The Master came down from his meditation seat, circled once 
around it, and then turned to her messenger and said, “I have already 
finished reciting the Tripitaka for her.” 

The messenger, upon his return, reported this to the old woman. 

The old woman said, “When I asked him the other day to recite all of 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


235 


the Tripitaka for me, why did the venerable monk read only half the 
Scriptures ?” 5 

In speaking of reciting the whole Tripitaka or reciting just half of It, it is clear that, 
for the old woman, the Scriptures were simply ‘three scrolls’, whereas, for Joshu, 
saying that he had already finished reciting the Tripitaka showed that his Scripture 
encompassed the whole of the Tripitaka. In sum, as to the plight of reciting the 
whole Tripitaka, there is Joshu who is circling his meditation seat, there is his 
meditation seat which is encircling Joshu, there is Joshu who is circling Joshu, and 
there is his meditation seat which is encircling his meditation seat. Be that as it 
may, his reciting the whole Tripitaka is not just his circling around his meditation 
seat, nor is it just his meditation seat doing the circling. 


Great Master Daizui Shinsho of Ekishu Province was an heir of Meditation 
Master Chokei Daian. As in the previous narrative, there was once an old woman 
who sent the Master an offering of monetary alms along with a request for him to 
recite the whole of the Tripitaka for her. 

The Master came down from his meditation seat and circled it 
once, then, turning to her messenger, said to him, “I have already 
finished reciting the Tripitaka for her.” 

The messenger, upon his return, reported this to the old woman. 

The old woman said, “When I asked him the other day to recite all of 
the Tripitaka for me, why did the venerable monk read only half the 
Scriptures?” 

Now, do not focus your inquiry on Daizui’s circling his meditation seat, or focus it 
on the meditation seat’s encircling Daizui, as in the previous narrative. It is not just 
a matter of the perfect roundness of his Fist and Eye; it is his walking in a circle, 
which has made a circular form. But did the old woman have the Eye to see that, or 
was she not yet equipped with that Eye? For even though her remark, “He only 
recited half the Tripitaka correctly Transmitted what was being stated by Daizui’s 
Fist, she should have said, “When I asked him the other day to recite the Tripitaka 
for me, why did the venerable monk only waste time fooling around?” Had she put 
the Matter* like this, even accidentally, she would have been an old woman who 
was equipped with the Eye. 


5. She is saying, in effect, “Why did he do only half the job?” 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


236 


djb 

There was once a government official who provided our Founding Ancestor, 
Great Master Tozan Ryokai, with an alms meal and a votive offering of monetary 
alms, asking the Master if he would read or recite the Tripitaka for his benefit. 

The Great Master got down from his meditation seat and, 
turning towards the official, silently nodded his head . 6 

The official nodded his head to the Great Master. 

Leading the official, the Master took both of them around the 
meditation seat for one circling and then, turning to the official, he 
nodded his head. After a rather long time, he asked the official, “Did 
you understand?” 

The official answered, “No, I didn’t understand.” 

The Master said, “You and I have read and recited the whole of 
the Tripitaka, so why did you not understand?” 

This “You and I have read and recited the whole of the Tripitaka ” is clear enough. 
Do not consider their going around the meditation seat as their reading and reciting 
the Tripitaka', do not understand their reading and reciting the Tripitaka as their 
going around the meditation seat. Instead, we should listen to the compassionate 
instruction of our Founding Ancestor. 

This incident was cited by my late Master, the Old Buddha, when he was 
residing on Mount Tendo. A Korean donor had presented him with a votive 
offering of monetary alms along with the request that the whole community recite a 
Scripture and that the Master give a Dharma talk from his meditation seat. Having 
finished recounting this story, my late Master drew a large circle in the air with his 
ceremonial hossu and said, “Today I, Tendo, along with you, have read and recited 
the whole of the Tripitaka.” He then laid his hossu to one side and came down 
from his seat. 

We should now study what my late Master said, without comparing it with 
the sayings of others. Still, in his reading and reciting the whole of the Tripitaka, 
did he use a whole Eye or only half of It? Did what our Founding Ancestor said 
and what my late Master said involve the use of their Eye or the use of their 
tongue? And to what extent did they come to use them? Do your utmost to see ! 


6. Upon being oifered alms by a lay person, a monk customarily performs monjin. That is, he 
makes a deep bow from the waist, with hands held in the prayer-like gassho position. The 
nod spoken of here and later in the text refers to a slight nodding of the head, with the hands 
usually held in shashu. The head nod was used as a simple form of greeting or 
acknowledgment whilst in the Monks’ Hall. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


237 


djb 

Great Master Igen, our ancient Ancestor of Yakusan Mountain, 
was in the habit of not permitting his monks to read Scriptures. One 
day, when he himself was holding a Scripture in his hands and reading 
it, a monk asked him, “Venerable Monk, you are in the habit of not 
permitting us to read Scriptures, so why are you reading one?” 

The Master replied, “I just want to shield my eyes.” 

The monk asked, “May I take a lesson from the Venerable 
Monk and do likewise?” 

The Master replied, “If you were to read, it would surely be 

n 

enough to pierce holes even through the hide of an ox.” 


The phrase, “I wish to shield my eyes,” is what the shielded Eye Itself utters. ‘To 
shield one’s Eye’ means to forget all about ‘eyes’ and to forget all about 
‘Scriptures’; it means to shield our whole Eye and to shield It completely. It means 
to open the Eye while we are shielding It, to enliven our Eye within our shielding 
of It, to enliven our shielding of It within the Eye Itself, to add another eyelid to 
our eyelids, to make the most of our Eye within our shielding It, and to let the Eye 
Itself make the most of Its being shielded. Thus, if it is not a Scripture for the Eye, 
the function of shielding the Eye does not yet exist. 

“You would surely pierce through the hide of an ox” refers to the hide of the 
Whole Ox, and to the whole hide of the Ox, and to making use of the Ox to make a 
hide. Thus we make hide, flesh, bones, and marrow, along with horns and nostrils, 
into the living measure of the Ox. When taking a lesson from the venerable monk, 
the Ox becomes the Eye—this is to be understood as ‘shielding the Eye’: it is the 
Eye becoming the Ox. 

djb 


Meditation Master Yafu Dosen once said in verse: 

You may well ask, “Boundless are the merits of offerings made 
to the countless Buddhas, 

But how can they possibly resemble the merits from continually 
reading Their ancient instructions 
Whose words are written in ink upon white paper? ” 

Well, open your eyes and look at what is right in front of you! 


7. In accord with Dogen’s later discussion, what the Master is actually saying is “If you were 
to truly read—that is, to read with the Eye of wise discernment—you would be able to 
penetrate the Scripture (the hide) and see Buddha Nature (the Ox) in it. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


238 


You need to recognize that the blessings and merit from making offerings to the 
ancient Buddhas and from reading Their ancient instructions stand shoulder-to- 
shoulder with each other, and even go beyond blessings and merit. What people 
call ‘ancient instructions’ are the inked words written on white paper, but who can 
understand these as Their Age-old Instruction? You need to train until you 
thoroughly understand this very principle. 


In the monastery of Great Master Ungo Doyo there was once a 
monk who was in his quarters chanting a Scripture. The Great Master, 
from outside the window, asked him, “What Scripture is the acharya* 
reciting?” 

The monk replied, “The Vimalakirti * Scripture .” 

The Master said, “I am not asking you if it is the Vimalakirti 
Scripture. What you are reciting is a Scripture of What!” 

o 

Thereupon, this monk gained entry into the Truth. 

The Great Master’s remark, “What you are reciting is a Scripture of What!” means 
that what is at the bottom of reciting a text is far beyond all time; it is not 
something one would want to describe as ‘reciting’. The monk had met a 
poisonous snake along his path . 8 9 This is why the question of “What Scripture?” 
manifested before his very eyes. Having met ‘such a person’,* he could not give 
him a false answer. This is why he said, “The Vimalakirti Scripture .” 

Speaking generally, ‘to read Scriptures’ means that we collect together every 
single, solitary Ancestor of the Buddha and read a Scripture through their Eye. At 
this very moment, in a twinkling, the Ancestors of the Buddha become Buddhas, 
give voice to the Dharma, give voice to Buddha, and do what a Buddha does. If it 
is not an occasion for this kind of ‘reading Scripture’, the Head, Face, and Eye of 
the Buddha’s Ancestors do not yet exist for you. 


In the assemblies of present-day Ancestors of the Buddha there are many 
varied procedures for the reading of Scriptures, such as when a donor comes to the 


8. The Great Master’s question and exclamation are translations of the same phrase in the 
original, but reflect how the monk interpreted them. The monk understood the latter 
statement as pointing him away from an intellectual understanding of Scripture to That 
which is the True Source of all Scriptures. 

9. That is, the Master’s statement pulled the monk up short, as if he were faced with a life- 
threatening situation. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


239 


monastery and asks the whole community to read a Scripture, or when the monks 
read a Scripture for someone’s benefit on a regular basis, or when monks read them 
voluntarily, and so forth. Besides these, there is the reading of Scriptures by the 
whole community for the benefit of some deceased monk. 

In the case of a donor coming to the monastery and asking the whole 
community to read a Scripture, at breakfast time on the appointed day, the Chief of 
the Monks’ Hall hangs up ‘Reading of Scriptures’ signs in front of the Monks’ Hall 
and at the various private quarters. After breakfast, a bowing mat is spread out 
before the Saintly Monk . 10 At the appropriate time, the bell before the Monks’ Hall 
is rung either once or three times, in accordance with the instructions of the Abbot. 
At the sound of the bell, the Chief Junior and the whole community put on their 
kesas,* enter the Cloud Half go to their regular places, and sit facing outwards. 
Next, the Abbot enters the hall, makes monjin* to the Saintly Monk and, after 
offering incense, sits in his own place. The novices are then instructed to distribute 
copies of the Scripture. These Scriptures had been arranged in the proper order 
earlier in the Kitchen Hall so as to be ready for distribution at the proper time. The 
Scriptures are distributed from inside a Scripture box or put on a tray and 
distributed from there. Once the members of the community have asked for a copy 
the Scripture, they then open It and begin their reading of It. 

At this time, the Guestmaster leads the donor into the Cloud Hall. The donor, 
having procured a hand-held censer just outside the Cloud Hall, holds it aloft and 
enters the hall. The hand-held censer is stored in the common area by the entrance 
to the kitchen. It has been filled with incense beforehand, and a temple helper is 
asked to bring it to the front of the Cloud Hall and give it to the donor when the 
latter prepares to enter the hall upon being summoned. The request for the hand¬ 
held censer is made by the Guestmaster. When entering the hall, the Guestmaster 
goes first, followed by the donor. They enter by the south side of the front entrance 
to the Cloud Hall. The donor goes up before the Saintly Monk, offers a pinch of 
incense, and makes three bows. He or she does these bows while holding on to the 
censer. During the bows, the Guestmaster stands to the north of the bowing mat, 
hands in shashu,* and faces south towards the donor. Once the donor has finished 
bowing, he or she turns to the right and, facing the Abbot, holds the censer aloft 
and, bending from the waist, makes a nodding motion with the head. The Abbot, 
still in his seat, holds the Scripture aloft with his hands in gassho* in 
acknowledgment of the donor’s nod. The donor then turns to the north and nods. 


10. The Saintly Monk in the Monks’ Hall usually alludes to the picture or statue of Manjushri, 
who represents spiritual wisdom, although in some Chinese monasteries the figure is of 
Hotei, the Laughing Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


240 


Once the nodding is finished, the hall is circumambulated, starting from in front of 
the Chief Junior. During the circumambulating of the hall, the Guest Master goes 
first, leading the donor. Having done one round of circumambulating, they return 
in front of the Saintly Monk where the donor, facing the Saintly Monk, holds the 
censer aloft and does a nod. At this time, the Guestmaster, hands in shashu, stands 
just inside the entrance to the Cloud Hall, south of the bowing mat, facing 
northwards. Having finished the nodding to the Saintly Monk, the donor follows 
the Guestmaster out to the front of the Cloud Hall, where they circumambulate the 
area in front of the hall once, then reenter the Cloud Hall. Facing the Saintly Monk, 
the donor does three bows. When the bows are finished, the donor sits in a 
ceremonial folding chair and witnesses the reading of the Scripture. The folding 
chair is placed near the pillar left of the Saintly Monk and facing south. It may also 
be placed near the south pillar and facing north. When the donor has been seated, 
the Guestmaster should turn towards the donor and nod, and then take his own 
place. Alternatively, while the donor is circumambulating the hall, the Scripture 
may be chanted in Sanskrit. The seats for those who are chanting may be to the 
right of the Saintly Monk or to the left of the Saintly Monk, whichever is 
convenient. 

Aloes or some other pure incense is inserted and burned in the censer. This 
incense is supplied by the donor. 

While the donor is circumambulating the hall, the monks in the assembly 
hold their hands in gassho. 

Next, the monetary donation for the reading of Scriptures is distributed 
among the monks. The amount of the donation is at the discretion of the donor. 
Sometimes, objects like cotton cloth or fans are handed out. The donor himself 
may hand them out, or some temple officer or helper may do so. 

The method for distributing these offerings is to place the donation in front 
of the monk, not to place it in the monk’s hand. When a donation is placed before 
the assembled monks, each monk in turn acknowledges it with hands held in 
gassho. Alternatively, donations may be distributed at that day’s midday meal. 
When they are distributed at the midday meal, after the Chief Junior has made the 
offering of the donor’s food, he strikes his clappers once more and distributes any 
other alms the donor may be offering. 

The donor will have written out on paper the purpose for which he is 
dedicating the merit of his alms, and this paper will have been affixed on the pillar 
to the right of the Saintly Monk. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


241 


When we are reading a Scripture in the Cloud Hall, we do not read It with a 
loud voice, but with a low one. Sometimes we simply open the Scripture book and 
look at the words, reading the text with our eyes word by word, without reading It 
in phrases. For the reading of Scriptures at such a time, there are hundreds of 
thousands of copies stored for common use, such as copies of the Scripture on the 
Diamond-like Wisdom, the “Universal Gate” chapter and “The Conduct That Eases 
the Way” chapter from the Lotus Scripture, and the Golden Light Scripture. Each 
monk reads one scroll. When the reading of Scriptures is finished, the temple 
assistants pass in front of the seats, carrying the original tray or the Scripture box, 
and each monk in the assembly replaces the Scripture there. When taking and 
replacing Scriptures, we make gassho. When we are taking a scroll, we make 
gassho first and then take a scroll. When we are replacing a scroll, we first place it 
and then make gassho. After this, each monk, with hands in gassho, recites the 
Transfer of Merit verse in a low voice. 

When there is a reading of Scriptures in a hall that is open to the general 
public, one of the managerial officers of the monastery offers incense, makes bows, 
circumambulates the hall, and distributes alms donations, all just as a donor would 
do. The hand-held censer is also held aloft in the same way that a donor would. If 
the donor who is requesting the assembly to do a reading is someone from within 
the monastic assembly, the procedure is the same as for a lay donor: there will be 
an incense offering, bows, a circumambulating of the hall, a distributing of 
donations, and so forth. The Guestmaster will lead this monk in the same way that 
he would lead a lay donor. 

djb 

It is customary to read Scriptures in celebration of the Imperial Birthday. If 
the Imperial Birthday is celebrated on the fifteenth day of the first lunar month, we 
begin reading the Scriptures on the fifteenth day of the twelfth lunar month. On 
that day there is no Abbatical lecture in the Monks’ Hall. Two rows of meditation 
platforms are set up in front of the statue of Shakyamuni Buddha in the Buddha 
Hall. That is, the platforms are set out facing each other east and west, with each 
platform running from south to north. Special stands are set up in front of these 
platforms. On these stands we place the Scriptures—the Scripture on the Diamond- 
like Wisdom, the Scripture on the Two Lords, the Lotus Scripture, the Scripture on 
the Supreme Lord, the Golden Light Scripture, and the like. Each day, a few monks 
from among those in the Monks’ Hall are invited to partake of refreshments well 
before the time of the midday meal. A bowl of noodles and a cup of hot soup are 
served to each monk. Or each may receive six or seven steamed dumplings and a 
serving of hot soup. The dumplings are served in their own bowl and are eaten with 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


242 


chopsticks, not with a soupspoon. While eating, the monks partake of these 
refreshments in their sitting place for reading Scriptures; they do not sit anywhere 
else. The refreshments are arranged on the stand for holding the Scriptures; a 
separate table is not provided. While the monks are consuming their refreshments, 
the Scriptures remain on the stand. When they have finished their refreshments, the 
monks leave their seats to rinse out their mouths and then return to their sitting 
places. They then begin reading the Scriptures. They read the Scriptures from after 
breakfast until the time of the midday meal. At the three drummings that signal the 
midday meal, they rise from their sitting places. The daily reading of the Scriptures 
is limited to the period before the midday meal. 

On the first day, a yellow signboard reading “Training Ground Established in 
Celebration of the Imperial Birthday” is hung under the eaves on the east side of 
the front of the Buddha Hall. Also, a yellow placard on which is written the 
intention of celebrating the Imperial Birthday is hung on the east pillar at the front 
of the Buddha Hall. The Abbot writes his name on a small piece of red or white 
paper; its two characters are written on the paper, which is then pasted on the face 
of the placard beneath the date. The Scripture reading continues in the manner 
previously described until the day of the Imperial Birthday, when the Abbot gives a 
lecture in the Monks’ Hall in celebration. This is a custom from ancient times, one 
that is not out-of-date today. 

Further, there is the Scripture reading that a monk does on his own. From the 
first, temples and monasteries have had a public hall for reading Scriptures. It is in 
this hall that a monk reads the Scriptures. The procedure for doing so is as given in 
the Book of Rules and Regulations. 

djb 

Great Master Igen, our founding Ancestor of Yakusan 
Mountain, once asked the novice monk Ko, “Did you come to realize 
the Truth through reading some Scripture or through requesting your 
Master’s personal instruction?” 

The novice Ko replied, “I did not come to realize It through 
reading Scriptures or through requesting personal instruction.” 

The Master said, “There are many people who do not read 
Scriptures or seek instruction, so how come they have not realized 
It?” 

The novice Ko replied, “I do not say that they do not have It. 
Simply, they have not dared to let themselves experience It.” 



Shobogenzo: On Reading Scriptures 


243 


In the house of the Buddhas and Ancestors, there are those who let themselves 
experience It and those who do not. Even so, reading Scriptures and seeking 
instruction are the common tools of our everyday life. 

Delivered to the assembly at Kannondori in Koshohdrin-ji Temple on the fifteenth day of the 
ninth lunar month in the autumn of the second year of the Ninji era (October 21, 1241). 


Copied by me in the attendant monk’s quarters at Daibutsu-ji Monastery in Yoshida Prefecture, 
Echizen Province, on the eighth day of the seventh lunar month in the third year of the 
Kangen era (August 1, 1245). 

Ejo 



21 


On Buddha Nature 

(Bussho) 

Translator’s Introduction: In the present discourse, Dogen explores the multidimensional 
meanings of Buddha Nature. His discussion centers on two seemingly contradictory statements, 
namely, that all sentient beings have Buddha Nature and that all sentient beings lack a Buddha 
Nature. Confusion as to what these two statements are pointing to can easily arise because of the 
ambiguity of the Japanese verbs u and mu. The fonner term may mean ‘to have’, ‘to possess’, ‘to 
be in possession of’, ‘to be possessed of’, ‘there is’, ‘there are’, or ‘X exists’. The latter term 
functions to deny or negate the preceding, and it also supplies extended meanings such as ‘to 
lack’, ‘to be devoid of’, and ‘to be beyond’. What Dogen asserts—as do the Masters whom he 
quotes—is essentially that no sentient being is devoid of Buddha Nature and no sentient being 
possesses a thing called ‘a Buddha Nature’. Further, as Dogen also asserts, based on a line from a 
verse by Shakyamuni Buddha, all sentient beings have Buddha Nature through and through; that 
is, they are inseparable from Buddha Nature, are completely possessed of Buddha Nature, and 
indeed are Buddha Nature. 

Along with the verse by Shakyamuni Buddha, Dogen builds his discourse upon a number of 
koan stories, each of which illustrates some way in which Buddha Nature has been either 
correctly or erroneously understood. 


Shakyamuni Buddha said in verse: 

All sentient beings have Buddha Nature through and 
through, 

And the Tathagata continually dwells therein, ever 
constant. 

This is the Lion’s roar of our great Master, the Venerable Shakyamuni: it turns the 
Wheel of the Dharma, and, at the same time, it is the very skull and eyeballs of all 
Buddhas and all ancestral Masters. As of the second year of the Japanese Ninji era 
(1241), for two thousand one hundred and ninety years now, it has been explored 
through one’s training with a Master. Genuine heirs down to my Master have 
resided in It and have been grounded in It for fifty generations—twenty-eight in 
India and twenty-three in China. 1 Buddhas and Ancestors everywhere are no 
different. 


1. Bodhidharma is counted as both the twenty-eighth Indian Ancestor and the first Chinese 
Ancestor. 


244 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


245 


And what would be the principle underlying the World-honored One’s 
words, “All sentient beings have Buddha Nature through and through?” “It is That 
which manifests just so,” as Eno put it in turning the Wheel of the Dharma. We call 
It ‘a sentient being’ or ‘whatever has feelings’ or ‘every living being’ or ‘every 
manner of being’. The phrase ‘to have It through and through’ refers to ‘sentient 
beings’, that is, to all beings having existence. Accordingly, it is Buddha Nature 
that one has through and through, and any instance of ‘having It through and 
through’ we call ‘a sentient being’. At such a time, what sentient beings experience 
as existing both within and outside themselves will, therefore, be their ‘having 
Buddha Nature through and through’. It goes beyond the Skin and Flesh, Bones 
and Marrow that are directly Transmitted from Master to disciple, one-to-one, 
because one has already acquired the Master’s Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow. 

You need to realize right now that the existence which is had through and 
through by Buddha Nature is beyond the existence of ‘existing versus not existing’. 
‘Having It through and through’ is the Buddha’s term. It is the Tongue of Buddhas. 
It is the Eye of the Buddhas and Ancestors. It is the Nose of mendicant monks. 

The phrase ‘having It through and through’, moreover, does not mean that 
one began having It at some moment, or that one had It to start with, or that one 
has It as some strange and mysterious thing, much less that one has It conditionally 
or arbitrarily. It has nothing to do with, say, ‘the sphere of the mind’ or ‘the 
characteristics of one’s true nature’. Hence, the external conditions and internal 
propensities of a sentient being’s ‘having It through and through’ are beyond any 
influence from accumulations of past karma,* beyond anything that arises 
arbitrarily or conditionally, beyond anything that depends on thoughts or things 
that arise, beyond any spiritual power, and beyond any training done in order to 
experience the Truth. If the ‘having It through and through’ of sentient beings was 
based on past karma, or was the arising of some set of conditions, or the 
spontaneous arising of some thought or thing, then the path to awakening of all the 
saintly, the enlightenment of all the Buddhas, and the Eye of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors would be based on an accumulation of past karma, or would be the 
occurrence of some set of conditions, or the spontaneous arising of some thought 
or thing. But this is not the case. The whole realm of one’s being is completely 
devoid of any defilements coming from without. Moreover, in an instant, there is 
no ‘second person’. 2 But people are not apt to be concerned, straight off, with 


* See Glossary. 

2. That is, upon one’s spiritually awakening to Buddha Nature, the distinction of ‘self and 
other’ disappears. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


246 


cutting the roots of the defiling passions that they are afflicted with, for when does 
their ever-busy consciousness come to rest? 

Buddha Nature is not the existence of something that arises arbitrarily or 
conditionally, for the whole realm of our being—which is Buddha Nature—is 
never hidden from us. But saying that the whole realm of our being is never hidden 
from us is not necessarily the same as saying that our physical world is what 
existence really is. The statement “The whole realm of my being is something that 
I possess” constitutes a false view of non-Buddhists. Buddha Nature is not the 
existence of something that one possesses at the start, for It pervades both our past 
and our present. It is not the existence of something that has arisen for the first 
time, for It does not partake of a single bit of illusory dust. It is not the existence of 
some particular being, for It encompasses all beings. It is not the existence of 
something that is beyond having a beginning, for It is something that makes Its 
appearance just in the way that It does. It is not the existence of something that has 
just come into being for the first time, for our ordinary, ever-present mind is 
synonymous with the Way. 

Above all, you need to know that within this ‘having It through and 
through’, sentient beings do not readily find an easy or pleasant way to encounter 
It. When you understand ‘having It through and through’ in this manner, to have It 
through and through then means to penetrate Its very substance and to let all our 
notions and opinions about It drop off. 


Upon hearing the term ‘Buddha Nature’, many practitioners have 
erroneously surmised It to be the same as the non-Buddhist ‘innate eternal self’ of 
the Shrenikans. 3 This is because they have not yet become ‘such a person’,* or are 
not in accord with their True Self, or have not met with a genuine Master. To no 
avail, they take their mind, will, or consciousness, which are constantly on the 
move like wind and fire, to be their perception and comprehension of their Buddha 
Nature. Who has ever said that there is anything within Buddha Nature to perceive 
or comprehend? Even though persons who have perceived and comprehended It 
are Buddhas, Buddha Nature is beyond any thing we perceive or comprehend. 
Even more, the perception that leads us to recognize Buddhas as persons who have 
discerned It and know It is not perception as some people have erroneously 
explained it, for this perception lies beyond the realm of their mind, which is ever- 


3. Dogen discusses the Shrenikan view in Discourse 6: On ‘Your Very Mind Is Buddha’ (Soku 
Shin Ze Butsu) 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


247 


moving like wind and fire. Simply put, a couple of faces of a Buddha or an 
Ancestor are what we perceive It to be. 

In the long past, from the Chinese Han and T’ang dynasties down through 
the Sung dynasty, the virtuous monks of long ago sprang up like rice and hemp, 
bamboo and reeds. Having gone to India and returned, they taught the Way to both 
ordinary people and those in loftier positions. Sad to say, many believed that their 
mind’s moving like wind and fire was their enlightened consciousness of Buddha 
Nature. Even though such persons were negligent in their exploration of the Way, 
their faulty remarks persist today. Present-day trainees and novices of the Buddha’s 
Way should not be like them. Even though you may be exploring what enlightened 
perception is, one thing it is not is the mind’s constant moving like wind and fire. 
And even though you explore its constant movement, this movement is not what It 
really is. If you have a realization of That which really moves, you will realize 
what true perception and comprehension are. 

Buddha, being at one with Buddha Nature, is encountered everywhere, be it 
here or be it there. Buddha Nature is invariably what we have through and through, 
for That which we have through and through is Buddha Nature. What we have 
through and through is not a fragment of something that has been smashed into 
hundreds of bits, nor is It something as undifferentiated as a bar of solid iron. This 
is why a Master brandishes his fist to show It. It is beyond being large or small. 
What we have been calling ‘Buddha Nature’ is not to be equated with ‘the saintly’, 
nor, indeed, is it to be equated with Buddha Nature Itself. 

There is a certain view which likens Buddha Nature to the seeds of plants 
and trees. When the rain of the Dharma pours down and moistens the seeds, they 
sprout and send forth shoots, then branch out and produce leaves, flowers, and 
fruit, with the fruit, in turn, becoming pregnant with seeds. To view and explain It 
in this manner is due to the sentimental thinking of ordinary people who wander 
through life in ignorance. Even though they view and explain It in this manner, you 
should investigate thoroughly through your training that each and every seed, 
along with each and every flower and fruit, is the product of an honest and sincere 
heart. There are seeds within the fruit, and even though the seeds are not visible, 
they will produce such things as roots and shoots. Even when left on their own, 
they become trees thick with branches large and small. Buddha Nature is beyond 
discussion of Its being something within or outside them, for nothing is devoid of 
It at any time, past or present. Thus, even though you put your trust in the view of 
such ordinary people, the roots, sprouts, branches, and leaves are alike in being 
bom, alike in dying away, and alike in having It through and through. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


248 


djb 

CX) 

The Buddha said, “If you wish to grasp the meaning of ‘Buddha Nature’, 
just look at the conditions associated with the moment. Then, when the right 
moment arrives, Buddha Nature will manifest before your very eyes.” Now, the 
statement, “If you wish to grasp the meaning of ‘Buddha Nature”’ does not simply 
mean having knowledge of It. Rather, it is tantamount to saying, “If you want to 
put It into practice, if you want to experience It directly, if you want to ‘see’ It,” or 
even “If you want to get the thought of It out of your mind.” And this giving voice 
to It, putting It into practice, experiencing It directly, dropping off thoughts of 
whether one is accurate or inaccurate about It, and so forth, are conditions 
associated with the moment. In contemplating the conditions associated with the 
moment, we contemplate by means of the conditions associated with the moment. 
It is our doing mutual contemplation by means of hossu* and traveling staff,* for 
instance. 4 Further, we cannot do our contemplation by employing intellectual 
discernment that is tainted with defiling passions or that is free of defiling 
passions, or by employing discernment derived from our original awakened state 
or from our first awakening, or by employing discernment derived from our not yet 
having awakened or from our having genuinely awakened. The Buddha’s saying 
“just look” does not depend on our being able to look or on what we look at. What 
“just look” refers to is unconnected with such matters as ‘genuine contemplation’ 
and ‘false contemplation’. Because it is ‘just looking’, it is not looking at ourselves 
or looking at anything else. It is pointing to the conditions of the moment and it is 
transcending the conditions of the moment: it is pointing to Buddha Nature and it 
is letting go of any concept of ‘Buddha Nature’. It is Buddha pointing to Buddha: it 
is True Nature pointing to True Nature. 

As to the phrase ‘when the right moment arrives’, folks in both the past and 
the present have frequently held the view that this means one simply waits for 
some future time when Buddha Nature will manifest before one’s eyes. They 
believe that while doing their training and practice in this way, the time will arrive 
when Buddha Nature will spontaneously manifest before their eyes. They say that 
until that time comes, It will not manifest even by visiting one’s Master and 
inquiring into the Dharma or even by doing one’s best to practice the Way. Looking 
at the Matter* in this manner, they uselessly return to worldly ways, vainly waiting 
for It to fall down upon them from the heavens. Folks like this, I fear, are that type 


4. The hossu and the traveling staff were often employed by Masters in various ways to point 
their disciples toward realizing Buddha Nature. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


249 


of non-Buddhist who believes that things just happen to happen, independent of 
any cause. 

The Buddha’s statement, “If you wish to grasp the meaning of ‘Buddha 
Nature,’” was His way of saying, “If you want to know the meaning of ‘Buddha 
Nature’ here and now.” His statement, “Just look at the conditions associated with 
the moment,” was His way of saying, “Just discern what the conditions at this 
moment are.” You need to realize that His saying “If you wish to know Buddha 
Nature” is synonymous with the conditions at the moment. 

And as to His saying “When the right moment arrives,” the moment has 
already arrived, so where is there room for doubt? Even if we should have doubts 
about whether it is the right moment, this is still Buddha Nature coming forth in us. 
You need to realize that the phrase “when the right moment arrives” means that we 
should not idle away any moment within a day. His saying “when it arrives” is as if 
He had said, “It has already come.” When we get all involved with ‘when the time 
comes’, Buddha Nature does not come before us. Hence, since the time has already 
come, this is “Buddha Nature manifesting before our very eyes.” In other words, 
the truth of It is self-evident. In sum, there has not yet been a time when the right 
moment has not come, nor is there a Buddha Nature which is not Buddha Nature 
manifesting before our very eyes right now. 


The Twelfth Indian Ancestor, Venerable Ashvaghosa, in describing the 
Ocean of Buddha Nature for the sake of the Thirteenth Ancestor, once said: 

The great earth with its mountains and rivers 

Takes all its various forms completely in accord with It, 

And deep meditative states and the six spiritual powers 
Manifest themselves because of It. 

Accordingly, this great earth with all its mountains and rivers is the Ocean of 
Buddha Nature. To say that It takes all its various forms completely in accord with 
It means that, at such time as this materialization takes place, It is the great earth 
with its mountains and rivers. In his having said that the earth takes all its various 
forms in accord with It, you should realize that the form of the Ocean of Buddha 
Nature is like this. Further, It is not something to be associated with being inside, 
or outside, or in the midst of It. Since this is the way things are, to look at 
mountains and rivers is to look at Buddha Nature, and to see Buddha Nature is to 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


250 


see the jaw of a donkey and the muzzle of a horse . 5 To assert that the phrase 
‘completely in accord with It’ means ‘totally in accord with It’ or that it means 
‘being in accord with It in Its totality’ is to understand the term and not to 
understand It. 

As to the lines, “And deep meditative states and the six spiritual powers 
manifest themselves because of It,” you need to understand that one’s manifesting 
or not yet manifesting deep meditative states is all in accord with Buddha Nature. 
The dependence of all six spiritual powers upon It and their non-dependence upon 
It is ‘all in accord with Buddha Nature’. These six spiritual powers are not simply 
the six spiritual powers spoken of in the Agama Scriptures. ‘Six’ is another way of 
saying that the phrase ‘three and three in front, and three and three behind ’ 6 is the 
perfection of the six spiritual powers . 7 So, do not spend your time in studying that 
the six spiritual powers are ‘the hundreds of things that sprout up in your head ever 
so clearly’ or that they are ‘whatever so obviously motivates the Buddhas and 
Ancestors’. Even though the six spiritual powers may seem enticing, they are 
something that can create a hindrance to one’s immersion in the Ocean of Buddha 
Nature. 


The Fifth Chinese Ancestor, Meditation Master Daiman Konin, was a native 
of Obai in Kishu Province. His father had died before he was bom. He realized the 
Way whilst still a child and, as a practitioner of the Way, spent his life cultivating 
pine trees. 

While planting pine trees on Mount Saizan in Kishu, he happened to meet 
the Fourth Ancestor, who was traveling through the area. The latter told him, “I 
would like to Transmit the Dharma to you, but you are already too old. If you 
would wait until your return in some other lifetime, I will still be looking for you.” 
The forester consented to this. 

Eater, he went with the unmarried daughter of a family in the Shu clan and 
was reborn through her. In consequence of her not being married, she cast her baby 


5. ‘To see a donkey’s jaw and a horse’s muzzle’ is a traditional Zen Buddhist phrase for 
discerning concrete particulars without any taint of discriminatory judgment. 

6. A classical Zen Buddhist phrase for an indefinite number of things or persons, ‘three’ 
meaning ‘any number more than two’. 

7. ‘The perfection of the six spiritual powers’ can be understood as a reference to the 
marvelous spiritual powers which Dogen takes up in Discourse 24: On the Marvelous 
Spiritual Abilities (Jinzu). 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


251 


into a muddy creek. Divine beings protected him, and even after seven days he 
remained unharmed. As a result, she picked him up and nurtured him . 8 

He was a child of just seven years when he encountered the Fourth Ancestor, 
Meditation Master Daii Doshin, on the road to Obai. The Ancestor saw that, even 
though he was a small boy, he was strikingly handsome and in no way ordinary 
looking. 

The Ancestor greeted him, saying, “What is your family 
name?” 

The boy answered, “Although I have a family name, it is not a 
conventional family name.” 

When the Ancestor asked, “And what is this name?” he replied, 

“It is Buddha Nature .” 9 

The Ancestor said, “You do not have Buddha Nature.” 

The boy replied, “Because Buddha Nature is devoid of anything 
that can be possessed, you therefore say that I do not have It.” 

Realizing the boy’s capacity for training, the Ancestor asked his parent to let the 
boy leave home and come into the monastic family as his personal attendant. 
Because of the karma and circumstances of his parent, there was no particular 
impediment, so he abandoned lay life and became the Ancestor’s disciple. Later, 
the Ancestor passed on to him the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. 
He took up residence on the Eastern Mountain at Obai, where he greatly displayed 
the profound Principle. 

Accordingly, when we thoroughly examine the statements of these Ancestral 
Masters, there is a profound meaning underlying the Fourth Ancestor’s words, 
“What is your family name?” Long ago, there was a person who described himself 
as “a native of the country of What,” and there was another who gave as his name 
“the family name of What.” Here, the Ancestor is making a statement, “Your 


8. Dogen’s account of Daiman Konin’s past life as a forester and his subsequent birth, 
abandonment, and rescue by his mother is quite truncated. A fuller and clearer account is 
given by Meditation Master Keizan in his Denkoroku (Shasta Abbey Press, 1993), pp. 165- 
167. 

9. There is an untranslatable play on words in this passage: the spoken Chinese word hsing can 
mean not only ‘family name’ but also, when written with a different character, it means 
‘[one’s Innate] Nature’ and ‘[one’s True] Nature’. Thus, when the dialogue is seen from the 
boy’s perspective, he is, in effect, making a spiritual response to the conventional Chinese 
inquiry as to someone’s family name (to ask someone’s personal name is considered 
impolite). Dogen later explores the subtler meanings of this dialogue when seen from the 
perspective of the Fourth Ancestor. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


252 


family name is What .” 10 It was, for instance, like Eno stating to Nangaku, “I am 
‘just like This’ and you are also ‘just like This.’” 

When the boy responded, “Although I have a family name, it is not a 
conventional family name,” he was saying, “The name that I have is not a 
conventional name, since a conventional name would not be correct for That which 
I have.” In the Fourth Ancestor’s saying, “What is this name?” the term ‘What’ 
means This, for he had already made his This the What, which is Its name . 11 Our 
realizing the What is due to the This, and our realizing the This is a functioning of 
the What. Its ‘name’ is both This and What. We should make the This into our 
mugwort tea or our green tea; indeed, we should treat It as our everyday food and 
drink. 

The deeper meaning behind the boy’s saying, “It is Buddha Nature,” is that 
the ‘It’ refers to ‘Buddha Nature ’. 12 Due to the What, one is Buddha. Were we to 
take his ‘it’ to a deeper level than just a response to “What is your family name?” 
then, at the time when his ‘It’ was no longer an ‘it’, It referred to ‘Buddha Nature’. 
Thus, even though his ‘It’ refers to the What and refers to Buddha, when he came 
to drop everything off and realize the Truth, It was certainly his family name. That 
family name of his, accordingly, was the same as Shu would be. Even so, he did 
not receive It from his father or from his grandfather, nor was It like his mother’s 
clan name, so how can It possibly be equated with the name of some third party? 

To clarify the Fourth Ancestor’s remark, “You do not have Buddha Nature,” 
he is saying, in effect, “You are not It, and even though you put your trust in It, you 
do not possess Buddha Nature.” You must comprehend this and explore it through 
your training, for when is it that someone does not have Buddha Nature? Does 
someone lack Buddha Nature upon starting out towards Buddhahood? Does 
someone lack Buddha Nature upon having gone beyond realizing Buddhahood? 
Do not become preoccupied with seven different ways of going, and do not go 
blindly groping for It in eight different directions. And one can learn in training 


10. That is, one’s True Nature is beyond any name we can give It, but for convenience It was 
referred to by some Zen Masters as ‘What’. 

11. The term ‘This’ was often used by Zen Masters to designate a direct pointing to That which 
goes beyond naming, that is, the ‘What’. At the same time, the concrete This and the 
indescribable What are not separate; in other words, the This is the What. 

12. The common classical Chinese word shih has a double meaning: ‘[it] is’ and ‘this [is]’. In 
this translation, when the word is referring to Buddha Nature, it is rendered as either ‘It’ or 
‘This’, depending on which seems smoother in context. 

13. That is, you do not need to seek Buddha Nature far and wide, because It is everywhere at all 
times. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


253 


that ‘not having Buddha Nature’ is, on some occasions, a meditative state. You 
should ask whether the time when Buddha Nature realizes Buddhahood is a time of 
‘not having Buddha Nature’, and whether the time when Buddha Nature gives rise 
to the intention to realize Buddhahood is also a time of ‘not having Buddha 
Nature’. You should have the pillars* of the temple ask you, and you should ask the 
pillars of the temple, and you should have Buddha Nature ask. 

Thus, the phrase ‘not having Buddha Nature’ is something that could be 
heard, long ago, coming from the quarters of the Fourth Ancestor. It was heard 
about from Konin, it was put into circulation by Joshu, and it was promoted by 
Isan. By all means, concentrate on the words ‘not having Buddha Nature’ and do 
not fall into stagnation. Even though you should certainly trace your way back to 
‘not having Buddha Nature’, you have Its measure (which is the What), you have 
Its moment in time (which is you), you have Its correspondence (which is the 
This), and you have the same family name as It (which is Shu), for all these 
directly point to It. 

When the boy said, “Because Buddha Nature is devoid, you therefore say 
that It is beyond existence ,” 14 he had put it clearly, for ‘being devoid’ does not 
mean ‘being nothing’. When he stated that Buddha Nature is devoid, he did not say 
that It is half a pound or that It is eight ounces, as some Masters have done: he uses 
the term ‘beyond existence’. Since It is devoid, he does not say that It is empty, and 
since It is beyond existence, he does not say that It is nothing: he says that since 
Buddha Nature is devoid, It is beyond existence . 15 Thus, when ‘beyond existence’ 
is said, this is a means of expressing Its being devoid, and ‘being devoid’ is a 
means of expressing Its being beyond existence. The ‘being devoid’ of which he 
speaks is not the ‘being empty’ in the statement from the Heart Scripture that 
“Material form is the same as being empty.” Although in the statement, “Material 
form is the same as being empty,” material form is not being forced into becoming 
empty, and emptiness is not being split up to manufacture material form, the ‘being 
devoid’ of which he spoke is that of ‘being devoid is what emptiness means’. The 


14. In the following passage, context suggests that Dogen is shifting his discussion of the word 
mu, meaning ‘not having’, from being devoid of anything that one can possess to not having 
existence in the sense of not being subject to arising, persisting, undergoing change, and 
disappearing. In order to help the reader in making this shift, this sentence has been 
retranslated from what was quoted earlier to bring out this double meaning of the term mu, 
which would otherwise be lost in translation. 

15. In other words, Buddha Nature does not exist in the ordinary sense of ‘existing’—that is, 
being subject to change, as thoughts and things are—and is therefore described as ‘beyond 
existence’. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


254 


‘being devoid’ of ‘being devoid is what emptiness means’ is synonymous with 
Master Sekiso Keisho’s calling it “a stone in space.” So, this is how the Fourth and 
Fifth Ancestors inquired into and talked about the non-possessing of Buddha 
Nature, about the emptiness of Buddha Nature, and about the existence of Buddha 
Nature. 


When the Sixth Chinese Ancestor, Meditation Master Daikan 
Eno of Mount Sokei, first went to train on Mount Obai, the Fifth 
Ancestor asked him, “Where have you come from?” 

Eno replied, “I am a native from south of the Peaks .” 16 

The Fifth Ancestor then asked, “What is it that you seek in 
coming here?” 

Eno replied, “I am seeking to become a Buddha.” 

The Fifth Ancestor said, “People from south of the Peaks do not 
possess Buddha Nature, so how can you become a Buddha?” 

In the Fifth Ancestor’s saying that people from south of the Peaks do not 
possess Buddha Nature, he is not saying that people from south of the Peaks lack 
Buddha Nature, nor is he saying that people from south of the Peaks have a 
Buddha Nature: he means that people from south of the Peaks do not possess a 
Buddha Nature . 17 His saying, “How can you become a Buddha?” means “What 
sort of Buddha are you hoping to become?” 

Generally speaking, senior monks who have clarified the principle of 
Buddha Nature are few. It is not something that you can leam from any of the 
Agama Scriptures or from academic teachers of Scriptural texts and writers of 
erudite commentaries. It is something passed on directly, one-to-one, only to the 
descendants of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

The underlying principle of Buddha Nature is not that Buddha Nature is 
perfectly fulfilled before one has realized Buddhahood, but that It is perfectly 
fulfilled after realizing Buddhahood. Unquestionably, Buddha Nature is in 
complete harmony with realizing Buddhahood. You need to make a great effort 
indeed to explore this through your training, and you may need to explore it 
diligently for ten, twenty, or even thirty years. And it is not something that those 
‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’ * have clarified. To state that sentient beings 


16. That is, from southeast China. 

17. That is, Buddha Nature is not something one can possess since It is not something apart 
from or less than oneself. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


255 


have Buddha Nature and that sentient beings do not possess a Buddha Nature is to 
state this very principle. And the correct way for you to proceed is to explore 
through your training that this principle is the Teaching that Buddha Nature will be 
fully perfected from the moment of your realizing Buddhahood and beyond. What 
you do not explore in this way will not be the Buddha Dharma. If you do not do 
your exploring in this way, you cannot hope to arrive at the Buddha Dharma this 
very day. If you do not clarify what this principle is, you will not clarify what 
realizing Buddhahood is, nor will you hear of Its existence. This is why the Fifth 
Ancestor, in addressing the one facing him, made the remark that people from 
south of the Peaks do not possess Buddha Nature. In encountering a Buddha and 
hearing His Dharma for the very first time, what is hard to come by and difficult to 
hear about is that all sentient beings lack a Buddha Nature . 18 Whether you are 
following a good spiritual friend or following a Scriptural text, what you should 
take delight in hearing about is that sentient beings do not possess a Buddha 
Nature. Someone who does not come and participate in learning about and 
comprehending that all sentient beings lack a Buddha Nature is someone who has 
not yet learned about or comprehended what Buddha Nature is. In that Eno was 
wholeheartedly seeking to become Buddha, the Fifth Ancestor said nothing else, 
nor did he employ any other skillful means to facilitate Eno’s realizing 
Buddhahood. He simply said, “People from south of the Peaks do not possess 
Buddha Nature.” You need to realize that to say and to hear that one does not 
possess Buddha Nature is the straight path to realizing Buddhahood. So, the very 
moment that people go beyond ‘possessing Buddha Nature’ will be the very 
moment that they realize Buddhahood. Those who have not yet learned of going 
beyond ‘possessing Buddha Nature’ have not yet realized Buddhahood. 


After becoming the Sixth Ancestor, Eno once said, “For human beings, there 
is a north and a south; for Buddha Nature, there is no north or south.” Being 
presented with this statement, you should work hard on understanding the meaning 
of this expression. You should reflect on the phrase ‘north or south’ with an open 
mind, for there is a deeper meaning in the expression that the Sixth Ancestor has 
given us. Namely, there is a way of taking it to mean that, even though people may 
realize Buddhahood, Buddha Nature cannot realize Buddhahood. I wonder, did the 
Sixth Ancestor comprehend this or not? 


18. That is, they lack a Buddha Nature because they are Buddha Nature through and through. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


256 


Long ago, having received a bit of the Teaching that the Fourth and Fifth 
Ancestors later voiced as ‘not possessing Buddha Nature’, Kasho Buddha, as well 
as Shakyamuni Buddha, among others, upon realizing Buddhahood and turning the 
Wheel of the Dharma, had the ability to state that one has Buddha Nature through 
and through. This Teaching has the capacity to hold us to just the way things are. 
So, how could Their ‘having It’ in ‘having It through and through’ fail to be Their 
inheriting of the Dharma that is expressed as ‘not possessing It’, in which there is 
no lacking It? Thus, the words ‘not possessing Buddha Nature’ could be heard long 
ago in the quarters of the Fourth and Fifth Ancestors. If, at that time, the Sixth 
Ancestor was indeed ‘such a person’, then we should work diligently on the words, 
‘not possessing Buddha Nature’. 

Putting aside the ‘not having’ implied by ‘possessing versus non¬ 
possessing’, we should ask, “What is Buddha Nature?” That is, we should inquire 
into what sort of thing Buddha Nature is. People nowadays, upon hearing of 
Buddha Nature, do not ask, “What is Buddha Nature?” Instead, they concern 
themselves with matters like whether someone does or does not have a Buddha 
Nature. This is a shallow way of going about the Matter. So, among the various 
meanings of ‘not having’, we need to explore ‘not having’ in the sense of ‘there not 
being Buddha Nature’. Again and again, we should try to fish out what is meant by 
the Sixth Ancestor’s statement, “For human beings, there is a north and a south; for 
Buddha Nature, there is no north or south,” for we doubtless have the ability to 
wield a fishhook. We need to calmly take up and not hold onto the words, “For 
people, there is a north and a south; for Buddha Nature, there is no north or south,” 
which the Sixth Ancestor uttered. There are some befuddled persons who hold to 
the following opinion, “Doesn’t what the Sixth Ancestor said mean that a north and 
a south exist for human beings due to their hard-edged physical nature, but since 
Buddha Nature has no such limitations and is all-pervading, It is beyond any 
notions of north or south?” To speculate in this way is sheer silliness. You should 
disregard this false explanation in your diligent exploration of what the Ancestor 
said. 


The Sixth Ancestor, in giving teaching to his disciple, Gyosho, once said, 
“Impermanence is, of course, Buddha Nature, and permanence is, in fact, the mind 
dividing up all things into good or bad.” The impermanence of which the Sixth 
Ancestor spoke is beyond the conjecturing of non-Buddhists and those who follow 
the Two Lesser Courses.* Although the non-Buddhists and those of the Two Lesser 
Courses—extending from those persons who founded their traditions up to their 
most recent descendants—may speak of something being impermanent, it is 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


257 


unlikely that they are able to fully fathom what It is. Thus, for the one who would 
clarify, put into practice, and fully realize impermanence as being impermanent in 
itself, all will be impermanence. Those who can help others reach the Other Shore 
through manifesting their True Self will manifest It and give voice to the Dharma 
for that purpose: this is Buddha Nature. Further, sometimes they will display the 
Dharma Body as something tall and sometimes they will display It as something 
short. What is constantly saintly is impermanent and what is constantly ordinary is 
impermanent. The view that those who are just ordinary people and not saintly 
ones, and thus must lack Buddha Nature, is a foolish opinion held by some folks 
who are small-minded; such a view constitutes a narrow perspective which their 
intellect has conjectured. For the small-minded, ‘Buddha’ is a body and ‘Nature’ is 
its functioning, which is the very reason why the Sixth Ancestor said, “What is 
impermanent is, of course, Buddha Nature.” 

What seems constant has simply not yet undergone change. ‘Not yet 
undergone change’ means that, even though we may shift our perspective to our 
subjective self or shift it to the objective, outer world, in both cases there are no 
signs of change to be found. In that sense, it is constant . 19 As a consequence, 
grasses and trees, as well as thickets and forests, are impermanent and, accordingly, 
they are Buddha Nature. It is the same with the human body and mind, both of 
which are impermanent and, accordingly, they are Buddha Nature. The mountains 
and rivers in the various lands are impermanent, so, accordingly, they are Buddha 
Nature. Supreme, fully perfected enlightenment is Buddha Nature, and hence it is 
impermanent. The Buddha’s great entry into nirvana was impermanent, and hence 
it is Buddha Nature. 

Those of the Two Lesser Courses with limited insight, along with the 
academic teachers of the Scriptures and writers of erudite commentaries, must 
surely be appalled, skeptical, frightened, or awed by what the Sixth Ancestor said. 
Should people become appalled or skeptical, they will be some sort of devilish 
obstructionists or non-Buddhists. 


In India the Fourteenth Indian Ancestor was called the Venerable Nagarjuna, 
meaning ‘He Who Was Born Under the Tree of the Nagas’, and in T’ang China he 
was called ‘He Who Is a Tree for Dragons’ and ‘He Who Surpasses the Dragons’, 


19. That is, the ever-present ‘now’ is what is constant, even though there is that which we 
consider to be separate from the ‘now’, namely, the future and the past. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


258 


as well as ‘He Who Is as Fierce as a Dragon ’. 20 He was a native of Western India. 
He went to Southern India, where he gave voice to the Wondrous Dharma for the 
sake of the people there, since a great many of them believed that happiness was 
simply a matter of fate. 

Those who heard his Teaching said amongst themselves, “The 
most important thing in the world is the happiness that people are fated 
to have. He talks so meaninglessly about some ‘Buddha Nature’. Who 
has been able to see such a thing?” 

The Venerable One responded, “If you wish to see Buddha 
Nature, you must first rid yourself of your arrogant pride.” 

One of them asked, “Is Buddha Nature larger than I am or 
smaller?” 

The Venerable One replied, “Buddha Nature is neither large nor 
small, neither vast nor constricted. It is beyond happiness, beyond 
retribution, for It is undying and unborn.” When the person heard these 
superior principles, he completely turned his mind around. 

The Venerable One, whilst still in the Dharma Seat, then revealed 
himself to be so free of any worldly ways that he looked like the orb of 
the Moon at Its full. But all those assembled there merely heard the 
sounds of the Teaching and did not observe the Master’s appearance. 

One amongst them, however, Kanadaiba by name, the son of a 
town elder, said to those assembled, “Don’t you see his appearance?” 

Those in the assembly said, “What we do not see with our eyes or 
hear with our ears right now does not exist, for it is not something that 
we can know with our minds or experience with our bodies.” 

Kanadaiba said, “This is the Venerable One’s manifesting his 
Buddha Nature, by means of which he shows us how we can know It. 

By being cloaked in It, his meditative state, which is free of 
attachments, takes on a form resembling the Moon at Its full, for the 
meaning of ‘Buddha Nature’ is That which is utterly unbounded and 
radiant.” 

Once Kanadaiba had finished speaking, the orb-like look seemed 
to disappear. Then, whilst still occupying his Dharma Seat, Nagarjuna 
spoke in verse, saying: 


20. The Sanskrit word naga, which forms the first part of Nagarjuna’s name, means serpent. 
When the word came to China, it was translated as dragon. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


259 


Through my body, I have manifested the look of the Full 
Moon, 

Thereby displaying the physical presence of all Buddhas. 

My voicing of the Dharma has no fixed form, 

21 

For Its real functioning is beyond what is said, or how. 

You need to realize that the genuine functioning of the Dharma is beyond 
any immediate display of what is said or how It is put. A genuine voicing of the 
Dharma has no set form. The Venerable One was ever engaged in giving voice to 
Buddha Nature far and wide, on innumerable occasions. We have given just one 
brief example here. 

You need to discern and affirm for yourself the underlying meaning of his 
saying, “If you wish to see Buddha Nature, you must first rid yourself of your 
arrogant pride.” It is not that one lacks sight, but the seeing of which he spoke is 
based on ridding oneself of one’s arrogant pride. The arrogance of self is not just of 
one kind, and pride takes many forms. Methods for ridding oneself of these will 
also be diverse and myriad. Even so, all of these methods will be ‘one’s seeing 
Buddha Nature’. Thus, you need to learn both to look with your eyes and to see 
with your Eye. 

Do not equate the Master’s statement, “Buddha Nature is neither large nor 
small,” with similar words used by those who wander through life in ignorance or 
by those of the Two Lesser Courses. Those who merely think one-sidedly that 
Buddha Nature is something vast and enormous are harboring a false notion. 
Because we make use of what we are hearing as the subject for our consideration, 
we need to consider Its underlying principle as we hear it here and now, unimpeded 
by the Master’s statement that It is neither large nor small. 

Now, let us give ear to the verse that the Venerable One spoke, specifically 
his lines, “Through my body, I have manifested the look of the Full Moon, thereby 
displaying the physical presence of all Buddhas.” Because the display of the 
physical presence of all Buddhas is a manifestation of one’s Spiritual Body, it has 
the look of the Full Moon. Accordingly, you need to grasp that all manner of 
tallness and shortness, as well as of squareness and roundness, are manifestations 


21. The phrase ‘the look of the Moon at Its full’ in this poem and in subsequent paragraphs 
refers to the discernible characteristics of one who has fully realized his or her Buddha 
Nature. In some instances, this phrase is misunderstood and taken literally by persons of 
worldly mind, in which cases it is rendered as ‘the look of a full moon’. Similarly, the term 
‘body’ is used when it refers to the physical body, whereas the term ‘Spiritual Body’ is used 
in reference to the spiritual Enlightenment Body, which manifests ‘the look of the Moon at 
Its full’. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


260 


of your Spiritual Body. Those who are ever so ignorant of what this Spiritual Body 
is and of what manifesting It means are not only in the dark about the look of the 
Full Moon, they are not displaying the physical presence of all Buddhas. Foolish 
people fancy that the Venerable One provisionally displayed his body in some 
altered form, which is described as ‘the look of a full moon’, but this is an arbitrary 
and false notion of those who have not had the Buddha’s Way Transmitted to them 
from Master to disciple, for where or when would It possibly manifest as 
something separate from and independent of one’s body? What is important for 
you to recognize is simply that, at the time, the Venerable One was seated on the 
raised platform of a Dharma teacher. His body showed itself in the same manner as 
the body of anyone sitting here now, for this body of ours is, in fact, a 
manifestation of the Moon at Its full. His manifestation of the Spiritual Body is 
beyond being something square or round, beyond something existing or not 
existing, beyond something hidden or revealed, beyond something consisting of 
eighty-four thousand components: it is simply the manifestation of his Spiritual 
Body. ‘The look of the Full Moon’ describes the Moon implied in Fuke’s remark, 
“ Right here is where the What is, whether the matter is put clumsily or 
delicately .” 22 Because this manifestation of his Spiritual Body is rid of any 
arrogant pride, It goes beyond his being Nagarjuna; It is the physical presence of 
all Buddhas. Because he displayed It, his Spiritual Body passes through and 
beyond the physical presence of all Buddhas. Hence, It has no connection with 
whatever may be on the periphery of the Buddha’s Way. 

Although there is the Unbounded Radiance which takes some form like ‘the 
Moon of Buddha Nature at Its Full’, It is beyond what is commonly construed as 
‘the look of a full moon’. And what is more, Its real functioning is beyond what is 
said or how it is put, and the manifestation of this Spiritual Body is beyond the 
physical and the mental, beyond the realm of the skandhas.* Although It 
completely resembles the realm of the skandhas, It displays Itself by means of 
them, for this realm is the physical presence of all Buddhas. The Buddhas are the 
skandhas which give expression to the Dharma; the Unbounded Radiance has no 
set form. Further, when Its not having any set form is evinced by the meditative 
state that has no attachments, this is a manifestation of one’s Spiritual Body. Even 
though our whole assembly may desire to see ‘the look of the Moon at Its full’, this 
is something one’s eyes have never seen before. It is the turning point for the 
skandhas, which will give voice to the Dharma, and it is the absence of any fixed 
way in how the Dharma is stated or what form It may take, while the Spiritual 


22. This remark appears in one of the stories contained in Dogen’s Chinese Shinji Shobogenzo. 
The full story is translated in the Addendum immediately following this discourse. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


261 


Body manifests freely as It will. Its very ‘being hidden from sight’ and Its very 
‘being openly displayed’ is Its stepping forward and stepping back in a cyclic 
manner. At the very time when Nagarjuna’s Spiritual Body was manifesting Itself 
freely as he sat upon his platform, the whole assembly merely heard the words of 
the Dharma and did not perceive the ‘look’ of their teacher. 

The Venerable Kanadaiba, who was Nagarjuna’s Dharma heir, clearly 
recognized the Full Moon, the perfection of that Full Moon, the manifestation of 
Nagarjuna’s Spiritual Body, the look of all Buddhas, and the physical presence of 
all Buddhas. Although there were many within the assembly who had entered the 
Master’s private quarters and had had the Buddhist Teachings poured into them, 
none could stand head-and-shoulders with Kanadaiba. Kanadaiba was respected 
for his Master’s sharing the Dharma seat with him, and he functioned as a teacher 
and guide for the whole assembly, since his partial seat was the whole of the 
Dharma seat. In that he had had the great, unsurpassed Dharma of the Treasure 
House of the Eye of the True Teaching authentically Transmitted to him, it was just 
like the Venerable Makakasho occupying the chief Dharma seat on Vulture Peak. 

During the time when he was involved in non-Buddhist teaching, Nagarjuna 
had had many disciples. Even so, once he turned his own heart around, he 
expressed his thanks to them all and disbanded his classes. After Nagarjuna 
became an Ancestor of the Buddha, he authentically Transmitted the Treasure 
House of the Eye of the True Teaching to Kanadaiba, considering him alone to be 
his true heir. This was the simple, one-to-one Transmission of the unsurpassed Way 
of the Buddha. Despite this, groups of pretenders arrogantly boasted, “We too are 
the Dharma heirs of the great scholar Nagarjuna.” They composed treatises and 
compiled commentaries, often forging Nagarjuna’s hand. But such are not the 
works of Nagarjuna. These masses of followers, whom he had long before 
dismissed, have confused and corrupted both ordinary persons and those in lofty 
positions. As disciples of the Buddha, you need to know that whatever was not 
authentically Transmitted directly to Kanadaiba is not the word and Way of 
Nagarjuna. This is the correct belief that will make it possible for you to reach your 
goal. Even so, there are many who have accepted those spurious works as spiritual 
nourishment, even while being aware that they were fraudulent. This foolish 
thickheadedness of human beings who insult great enlightened Wisdom is sad and 
pitiful indeed. 


23. A reference to Shakyamuni’s sharing His Dharma seat with His Dharma heir, Makakasho, 
who led the Sangha after the Buddha’s parinirvana, thus becoming the First Ancestor. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


262 


djb 

On the occasion when the Venerable Kanadaiba pointed to the Venerable 
Nagarjuna’s manifestation of the Spiritual Body, he commented to those assembled 
there, “This is the Venerable One’s manifesting his Buddha Nature, by means of 
which he shows us how we can know It. By being cloaked in It, his meditative 
state, which is free of attachments, takes on a form resembling the Moon at Its full, 
for the meaning of ‘Buddha Nature’ is That which is utterly unbounded and 
radiant.” 

Now, among those skin bags,* past or present, who have heard the Buddha 
Dharma as It has spread through the heavens above, the world of humans, and the 
great thousandfold worlds that comprise the universe, which of them has said that 
the look of someone manifesting his or her Spiritual Body is what Buddha Nature 
is? Throughout the great universe, the Venerable Kanadaiba alone has stated it. The 
rest have merely asserted that Buddha Nature is not something seen with the eyes, 
or heard with the ears, or grasped by the mind, or whatever. Because they have not 
realized that the manifesting of one’s Spiritual Body is Buddha Nature, they have 
not stated it. Although their ancestral Master was not loath to manifest It, their ears 
were shut so that they never heard about It. Since they had not yet comprehended 
what their Spiritual Body was, It was not something that they ever fully discerned. 
Hoping to see the meditative state that is free of characteristics as something with a 
form resembling the moon at its full, they respectfully bowed, but their eyes had 
not yet caught sight of It. 

djb 


“The meaning of ‘Buddha Nature’ is That which is utterly unbounded and 
radiant.” Thus, the manifestation of the Spiritual Body is one’s giving voice to 
Buddha Nature, for It is unbounded radiance and It is absolute. To give voice to 
Buddha Nature means to manifest the Spiritual Body, for it is the means by which 
the physical presence of all Buddhas is displayed. Where is the Buddha, or the pair 
of Buddhas, whose display of It did not take on the physical presence of a 
Buddha ? 24 The physical presence of a Buddha is someone’s manifesting the 
Spiritual Body, and Buddha Nature exists as that person’s manifestation of the 
Spiritual Body. On the other hand, the ability of the Buddhas and Ancestors to 
speak of It and understand It in terms of the four elements* and the five skandhas is 
also Their momentary manifestation of the Spiritual Body. The physical presence 


24. ‘One Buddha’ refers to someone who has realized the Truth, whereas ‘a pair of Buddhas’ is 
an allusion to a Master and a disciple after Transmission. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


263 


of all Buddhas, which we have already spoken about, is just like the realm of the 
skandhas. All Their functioning is the functioning of this realm. The way that 
Buddhas function completely plumbs the depths of how the Spiritual Body 
manifests when It encompasses all Its diverse forms. All the comings and goings of 
Their immeasurable, unbounded functioning are instances of this Spiritual Body 
being made manifest. 

Even so, since the time of Master Nagarjuna and his disciple Kanadaiba, 
among those who spiritually explored Buddhism as it existed in earlier and later 
generations throughout India, China, and Japan, no one has ever said anything the 
equal of what Nagarjuna and Kanadaiba said. How many teachers of Scriptures, as 
well as erudite scholars of Their commentaries and the like, have tripped over what 
the Buddhas and Ancestors have said? From ancient times, there have been those 
in Great Sung China who attempted to illustrate this incident, but they were unable 
to portray it either physically or mentally, nor could they draw it in space or upon a 
wall. Vainly sketching with their writing brush, they endeavored to depict 
Nagarjuna’s ‘manifestation of the Spiritual Body as the look of the Full Moon’ by 
sketching a mirror-like circle above a Dharma seat. These people have intended 
their depictions to be as gold dust before people’s eyes, yet even though the frosts 
of autumn and the flowers of spring have appeared and faded away for centuries 
since, not a soul has said they err. How sad that so many matters have been 
bungled like this! If Nagarjuna’s manifesting the ‘Spiritual Body with the look of 
the Full Moon’ is taken to mean that It had the look of a circle, it would be a real 
picture of a rice cake . 25 These artists’ playing around with people like this is silly 
enough to make one die laughing. Sad to say, in a kingdom like Great Sung China, 
nary a householder or a monk has heard and understood the words of Nagarjuna, or 
is familiar with what Kanadaiba said, or has even encountered it, let alone having 
any familiarity with the manifestation of one’s Spiritual Body! They are in the dark 
about the Full Moon, and the Moon at Its full has waned for them. This is because 
they are remiss in their examination of the past and lack a fondness for examples 
from the past as well. Further, in your endeavor to encounter the real manifestation 
of the Spiritual Body of old and new Buddhas, do not prize or play around with 
‘pictures of rice cakes’. You need to know that, when you attempt to depict the 
characteristics of the Spiritual Body manifesting with the look of the Full Moon, 
you should use the image of Nagarjuna’s body seated upon a Dharma seat. His 
raised eyebrows and twinkling eyes will be straight to the point. The Treasure 
House of the Eye of the True Teaching within his very Skin and Flesh, Bones and 


25. That is, like a picture of a rice cake, it would be incapable of providing nourishment or 
satisfying one’s hunger. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


264 


Marrow will undoubtedly be portrayed by his sitting upright and still. You should 
convey his face, which beams with the sweetest smile because he has become a 
Buddha and an Ancestor. To the degree that this portrait of yours does not yet have 
the look of the Moon, it will lack anything resembling Its form, and it will not give 
expression to the Dharma either in what is conveyed or how, nor will it have Its 
genuine functioning. 

If you desire to depict the Spiritual Body, you must the use the Full Moon as 
your model. When you wish to use the Full Moon as your model, you must 
specifically use only the Full Moon , for this is the way that the Spiritual Body 
manifests Itself. When you wish to portray the look of the Full Moon, you must 
model it only on the look of the Moon at Its full. And you must demonstrate the 
look of the Moon at Its full. On the other hand, if you do not portray the 
manifestation of the Spiritual Body, or portray the Full Moon, or portray the Moon 
at Its full, or aim at portraying the physical presence of all Buddhas, or embody the 
displaying of this presence, or aim at manifesting the Dharma, you will be vainly 
drawing a picture of a rice cake, and what does that get you? If you are quick to set 
your sights straight, who of you will not be sated right here and now, and not go 
hungry? 26 

Just as the moon is circular in form, so circularity is a manifestation of one’s 
Spiritual Body. 27 In your investigation of circularity, do not examine it as if it were 
the roundness of a coin, or liken it to a rice cake. The Spiritual Body is the body of 
the moon in its characteristic circular shape, so Its form is like the form of the 
Moon at Its full. You should investigate a coin or a rice cake, too, in terms of their 
circularity. 

djb 

CTO 


While I was still drifting about like a cloud, I went to Great Sung China. It 
was about the end of autumn in the sixteenth year of the Chinese Chia-ting era 
(1223) when I first arrived at Kori temple on Mount Ashoka. I saw that someone 


26. In this paragraph, Dogen explains that in order to draw a correct picture of a human being’s 
manifestation of Buddha Nature, you need to use as your basis the picture of a human being, 
rather than using some abstract object such as a circle. In order to emphasize this point, he 
talks about using the Moon at Its full as the model for drawing a Full Moon. This is 
comparable to saying that if you want to draw a picture of a round plate, use a plate that is 
round as your model, rather than, say, using some other round object or using a plate that is 
square. 

27. ‘Circularity’ implies something that has no beginning or ending, that is all-encompassing, 
and is ever flowing, ever changing, now coming forth, now receding. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


265 


had painted portraits of the thirty-three Indian and Chinese Ancestors on the wall 
of the western corridor. At the time, I did not grasp their meaning. Later, during the 
summer retreat in the first year of the Chinese Kia-ch’ing era (1225), I happened to 
return there, and while walking along the corridor with Guestmaster Jokei of 
Szechwan Province, I asked him, “Whose picture is this?” The Guestmaster 
answered, “It is the appearance of a full moon which represents Nagarjuna’s body.” 
When he spoke thus, his countenance showed no nose for the Great Matter, nor 
was there any expression of It in his voice. I commented, “There is no more to this 
than a painting of a rice cake.” Even though the Guestmaster burst out laughing at 
the time, there was no sword within his laugh that was capable of smashing a 
painted rice cake to bits. Subsequently, as the Guestmaster and I visited the Relics 
Hall and the six scenic spots of the monastery, I brought up the issue of the picture 
again several times, but not even the slightest inkling of what it was about ever 
arose in him. Naturally, there were also many other monks who put forth their 
opinions, but they too were completely useless. So I said, “I’ll try raising the 
question with the Abbot.” The Abbot at the time was the monk Daiko. The 
Guestmaster remarked, “He probably won’t be able to give you an answer as he 
doesn’t have the nose for that kind of thing. So how could he know anything about 
it?” Therefore, I did not ask the Venerable Daiko. Although my monastic brother 
Jokei talked to me in this way, he himself had no understanding either. Those other 
skin bags who heard our talk also had nothing to contribute. Generations of Abbots 
presiding at that temple’s meals of gruel and rice had never looked at that picture 
and wondered about it, so they had never revised and corrected their understanding 
of it. Further, when there are things that you cannot possibly depict, then you 
should not try to depict them at all, and what you can depict, you should depict in a 
straightforward manner. Despite this, the look of the Full Moon which is the 
manifestation of one’s Spiritual Body is something that one never depicts. 

To speak more broadly, in that such persons have not awakened from their 
present opinions and personal views that Buddha Nature is somehow synonymous 
with the intellective, perceptual, or cognitive functions of their mind, it is as if they 
had lost the distinction of meaning between the phrases ‘possessing Buddha 
Nature’ and ‘not possessing Buddha Nature’. This can be understood only by those 
with true understanding, and rare indeed are those who have even tried to 
investigate how to make such distinctions. You should know that this lack of effort 
on their part was due to the fact that such investigations had gone out of fashion. In 
many places, there have been Abbots presiding at meals of gruel and rice who have 
died without once in their whole life even mentioning the term ‘Buddha Nature’. 
And some among them have said that those who pay heed to Scriptural Teachings 
may discuss Buddha Nature, but those who practice Zen meditation should not 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


266 


speak of It. Folks who talk like this are truly beasts! What a bunch of demons they 
are to mingle with and defile the Way of our Buddha Tathagata! Is what they call 
‘paying heed to the Scriptural Teachings’ the Way of the Buddha? Or is what they 
call ‘practicing Zen meditation’ the Way of the Buddha? Recognize that what they 
are calling ‘paying heed to the Scriptural Teachings’ and ‘practicing Zen 
meditation’ are still not the Way of the Buddha. 


National Teacher Enkan Saian in Kangshu Province was an esteemed Master 
under Baso. He once pointed out to his assembly, “All sentient beings are 
possessed of Buddha Nature.” Right away, we need to thoroughly examine his 
words ‘all sentient beings’. All sentient beings have different internal propensities 
and external conditions, which are the fruits of past karma, so their perspectives are 
different. This holds true for each and every one of them, be they called ‘ordinary 
people’, ‘non-Buddhists’, ‘those in the Three Courses’, ‘those in the Five Courses’, 
or something else.“ ‘All sentient beings’, as spoken of in the Buddha’s Way in the 
present instance, means that all who possess a mind filled with craving are 
‘sentient beings’, since having a mind is synonymous with being a sentient being. 
All those whose mind is beyond craving will likewise be sentient beings, since 
being a sentient being is synonymous with having a mind. 30 Accordingly, all minds 
are, without exception, sentient beings, and all sentient beings are, without 
exception, possessed of Buddha Nature. And even grasses, trees, and our very 
nation are synonymous with Mind, and because they are synonymous with Mind, 
they are sentient beings, and because they are sentient beings, they are possessed of 
Buddha Nature. And, likewise, the sun, the moon, and the stars are synonymous 
with Mind, and because they are synonymous with Mind, they are sentient beings, 


28. Those in the Three Courses are the shravakas, the pratyekabuddhas, and the bodhisattvas. 
Those in the Five Courses are the above three, plus lay Buddhists who have taken and keep 
to the first five of the Ten Precepts, and those in lofty positions (‘celestial beings’) who 
devote themselves to doing good deeds and practicing meditation. 

29. That is, mind does not exist as an entity independent of human existence (such as the Subtle 
Intelligence posited by the Shrenikans). 

30. In referring to the mind in this passage, Dogen uses two words. The first (ushin) has two 
meanings: having or possessing a mind and having a mind that is enmeshed in attachments. 
The second (mushin) refers to a mind that has dropped off its attachments. This latter state of 
mind, however, also encompasses the first meaning of ushin as simply ‘having a mind’. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


267 


and because they are sentient beings, they are possessed of Buddha Nature. ’ 1 
‘Being possessed of Buddha Nature’, which the National Teacher spoke of, is no 
different. Were it different, it would not be the ‘being possessed of Buddha Nature’ 
that is put forth in the Buddha’s Way. The core of what the National Teacher said is 
simply that all sentient beings are possessed of Buddha Nature. Further, if anything 
were not a sentient being, it would not be possessed of Buddha Nature. Right now, 
it would be good for you to ask of the National Teacher, “Are all the Buddhas 
possessed of Buddha Nature?” since to inquire in this way will put him to the test. 
You should examine carefully that he did not say, “All sentient beings are the same 
as Buddha Nature,” but said, “All sentient beings are possessed of Buddha 
Nature.” A Buddha will have discarded any sense of possessing something as 
implied by the phrase ‘possessing Buddha Nature’. Their discarding of it is Their 
being at one with all things, as if all were a single, solid iron bar, and Their being at 
one with all things is as the passage of birds, which leaves no traces. As a 
consequence, all Buddhas are possessed of Buddha Nature. For this reason, the 
truth of what the National Teacher said not only penetrates through what ‘sentient 
beings’ means, but also penetrates through what ‘Buddha Nature’ means. Even 
though the National Teacher may not have fully understood all the implications of 
what he was saying, this does not mean that he lacked the opportunity to 
understand them, nor does it mean that the essence of what he said is meaningless 
for us today. 

Also, even though you may not yet have understood for yourself the Truth 
with which you are already equipped, you have Its four elements and five 
skandhas, and you have Its Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow. Thus it is that there 
are some whose affirmation of It takes their whole lifetime to affirm, and there are 
others for whom it takes lifetimes to affirm It. 


Meditation Master Isan of Mount Daii once said to his assembly, “All 
sentient beings lack a Buddha Nature.” Among the ordinary people and those in 
lofty positions who hear this, there will be those who will be delighted because of 
their great capacity for understanding, and there will also be no shortage of those 
who will be disquieted and filled with doubt. This is because the Venerable 
Shakyamuni stated that all sentient beings have Buddha Nature through and 
through, whereas Isan is saying that all sentient beings lack a Buddha Nature. 
Since the meaning of the words ‘have’ and ‘lack’ must surely be greatly different, 


31. That is, the whole universe and everything in it is Buddha Nature. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


268 


some may harbor doubts as to which statement is true to the mark and which is not. 
Even so, in the Buddha’s Way, only Isan’s statement, “All sentient beings lack a 
Buddha Nature,” excels National Teacher Enkan’s. Even though Enkan’s phrase 
about ‘being possessed of Buddha Nature’ resembles a stretching forth of a pair of 
hands along with the former Buddha, nevertheless, this remark is the same as a 
traveling staff being shouldered by two people. 32 Now, Isan’s phrase is not like 
this; his observation is like a traveling staff absorbing two people. 33 Moreover, 
even though the National Teacher was a monastic son of Baso, and Isan was a 
monastic grandson of Baso, the Dharma grandson was an old hand at his 
grandfather’s way of putting the Matter, whereas the Dharma son was a youngster 
when it came to his father’s way of putting It. The gist of what Isan said has made 
“All sentient beings lack a Buddha Nature” his underlying principle. He did not 
say anything that is even vaguely beyond the straight and narrow of Buddhist 
Teaching. This is how he received and preserved the Scriptures within the quarters 
of his own monastic tradition. 

Further, it is imperative that you ferret out how it is that all sentient beings 
are Buddha Nature, and in what sense they are possessed of Buddha Nature. If any 
people assert that they possess a Buddha Nature, they must surely be the henchmen 
of demons who will, one day or another, attempt to wrap all sentient beings up in a 
demon child’s swaddling clothes. Since Buddha Nature is Buddha Nature, sentient 
beings are sentient beings. Sentient beings, from the start, have never been 
equipped with a Buddha Nature. Even though they may wish to possess such a 
thing, the point is that Buddha Nature, in the first place, is not something that can 
come along with anyone. Do not assert that when Mr. Chang drinks wine, Mr. Li 
gets drunk. If anything possessed ‘a Buddha Nature’ in and of itself, such a thing 
would not be a sentient being. If anything possessed ‘being a sentient being’, then 
ultimately such a thing would not be Buddha Nature. This is why Hyakujo said, 
“To assert that a sentient being possesses Buddha Nature slanders Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha. And to assert that a sentient being lacks Buddha Nature 
slanders Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.” Accordingly, to say that one possesses a 
Buddha Nature and to say that one lacks Buddha Nature both become slander. 
Even though they become slander, it does not mean that one cannot say anything 


32. The traveling staff was often used by Masters to point a disciple towards the Truth, that is, 
towards which way to go. Hence, according to Dogen, while Enkan’s statement may seem to 
be expanding upon what the Buddha said, in reality he was merely repeating the same thing 
over again. 

33. Dogen’s descriptive phrase may refer to the face-to-face relationship in Transmission, 
wherein Master and disciple are absorbed together in That which points to the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


269 


about It. Were Isan and Hyakujo able to hear me at this moment, I would now say 
to Hyakujo, “Granted that both are slanderous, are you able to state what Buddha 
Nature is? Even though you can state what It is, such a statement may restrict the 
way of expressing It. If you do have a way of expressing It, such an expression will 
be in complete harmony with how it is heard.” And turning to Isan, I would 
remark, “Even though your saying that all sentient beings lack a Buddha Nature 
expresses It through words, you did not say that all of Buddha Nature lacks 
sentient beings and you did not say that all of Buddha Nature lacks Buddha Nature, 
and, what is more, you have not yet seen even in your dreams that each and every 
one of the Buddhas lacks a Buddha Nature. Should you give it another try, I’d like 
to take a look at it.” 


Meditation Master Hyakujo, in giving teaching to his assembly, said: 

It is Buddha that is the unsurpassed Vehicle. 34 It is Supreme 
Wisdom. It is what establishes people in the Buddha’s Way. It is the 
very Buddha Nature which a Buddha is possessed of. It is the Teacher 
and Guide who makes unhindered use of everything for the sake of 
others. It is unimpeded in Its discernment. Hence It is able to make 
good use of karmic cause and effect, and is naturally joyful and wise. 

Its cart wheels continually roll forward, carrying forth karmic 
causality. When dealing with life, It does not experience life as 
something that ceases. When dealing with death, It does not 
experience death as a hindrance. When dealing with the five skandhas, 

It does not experience the five skandhas as impediments, but rather as 
portals that are open; coming and going at will, It suffers no 
difficulties in going in and out of them. If you can be like this, there 
will be no need to discuss higher or lower stages of spiritual 
development. Indeed, if even an ant can be like this, then it will be, 
through and through, a wondrous Pure Land, beyond anything we can 
possibly imagine. 

This, then, was Hyakujo’s way of expressing the Matter. The five skandhas 
comprise our intact body at this very moment. Whatever we are doing right now is 
the opening of a portal, and it opens without our experiencing any impediments 
from our five skandhas. When we simply live, we are not restricted by life, and 


34. ‘Buddha’, here, refers to awakened Buddha Nature, the functioning of which is the subject 
of Hyakuj o’s remarks. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


270 


when we simply die, we are not put into turmoil by death. Do not uselessly crave 
life, and do not vainly fear death. They are both simply places where Buddha 
Nature resides. To be constantly disturbed and worn out over them is non-Buddhist 
behavior. To acknowledge the various conditions and circumstances that arise 
before our very eyes is the way to be unhindered in one’s dealing with them. This 
is the Ultimate Vehicle: it is to be Buddha. Wherever one may reside within this 
state of ‘being Buddha’ becomes a wondrous Pure Land. 


Obaku was sitting in Nansen’s Abbatical reception room, 35 
when Nansen asked Obaku, “What do you think of the principle 
enunciated in the Great Scripture on the Buddha’s Parinirvana that, if 
one trains oneself equally in meditative practice and in spiritual 
wisdom, one will clearly see one’s Buddha Nature?” 

Obaku replied, “Within all the hours of the day, It does not 
depend on a single thing, so we have It right from the start.” 

Nansen said, “You aren’t saying this as the view of an elder 
monk, are you?” 36 

Obaku replied, “I daren’t say so.” 

Nansen said, “Setting aside for the moment the matter of 
payment for your rice broth, to whom are you to return payment for 
your straw sandals?” 

Thereupon, Obaku remained silent. 

‘Training equally in meditative practices and spiritual wisdom’ does not 
mean that, since training in meditative practices does not interfere with pursuing 
spiritual wisdom, Buddha Nature can be clearly seen when training in both equally. 
Rather, when we clearly see our Buddha Nature, then we will be training equally in 
meditation practice and spiritual wisdom. So Nansen stated, “What do you think of 
this principle?” This would be the same as saying, for instance, “Who is it that sees 
one’s Buddha Nature clearly?” Or it can be stated by saying, “How about the 
principle that Buddha Nature’s equal pursuit of both is what causes us to realize 
our Buddha Nature?” 


35. Obaku was a Dharma heir of Hyakujo; Hyakujo and Nansen, as Dhanna heirs of Baso, were 
monastic brothers. 

36. The tenn ‘elder monk’ refers to a monk of many years training who is recognized for his 
deep understanding of spiritual matters. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


271 


The point of Obaku’s saying “Within all the hours of the day, It does not 
depend on a single thing” is that even though twenty-four hours exist within the 
span of a whole day, It is not dependent on them. Since Buddha Nature’s not 
depending on a single thing extends over all the hours of a day, It can be clearly 
seen. As to this ‘within all the hours of a day’ of his, would you ask at what 
specific time It will show up or in what country? These twenty-four hours that we 
are speaking of, would they have to be a human being’s twenty-four hour day? Or 
do they exist as a day in some other particular place? Or are they the kind of day 
that can occur for a while in Samantabhadra’s* Silver Realm? Whether it be in this 
land or some other world, It does not depend on either. It is already within the 
twenty-four hours of any day and does not depend on anything. 

Nansen’s asking, “You aren’t saying this as the view of an elder monk, are 
you?” is the same as asking, “You aren’t saying that this is your view, are you?” 
Although Nansen asked whether this is the view of an elder monk, Obaku should 
not turn to Nansen and affirm that it is indeed his own view. Although the 
statement was appropriate, it did not apply to Obaku alone, because Obaku is not 
the only person who held this view, as the views of many elder monks make 
abundantly clear. 

As to Obaku’s replying, “I daren’t say so,” when someone in Sung China is 
asked whether he is capable of doing something, he uses this phrase, “I daren’t say 
so,” to acknowledge in a humble way his ability to do so. Thus, to say, “I daren’t 
say so,” does not mean that one doubts one’s abilities. What this expression says is 
not to be taken literally. Whether ‘the view of an elder monk’ refers to some other 
elder monk or whether ‘the view of an elder monk’ refers to Obaku, in either case 
the answer should be that he daren’t say so. It should be like a water buffalo 
coming out from the water and bellowing “Mu. ” 37 To put it like this is to affirm It. 
You should try and see if you can say, in your own words, the Principle that Obaku 
is affirming. 

Nansen said, “Setting aside for the moment the matter of payment for your 
rice broth, to whom are you to return payment for your straw sandals?” In other 
words, the cost of your rice gruel is put aside for the moment, but who gets paid for 
the cost of your straw sandals? We should spend life after life exploring the intent 
of this statement through our training. We should keep our minds diligently 
investigating what he meant by ‘whatever the cost of the broth, don’t worry about 
it for the moment’. Why was he so concerned about the cost of straw sandals? It is 
as if he had asked, “In all the years that you have spent traveling as a mendicant 


37. Dogen will explain the significance of this term later in this discourse when he discusses the 
koan story of Joshu’s dog. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


272 


monk, how many pairs of straw sandals have you worn out?” to which Obaku 
might answer, “If I had not paid back the cost, I would not still be wearing straw 
sandals,” or, then again, he might reply, “Two or three pairs.” Either way could be 
how he expressed the Matter. Each way would correspond to his intent. 

The statement that Obaku thereupon remained silent simply means that he 
desisted from speaking. He did not remain silent because what he said was negated 
by Nansen, nor did he remain silent because he was negating what Nansen said. A 
patch-robed monk of true color is not like that. Keep in mind that silence speaks, 
just as laughter can wield a sword. This is Buddha Nature clearly seeing that there 
is enough gruel and enough rice. 


In citing this story, Isan asked his disciple Kyozan, “Don’t you 
think this shows that Obaku was no match for Nansen?” 

Kyozan replied, “Not so. We should recognize that Obaku had 
the wherewithal to capture the tiger alive.” 

Isan said, “My disciple’s perceptiveness has excelled itself in 

this.” 

What Isan was saying is, “Wasn’t Obaku able to match Nansen?” Kyozan said that 
Obaku had the wherewithal to capture the tiger alive. If he had already captured the 
tiger, he could probably have stroked the tiger on its head. To capture a tiger and to 
pet a tiger are to engage in two totally different things. Is clearly seeing Buddha 
Nature the same as opening the Eye? Is one’s Buddha Nature seeing clearly the 
same as losing one’s Eye? Quick, quick, speak! The perceptiveness of Buddha 
Nature excels Itself in this. As a result, It does not depend on half a thing or on its 
whole. Nor does It depend on hundreds of thousands of things or on hundreds of 
thousands of occasions. For this reason it can be said: 

The snares and traps ofpassion are but a single face of It. 

On no time within a day does It depend, nor is It outside of 
time; 

Rather, It is like wisteria and kudzu entwined about a tree. 

All within the universe and the universe itself are still 
bereft of words for It, you see. 


A certain monk once asked Great Master Joshu, “Does even a 
dog have Buddha Nature?” 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


273 


o o 

We need to clarify the intent of this question. ‘Dog’ here means a dog. He is not 
asking, “Can such a creature have Buddha Nature?” nor is he asking, “Can such a 
creature be devoid of Buddha Nature?” What he is really asking is, “Is even an 
iron man exploring the Way through his training?” Even though the trainee has 
made a mistake and his feelings of rancor and regret, which have become 
poisonous, are profound, still, even after thirty years it would be an improvement 
to see half a saintly person. 39 

Joshu replied, “(Mu) No, it doesn’t.” 

When we hear this expression, there are pathways that we need to 
investigate. The “no” by which Buddha Nature reveals Its identity will be 
expressed by this word. And the “no” by which the identity of a dog is revealed 
will also be expressed by this word. And the “no” of an onlooker’s exclamation 
will also be expressed by this word. 40 There may come a day when that “no” of 
Joshu’s will simply be a word for grinding away at stones. 

The monk then asked, “All sentient beings, without exception, 
have Buddha Nature, so how come a dog is devoid of It?” 


38. Even though kou-tsu (the Chinese word for ‘dog’) has often been understood in China and 
Japan as referring to an animal (as implied by a literal rendering of Dogen’s discourse), in 
both countries, ‘dog’ has long been used as a tenn for someone who is morally depraved (‘a 
dog of a person’). In Buddhism, such persons were called icchantika, that is, those who were 
constant in their deliberate and wanton breakage of Precepts. Such persons were 
consequently thought to be devoid of Buddha Nature. Further, ‘dog’ was also sometimes 
used in both countries as a humbling term for oneself (‘a dog of a person like me’), someone 
who is doggedly devoted. There is apparently an interplay of all three meanings in the 
following passages. 

39. That is, the intent behind the monk’s question is as if he were asking, “I have truly tried to 
train with an iron will, but I have not yet realized the Truth. Is it because a dog of a trainee 
like me is somehow spiritually defective?” Dogen’s comment is that even if someone’s 
training is being poisoned by feelings of regret at not yet having realized the Truth, still, 
asking the question in the first place is itself a sign of spiritual progress (being a half-saintly 
person), even if the person has not yet awakened to his True Nature after thirty years of 
training. 

40. That is, the word ‘no’ has different meanings, depending on what it relates to. In the context 
of Buddha Nature, it means ‘being beyond having or not having’; in the context of a dog, it 
means ‘not possessing a Buddha Nature’; and in the context of a bystander, it means “There 
is nothing there that I can see.” 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


274 


The import of his question is as though he were saying, “If all sentient beings did 
not exist, then Buddha Nature would not exist and a dog would not exist. How 
about that point? How could you expect a dog not to have Buddha Nature?” 

Joshu responded, “On the grounds that such a one has karmic 

• ’)') 41 

ignorance. 

The meaning of what he said is that even though the reason for its existence is 
karmic ignorance, and its having karmic ignorance is the grounds for its existence, 
a dog does not possess karmic ignorance, nor does Buddha Nature possess it. 
Karmic ignorance has never understood what a dog really is, so how could a dog 
possibly encounter Buddha Nature? Whether Joshu were to confirm or contradict 
what the monk said, still, this is a case of karmic ignorance on the monk’s part 
from beginning to end. 

Joshu had another monk who asked him, “Does Buddha Nature 
exist even in a dog, yes or no?” 42 

This question may have been the reason why this monk was a match for Joshu, 43 
since expressing or asking about Buddha Nature is the everyday food and drink of 
Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Joshu said, “(U) Yes, It exists.” 

The nature of this ‘It exists’ is beyond the ‘existence’ as understood by the 
commentators of the various scholastic traditions, and beyond the assertion of 
existence made by the Sarvastivadins. 44 Advancing on from them, we should 
investigate what the existence of Buddha is. The existence of Buddha is Joshu’s “It 
exists,” and Joshu’s “It exists” is the dog’s existing, and the dog’s existing is the 
existence of Buddha Nature. 


41. Karmic ignorance may be defined as the deluded state of consciousness that was inherited at 
birth from past lives and which inhibits one from seeing Buddha Nature. 

42. In the original text, the wording of this question is the same as that used by the preceding 
monk, but the intent is different, as the subsequent comments by Joshu and Dogen make 
clear. 

43. The implication of this statement is that the previous monk had asked the question from the 
perspective of one who had not yet realized his True Nature, whereas this monk had already 
had such a realization and was exploring True Nature with his Master. 

44. The Sarvastivadins were members of one of the twenty pre-Mahayana schools of Indian 
Buddhism, which arose some three centuries after the death of Shakyamuni. One of their 
doctrines was that past, present, and future time all have real existence and that the Dharma 
is ever-present. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


275 


The monk then asked, “If It already exists, why is It strongly 
impelled to enter into this body of flesh?” 

This monk’s question is asking, “Is It something existing now, or is It something 
that existed at some time in the past, or has It always existed?” Even though That 
Which Always Exists resembles other types of existence, That Which Always 
Exists clearly stands alone. 

Is That Which Always Exists strongly impelled to enter into fleshly form or 
is It not? Although we have been strongly impelled to take on this fleshly body of 
ours, in our daily conduct and spiritual practice there is no bumbling, useless effort. 

Joshu replied, “It is because a dog knowingly and intentionally 
breaks Precepts.” 

Even though this statement had long been spread abroad as a common saying, it 
was now Joshu’s way of putting the Matter . 45 What he is talking about is the 
deliberate breaking of Precepts. Probably very few people have not had doubts 
about this expression of his, because it is difficult for them to clearly understand 
the character for ‘enter into’, which is part of the phrase ‘impelled to enter into’. 
However, this character for ‘enter into’ is not essential . 46 
Moreover, as Sekito Kisen put it in a poem: 

If you would know the Undying One within the hermit’s hut, 

How can you do it apart from your fleshly body here and now? 

Even though we may not yet know who the Undying One is, when, pray, are we to 
separate It from our fleshly body? Having broken a Precept is not necessarily what 
impels us to enter a body of flesh, nor is our impulse to enter this fleshly body of 
ours necessarily due to our knowingly having broken a Precept. When such an 
action is done deliberately, then the Precept will be broken. You need to realize that 
this breaking of Precepts will be hidden from sight within our daily conduct and 
spiritual practice of dropping off body. This is expressed as ‘being impelled to 
enter’. When our daily conduct and spiritual practice of dropping off body is 
genuinely hidden from sight, it will be concealed from both ourselves and others. 


45. That is, the popular understanding of the statement was that if someone, knowing better, 
deliberately broke Precepts, that person would be reborn as an animal. 

46. The phrase ‘being impelled to enter into’ is comprised of two characters: the first (to) means 
‘to be impelled’, the second (nyu) means ‘to enter into’. Dogen’s point is that the ‘enter into’ 
is unessential, since it is difficult to see a clear distinction between ‘to be impelled to take on 
some bodily form’ and ‘to be impelled to enter into taking on some bodily form’. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


276 


Even so, do not say that you are not yet free, that you are just a fellow with a 

47 

donkey in front of him and a horse behind him. 

Even more, as our lofty Ancestor Ungo Doyo said, “Even though you may 
have studied the Buddha Dharma to Its very limits, you have erred in your 
approach if you have completely depended on your intellect.” Accordingly, even 
though someone has made this error for a long time, piling up the days and months 
by half-learning the Buddha Dharma to Its limits, such a person must be a dog who 
has been impelled to enter into that fleshly body of his. Although he knowingly has 
broken Precepts, he will still have Buddha Nature. 


In the assembly of the virtuous monk Chosa Keishin, his lay 
disciple Chiku, who was a high government official, raised a question, 
saying, “When a live earthworm is cut in two, both parts continue to 
move. I wonder, in which part does the Buddha Nature reside?” 

The Master responded, “Do not engage in deluded, dualistic 
thinking.” 

The official asked, “But how do you account for the 
twitching?” 

The Master replied, “It is simply that the elements of wind and 
fire have not yet dissipated.” 

Now, when the government official remarked about an earthworm being cut 
in two, had he concluded that, prior to its being cut, it was one segment of Buddha 
Nature? This is not the way things are viewed within the everyday experience of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors. The earthworm was not originally one segment of It, 
and, after being cut, the earthworm was not two segments of It. The assertion of 
‘one’ and ‘two’ needs to be diligently explored through one’s training and practice. 
As to the ‘two parts’ in his saying that both parts continue to move, did he take the 
worm before it had been cut to be one part of Buddha Nature, and did he take That 
which goes beyond awakening to be one part of the worm? Regardless of how the 
government official may have understood his phrase ‘two parts’, do not disregard 
the words he spoke. Is it that the two cut segments made up one whole and, 
moreover, that they exist as a whole being? The movement of which he spoke 
when saying that both continue to move will be the movement of one’s meditative 
practice which loosens the roots of delusion and the movement of one’s wise 
discernment which pulls these roots out. 


47. A Zen phrase for an ordinary person who has not yet realized enlightenment. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


277 


His statement, “I wonder, in which part does the Buddha Nature reside?” 
needs to be examined in detail. He should have said, “When someone cuts Buddha 
Nature in two, I wonder in which part does the earthworm reside?” In saying, 
“Both parts continue to move, so in which part does Buddha Nature reside?” does 
he mean that, if both are moving, it is not possible for Buddha Nature to reside in 
either? Or is he saying that, if both are moving, the place where Buddha Nature is 
residing must be in one or the other, even though both are moving? 

When the Master responded, “Do not engage in deluded, dualistic thinking,” 
what could he have meant by saying that his disciple should not engage in dualistic 
thinking? Did he mean that there is nothing dualistic about both parts moving, that 
the matter is beyond duality? Or did he simply mean that Buddha Nature is beyond 
duality? We should also investigate his statement that, simply, there is no duality, 
without getting into a discussion about ‘Buddha Nature’ or about ‘two parts’. 

As to the official’s asking what we are to make of their twitching, is he 
asserting that because they are twitching, it must be due to their piling one Buddha 
Nature atop another, or is he asserting that even though they are twitching, it is 
apart from their Buddha Nature? 

The Master’s replying that it is simply a matter of the elements of wind and 
fire not yet having dissipated was his way of making Buddha Nature emerge. Is he 
saying that it is Buddha Nature or is he saying that it is wind and fire? He cannot 
say that Buddha Nature appears together with wind and fire, nor can he say that 
one appears but not the other, nor can he say that because there is wind and fire, 
there is Buddha Nature. Therefore, Chosa did not say that an earthworm possesses 
Buddha Nature, nor did he say that an earthworm does not possess Buddha Nature. 
He simply stated that his disciple was not to engage in dualistic thinking and that 
the wind and fire had not yet dissipated. When it comes to the living reality of 
Buddha Nature, we should make Chosa’s words our way of thinking about It. 

The phrase ‘wind and fire have not yet dissipated’ needs calm and diligent 
consideration. What is the underlying meaning of ‘not yet having dissipated’? In 
his saying that they have not yet dissipated, is he saying that although the wind and 
fire had arrived, the time for their dispersal had not yet arrived? By no means! His 
saying “Wind and fire have not yet dissipated” is a Buddha giving expression to 
the Dharma. The wind and fire’s not yet having dispersed is Dharma expressing 
Buddha. The moment had arrived for giving voice to a single sound of the Dharma. 
It is a single sound of the Dharma being voiced, and it is the moment of Its arrival. 
The Dharma is a single sound, because It is the Dharma of the One Sound. 

Further, to think that Buddha Nature exists only during the time of life and 
that It cannot exist during the time of death is to have heard very little and 
understood even less. The time of life is one of ‘having Buddha Nature’ and of ‘not 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


278 


having a Buddha Nature’, and the time of death is one of ‘having Buddha Nature’ 
and of ‘not having a Buddha Nature’. If there were any discussion of whether or 
not the wind and fire had dissipated, it would have to be a discussion of whether or 
not Buddha Nature had dissipated. Even the time of their dissipating will be a time 
when Buddha Nature exists and a time when a Buddha Nature does not exist. And 
even the time before they have dissipated will be a time in which they are 
possessed of Buddha Nature and a time in which they do not possess a Buddha 
Nature. At the same time, to erroneously suppose that Buddha Nature is present or 
not present depending on whether or not there is movement, or to suppose that It is 
or is not transcendent depending on whether or not one is conscious of It, or to 
suppose that It is or is not one’s nature depending on whether or not one is aware 
of It is to be a non-Buddhist, someone who is outside the Way. 

From time immemorial there have been many foolish people who have taken 
their consciousness to be Buddha Nature and who have taken themselves to be 
someone who has realized their Original Nature, which is enough to make one die 
laughing. Moreover, to put into words what Buddha Nature is without going so far 
as to wallow in the mud or get soaked with water, It is the tiles and stones for our 
walls and fences . 48 

When It is stated on an even loftier level, what could It possibly be, this 
Buddha Nature? Have you really grasped It yet, in detail? It is having three heads 
and eight arms ! 49 

Delivered to the assembly on the fourteenth day of the tenth lunar month in the second year of 
the Ninji era (November 18, 1241) at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple, Yamashiro 
Province. 

Copied by me on the nineteenth day of the first lunar month in the fourth year of the same era 
(February 9, 1243). 

Ejo 


48. ‘Wallowing in the mud or getting soaked in water’ is a common Zen phrase for going to 
whatever lengths are necessary to help a sentient being realize the Truth. ‘Tiles and stones 
for our walls and fences’ refers to the bits and pieces of our experiences which we use to 
construct our world. 

49. An allusion to the guardian kings Achalanatha, the Steadfast Bodhisattva, and Ragaraja, the 
Passionate Bodhisattva. The former is sometimes associated with the finn commitment of 
trainees to train until they have overcome all hindrances to realizing enlightenment as they 
persist in helping others to realize Truth. The latter has associations with a passionate desire 
to help all sentient beings realize Buddhahood. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddha Nature 


279 


gQ? cQ? cQ? 

<J5 <J5 <^> 

Translator’s Addendum from 

Book One, Koan 96 from Dogen’s Chinese Shinji Shobogenzo 

Fuke and Rinzai were at the house of a donor for an alms meal . 50 Rinzai 
remarked, “It is said that a hair swallows up the vast ocean and that a mustard seed 
contains all of Mount Sumeru. Does this refer to someone’s wondrous use of 
spiritual abilities, or does this refer to all things having Original Nature?” At this, 
Fuke knocked Rinzai’s seat out from under him . 51 Rinzai said in rebuke, “Clumsy 
ox!” Fuke said, “ Right here is where the What is, whether the Matter is put 
clumsily or delicately.” At this, Rinzai, abashed, retired from the room. 

The next day, the two were visiting the same family for an alms meal. Rinzai 
asked Fuke, “Is today’s offering the same as yesterday’s?” Fuke again knocked 
Rinzai’s seat out from under him. Rinzai said reproachfully, “Clumsy ox!” Fuke 
replied, “O you with your eyes closed, would you care to expound on the 
clumsiness or delicacy of the What in the Buddha Dharma?” Rinzai, thereupon, 
stuck out his tongue at Fuke and ‘blew him a raspberry’. 


50. Fuke and Rinzai were training together at the same temple, and Fuke was the more senior of 
the two monks. They shared a common ancestor in Baso. 

51. Rinzai’s question is not only erudite in nature but it is inappropriate during an alms meal, 
since such alms were given to a monk with the understanding that they were to support a 
monk’s spiritual training, not to foster intellectual pursuits. 



22 

On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 

(Gydbutsu Iigi) 


Translator’s Introduction: The term iigi, which in common parlance may be literally rendered 
as ‘dignified behavior’, refers specifically in Buddhism to the four modes of everyday human 
bodily behavior: moving, standing still, sitting, and reclining. 

In a later section of this discourse, Dogen takes up an exchange between Meditation Master 
Seppo Gison and his disciple Gensha Shibi, who was his Dharma heir. The relationship between 
these two monks is illustrative of what is called the vertical and horizontal relationship of Master 
and Transmitted disciple: on one level, Seppo remains Shibi’s monastic senior, and on another, 
the two are on equal footing. While this relationship would hold true for Masters and their 
disciples in general, in this case it extended to the point where the two monks shared the 
Abbotship and Dharma seat of their temple. What one said was then expressed by the other as 
another way of putting the matter or as an expansion upon the theme of the first. At times, Dogen 
seems to find Shibi’s statement to be lacking in some sense, but this may have been his way of 
illustrating the horizontal and vertical aspects of the Master-disciple relationship in which the 
two are equal while, at the same time, the Master is the disciple’s senior. 


All Buddhas, without exception, make full use of Their everyday behavior 
for Their practice. This is what is meant by ‘a Buddha doing His practice’. ‘A 
Buddha doing His practice’ does not refer to a Buddha’s realizing enlightenment or 
to a Buddha’s transforming Himself for the sake of helping others. Nor does it refer 
to a Buddha as the embodiment of the Dharma or to a Buddha as others see Him 
embodied. It is beyond the state of a Buddha at His initial realization or at His 
fundamental realization, and it is beyond the state of a Buddha in His inherent 
enlightenment or in His going ‘beyond being enlightened’. A Buddha who is 
equivalent to any of these can never stand shoulder-to-shoulder with a Buddha who 
is doing His practice. Keep in mind that Buddhas, being within the Buddha’s Way, 
do not go looking for realization. Becoming proficient in one’s daily conduct 
whilst on the path towards Buddhahood is what is meant by ‘a Buddha just doing 
His practice’. It is not something that is even dreamt of by those who are, say, 
Buddhas as embodiments of the Dharma. 

Because this Buddha who is doing His practice manifests the four modes of 
behavior in everything He does, He manifests these modes right out in the open. 
Before He speaks, He gives a hint of His spiritual activity, which is woven into 


280 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


281 


whatever He does. This activity goes beyond time, or place, or ‘being Buddha’, or 
‘doing some practice’. If you are not a Buddha doing your practice, you will not let 
go of your attachment to ‘Buddha’ or your attachment to ‘Dharma’, and you will be 
grouped with those poor devils who deny that Buddha and Dharma can be found 
within themselves. 

What being attached to ‘Buddha’ means is that a person has formed an 
intellectual concept of ‘enlightenment’ and then becomes attached to this concept 
and his understanding of it. Because this view accompanies him through each 
moment, he does not look for an opportunity to let go of this concept and 
understanding, and so he uselessly holds onto his mistaken views. On the other 
hand, to view and explain enlightenment as ‘just being enlightenment’ may well be 
a perspective that accords with enlightenment, for who could call this a false view? 
I recall my own indulgence in conceptualization as my tying myself up without a 
rope. It was a fetter at every moment, for the tree of self had not fallen and the 
wisteria vines of my entanglements had not withered away. This was simply my 
passing through life whilst meaninglessly imprisoned in a cave of ignorance on the 
periphery of Buddhism. I did not realize that my Dharma Body was ill nor did I 
recognize that my Reward Body was in distress . 1 

Those in the various Buddhist doctrinal schools, who are academic teachers 
of Scriptures or erudite commentators and the like, have heard what the Buddha 
said as if from afar, and have remarked, as did one of the Tendai Masters, that even 
though there is the Ultimate Nature of things, to set up some theory as to that 
Ultimate Nature is the very darkness of karmic* ignorance. In saying this, the 
Tendai Master failed to add that when a theory on the ultimate nature of things 
arises within Ultimate Nature, this ‘ultimate nature of things’ is a fetter. Further, he 
has added the fetter of ignorance atop this. Even though, sad to say, the Master did 
not recognize the fetter of ‘the ultimate nature of things’, one’s ability to recognize 
the addition of the fetter of ignorance can become the seed for the mind’s giving 
rise to the aspiration to realize enlightenment. 

Now, a Buddha doing His practice has never been fettered with 
entanglements like this. This is why Shakyamuni Buddha said in the Lotus 
Scripture, “The lifetime which I obtained by My practice of the Bodhisattva* Path 


1. This is a reference to the three Bodies of the Buddha (Trikaya). The first is the Truth Body 
(Dharmakaya), which represents Absolute Truth or Buddha Mind Itself. The Reward Body 
(Sambhogakaya) represents the blissful reward of Buddhist training. The third is the 
Transformation Body (Nirmanakaya), which is the physical body of the Buddha as it 
appears in the world. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


282 


from the start is not exhausted even now, and will still be twice the past number of 
eons.” You need to recognize that this does not mean that His lifetime as a 
bodhisattva was strung out in a continuous line to the present, nor does it mean that 
the life span of the Buddha was ever-present in the past. The ‘past number’ of 
which He spoke refers to all that He had accomplished up to that point. The ‘even 
now’ that He refers to is the whole of His life span. Even though His practice from 
the start has been as continuous and unvarying as an iron rail extending over ten 
thousand miles, yet, at the same time, it is His letting go of things for hundreds of 
years and His letting things be what they are, wherever they are. 

As a consequence, doing one’s training and realizing the Truth are beyond a 
matter of existing or not existing, for training and realizing the Truth are beyond 
any stain. There are hundreds of thousands of myriad places where there are no 
Buddhas or human beings, yet this does not sully a Buddha who is doing His 
practice. Thus it is that someone who does the practice of a Buddha is not sullied 
by notions of ‘doing one’s training’ or ‘realizing the Truth’. This does not mean 
that one’s training to realize the Truth is necessarily untainted. And, at the same 
time, this state of ‘being untainted’ really does exist. 


As Eno of Mount Sokei once said to his disciple Nangaku: 

This Immaculacy is simply what all Buddhas protect and keep 
in mind. It is the same for you too, and it is the same for me too. And 
it is the same for all our Indian Ancestors too. 

So, because you are also like this, you are all the Buddhas, and because I am also 
like this, I am all the Buddhas. Truly, It is beyond ‘me’ and beyond ‘you’. Within 
this Immaculacy, the me that is the real Me—which all the Buddhas protect and 
keep in mind—is what the everyday behavior of a Buddha doing His practice is, 
and the you that is the real You—which all the Buddhas protect and keep in 
mind—is what the everyday behavior of a Buddha doing His practice is. Due to the 
‘me too’, Eno’s everyday behavior is what constituted his excellence as a Master, 
and due to the ‘you too’, Nangaku’s everyday behavior is what constituted his 
strength as a disciple, because the excellence of a Master and the strength of a 
disciple are what comprise the perfect knowledge and conduct of a Buddha doing 
His practice. You need to realize that what we call ‘what is protected and kept in 
mind by all Buddhas’ is ‘me too’ and ‘you too’. Even though the explanation by the 
former Buddha of Mount Sokei is beyond ‘me’, how could it possibly not refer to 
‘you’? What is protected and kept in mind by Buddhas who are doing Their 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


283 


practice is no different from That which thoroughly penetrates a Buddha who is 
doing His practice. 

From the preceding it should be evident that doing one’s training and 
realizing the Truth are beyond such things as one’s innate nature and the forms it 
takes, or what is the root is and what the branches are. In that the mental attitude of 
a Buddha doing His training is, as might be expected, what causes a Buddha to 
train, Buddhas willingly train Themselves accordingly. There are those who put 
aside their body for the sake of the Teaching as well as those who put aside the 
Teaching for the sake of their body, and there are those who do not begrudge their 
own lives as well as those who do begrudge their own lives. And not only are there 
instances of putting aside ‘Dharma’ for the sake of the Dharma, there is also the 
everyday behavior in which someone may put aside the ‘Teaching’ for the sake of 
his Mind. Do not lose sight of the fact that the ways of letting go are incalculable. 
We cannot gauge or measure the Great Way by using what some Buddha may think 
about. The thoughts of any Buddha represent but a single angle: they are, for 
instance, like the opening of one flower. Do not use just your discriminative mind 
to grope about for what everyday behavior is or how to put it in words. The 
discriminative mind is but one aspect: it is, for instance, like a single realm. 
Considering a blade of grass is clearly what the discriminative mind of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors considers . 2 This is one means by which a Buddha doing 
His training comes to recognize the traces of His footsteps. Even if, by our 
wholehearted consideration, we clearly see that our understanding of ‘what a 
Buddha is’ is beyond fathoming, when we focus on the bodily behavior and 
demeanor of a Buddha doing His practice—whether He is moving or still—His 
behavior and demeanor will fundamentally have features that surpass our present 
understanding. Because it is His daily conduct that surpasses our fathoming, we 
cannot compare it or apply it to anyone else, for it is beyond anything that we can 
gauge or measure. 

djb 

<X> 


Now, there is something that we need to investigate in the everyday behavior 
of a Buddha doing His practice. True, the everyday behavior of ‘me too’ and ‘you 
too’ is connected with the innate capabilities of ‘I alone’ in regards to one’s having 
come the way one has, both as a Buddha here and now and as oneself here and 
now. Nevertheless, this everyday behavior is the state of liberation associated with 


2. The ‘discriminative’ mind here refers to the discerning, non-judgmental functioning of the 
mind of Buddhas and Ancestors. The ‘discriminatory’ mind is used to describe the 
judgmental mind, which recognizes differences and then adds a value judgment to them. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


284 


the Buddhas in the ten directions and is not simply one’s identification with that 
state. This is why a former Buddha said, “Having comprehended the Matter* in 
abstract terms, we come back to the here and now where we conduct our daily 
living.” When we maintain and rely upon the Matter in this way, all things, all 
beings, all practices, and all Buddhas are familiar to us and are our kindly friends. 

Simply, each and every one of the Buddhas who physically put the Dharma 
into practice had obstructions to Their directly experiencing the Truth. Because 
there are obstructions to one’s directly experiencing the Truth, there will be 
liberation in one’s directly experiencing the Truth. When the hundreds of thoughts 
and things sprout up like grass blades before your eyes in such a bewildering way 
that they impede your sight, do not be dismayed that you cannot discern even a 
single thought or a single object. They are simply what is manifesting in this 
thought and what is manifesting in that thing. No matter what we ‘pick up’ or ‘haul 
away’ as we busy ourselves with entering and departing through the gates of our 
senses each day, nothing anywhere has ever been hidden from us, and, as a result, 
the Venerable Shakyamuni’s words, and realization, and practices, and 
Transmission, though unheard and unseen, are ever present. 

Whenever I go out the gates, just grass, 

And whenever I come in the gates, just grass, 

So for a myriad leagues 

There is not even an inch of grass. 

And the words ‘come in ’ 

And the words ‘go out’ 

Do not apply here 
Nor do they apply there. 

Whatever thoughts or things we are now grasping and clinging to as ‘real’ are not 
supported by our practice of letting go, and yet they are our dreams and illusions, 
our ‘flowers in the sky’. Who of us can see as mistaken these persistent dreams and 
illusions, these manufactured ‘flowers in the sky’? Because to step forth is a 
mistake and to step back is a mistake, because taking one step is a mistake and 


3. To paraphrase this poem, whenever I look either outside or within myself, there are only the 
transient images that my senses perceive and which my mind gives substance to. Hence, all 
there is in any experience is what I describe as arising, temporarily persisting, and 
dissipating, and that is of my own constructing. In this sense, the ‘myriad blades of grass’ 
are not real, no matter how far I travel within or without. And since there is no T that ‘goes 
out’ or ‘comes in’, these terms are useless in describing or directly knowing That Which Is 
Real. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


285 


taking two steps is a mistake, we make one mistake after another, for we have 
made Heaven and Earth strangers to each other. The Way to the Ultimate is not 
hard . 4 As for our dignity in these comings and goings, we should take as our ideal 
in our everyday behavior Sosan’s line, “The Great Way is being naturally at ease 
within ourselves.” 

We need to keep in mind that our coming forth into life is at one with our 
coming forth into the Way and that our entering death is at one with our entering 
the Way. In the head-to-tail rightness of that state, our everyday behavior manifests 
before our very eyes as if the turning of a jewel or the revolving of a pearl. To 
make use of, and be possessed of, one aspect of a Buddha’s everyday behavior is to 
be the whole of the great earth in all directions, as well as the whole of birth-and- 
death and coming-and-going; it is to be a dust-filled mundane world and to be a 
lotus in full bloom. This dust-filled mundane world and this lotus blossom are each 
an aspect of It. 

Many scholars are of the opinion that to speak of the whole of the great earth 
in all directions may refer to the southern continent of Jambudvipa* or to the four 
continents, whereas some cling to the notion that it is just the single nation of 
China, or go around in circles thinking that it is the single nation of Japan. 
Furthermore, just to say the words ‘the whole of the great earth’ is like thinking of 
it as the three-thousand great-thousandfold worlds, or like holding onto the notion 
of it as just one province or one district. Were you to undertake to explore the 
phrase ‘the whole of the great earth’ or ‘the whole of the universe’ through your 
training, you would need to mull it over three or four times, and do not conclude 
that such phrases are simply concerned with the breadth of something. This 
realization of the Way goes beyond ‘Buddha’ and transcends ‘Ancestor’. It is that 
which is extremely large being the same as that which is small, and that which is 
extremely small being the same as that which is large. Even though this resembles 
the dubious statement that when ‘large’ does not exist, ‘small’ does not exist, it is 
nevertheless synonymous with a Buddha doing His practice as His everyday 
behavior. What Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor have All 


4. Dogen is alluding to lines from the poem “That Which Is Engraved upon the Heart That 
Trusts to the Eternal” by Kanchi Sosan: 

The Way to the Ultimate is not hard; 

Simply give up being picky and choosey... 

Let but a hair s breadth of discriminatory thought arise 
And you have made Heaven and Earth strangers to each other 

One translation of the full poem can be found in Buddhist Writings on Meditation and Daily 
Practice, (Shasta Abbey Press, 1994), pp. 213-221. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


286 


affirmed is the everyday behavior of the whole universe. This should be explored 
by you through your training as ‘nothing ever having been hidden from you’. Not 
only has nothing ever been hidden from you, the everyday behavior of a Buddha 
doing His practice is His ‘making tea’ for everyone. 


Even though there are those who, in giving voice to the Buddha’s Way, may 
state that being bom from the womb, say, or being bom by transformation is a 
daily occurrence on the way to Buddhahood, such persons have still not stated that 
one may also be bom from moisture or from an egg. And what is more, they have 
not even dreamt of there being birth beyond those from womb, egg, moisture, or 
transformation. How much less could they possibly experience and perceive that 
beyond birth from womb, egg, moisture, or transformation there is birth from 
Womb, Egg, Moisture, or Transformation? Now, according to the great words of 
Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor, there is a Womb, a Moisture, an 
Egg, and a Transformation that is beyond birth from womb, egg, moisture, or 
transformation, which They have correctly Transmitted as ‘nothing ever having 
been hidden’, and They have correctly Transmitted this Tmth privately and in 
secret. How are we to categorize that bunch who most likely have not heard of this 
expression, much less have they learned about it, or understood it, or clarified what 
it means? You have already heard about the four types of birth, but how many 
types of death are there? For the four types of birth, could there be four types of 
death? Or could there be only two or three types of death? Or could there be five or 
six types, or a thousand or myriad types of death? Even entertaining a bit of doubt 
about this principle is part of exploring the Matter through training with one’s 
Master. 

Let’s consider this for the moment. Can there be any kind of sentient being 
sprung from one of the four types of birth who experiences birth but does not 
experience death? And are there any to whom the direct, one-to-one, Transmission 
of death has been given who have not received the direct, one-to-one, Transmission 
of life? You should by all means explore through your training whether there is any 
kind of being who is only bom or who only dies. 

There are those who hear the phrase ‘that which is beyond birth’ without 
ever clarifying what it means, acting as if they didn’t need to make any effort with 
their body and mind. This is a dullard’s foolishness in the extreme. They must be 
some kind of beast who has not even reached the level of discussing the gradual 
awakening of one who practices with faith and the sudden awakening of one who 
quickly grasps the Dharma. If you ask why, the reason is that even if they hear the 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


287 


phrase ‘that which is beyond birth’, they still need to explore what the intent of this 
statement is. Further, they make no effort to inquire into what ‘beyond Buddha’, 
‘beyond the Way’, ‘beyond mind’, and ‘beyond annihilation’ might mean, or what 
‘being beyond that which is beyond birth’ might mean, or what ‘beyond the realm 
of thoughts and things’ and ‘beyond one’s Original Nature’ might mean, or what 
‘beyond death’ might mean. This is because they sit idly by, like creatures that live 
in the water or in the vegetation. 

Keep in mind that ‘birth-and-death’ refers to our daily conduct in the 
Buddha’s Way, and that ‘birth-and-death’ is one of the everyday tools in our 
Buddhist tradition. It is something that we use skillfully and by which we gain 
skillfulness; it is something that we clarify and by which we gain clarity. As a 
consequence, all Buddhas are completely clear and bright within the free 
functioning of this ‘birth-and-death’, and They are completely purposeful in Their 
making use of it. Should any of you be in the dark about the times when this ‘birth- 
and-death’ occurs, who could say who your ‘you’ really is? Who would describe 
you as someone who fully understands what life is and who has mastered what 
death is? Such people as these cannot hear that they have sunk deep, drowning in 
‘birth-and-death’, and also cannot comprehend that they exist within ‘birth-and- 
death’. They cannot believe and accept that ‘birth-and-death’ means being born and 
dying at each instant, nor can they plead that they do not understand it or that they 
do not know it. 

On the other hand, some have fancied that Buddhas emerge only in the 
human world and that They do not manifest in other places or in other worlds . 5 If it 
were as they say, would all the places where a Buddha was present have to be part 
of the human world? This is their inference from the human Buddha’s statement, 
“I, and I alone, am the Honored One.” Well, there can also be celestial Buddhas, as 
well as Buddha Buddhas . 6 To assert that all Buddhas have manifested solely as 
human beings is not to have entered into the innermost sanctuary of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors. 

djb 


An Ancestor of our lineage once said, “After Shakyamuni Buddha received 
the Transmission of the True Teaching from Kasho Buddha, He went to the 
Tushita Heaven, where He is now residing, instructing the celestial inhabitants 


5. The worlds referred to here are the six worlds of existence into which a sentient being may 
be reborn. 

6. Celestial Buddhas exist in the celestial world, whereas Buddha Buddhas exist in a realm 
beyond the six worlds of existence. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


288 


there.” Truly, you need to realize that even though the human Shakyamuni had, by 
that time, taught about His future extinction, nevertheless, the Shakyamuni who 
was in a heavenly world is still there even now, teaching celestial beings. You who 
are undertaking this training should know that the remarks and actions of the 
human Shakyamuni underwent a thousand changes and myriad transformations. 
What He gave expression to when He let His light shine forth and manifested 
auspicious signs was but one aspect of His being a human being. We should not 
foolishly fail to realize that the Teaching of the Shakyamuni in the Tushita Heaven 
may also be of a thousand kinds and produce myriad gateways. The Great Way 
which Buddha after Buddha has correctly Transmitted transcends extinction, and 
the underlying principle that one lets go of ‘being beyond both beginning and 
ending’ has been correctly Transmitted by the Buddha’s Way, and by It alone. This 
is a meritorious behavior of the Buddha that others do not necessarily comprehend 
or even hear about. 

In places where a Buddha doing His practice is establishing the Teaching, 
there may be sentient beings who are beyond the four types of birth, and there may 
be places that are beyond the celestial worlds, beyond the world of ordinary human 
beings, beyond the world of mental objects, and the like. Whenever you attempt to 
catch a glimpse of the everyday behavior of a Buddha doing His practice, do not 
use the eyes of someone in a celestial world or in the world of ordinary human 
beings, and do not employ the discriminatory thinking of someone in a celestial 
world or in the world of ordinary human beings, and do not aim at fathoming a 
Buddha’s everyday behavior by trying to measure it. The ‘thrice wise and ten times 
saintly’* do not recognize it and have not clarified what it is, so how much less 
would the calculations of ordinary human beings and those in celestial worlds 
reach it! In that the discriminatory thinking of human beings is narrow in scope, so 
their sense-based intellects are also narrow in scope, and in that their life span is 
limited and urgent, what they concern themselves with is also limited and urgent. 
So, how could they possibly fathom the everyday behavior of a Buddha doing His 
practice? 

Therefore, do not count as disciples of the Buddha those in lineages that 
only take the world of ordinary human beings to be the realm of a Buddha or that 
narrow-mindedly take the ways of ordinary human beings to be the ways of a 
Buddha, for they are nothing more than human beings living out the result of past 
karma. Neither their body nor their mind has yet heard the Dharma, and they do 
not yet possess a body and mind that practices the Way. They do not live in accord 
with the Dharma or die in accord with the Dharma, nor do they see in accord with 
the Dharma or hear in accord with the Dharma, and they do not move, stand, sit, or 
recline in accord with the Dharma. Folks like this have never experienced the 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


289 


enriching benefits of the Dharma. They go around asserting such ‘principles’ as “A 
Buddha doing His practice is not related to His innate state of enlightenment or to 
His first awakening to that enlightened state” and “He is beyond ‘having realized 
or not having realized enlightenment. ’ ” 

Now, such notions as ‘thinking’ and ‘not thinking’, ‘having realized 
enlightenment’ and ‘not having realized enlightenment’, and ‘awakening to 
enlightenment’ and ‘being innately enlightened’, which common, worldly-minded 
people are avidly concerned with, are simply the avid concerns of common, 
worldly-minded people, for they are not what Buddha after Buddha has received 
and passed on. Do not make comparisons between the thinking of common, 
worldly-minded people and the thinking of the Buddhas, for they are vastly 
different. Common, worldly people’s being avidly concerned with their innate 
enlightenment and all the Buddhas’ actually realizing Their innate enlightenment 
are as different from each other as heaven and earth, for innate enlightenment is 
something beyond the reach of comparative discussions. The avid concerns of the 
thrice wise and ten times saintly have still not reached the Way of the Buddhas. 
How could the useless, ‘grain by grain’ calculations of common, worldly people 
possibly yield the measure of It? Even so, many are the folks who avidly concern 
themselves with false views on cause and effect and on ends and means, views 
which are held by common, worldly people and others who are outside the Way— 
and they suppose these views to be within the bounds of the Buddha’s Teachings. 
All the Buddhas have asserted that the roots of wrong-doing of these folks are deep 
and serious, and that such persons are to be pitied. And even though the deep and 
serious roots of their wrong-doing know no bounds, they are a heavy burden which 
these folks themselves must bear. They should just let go of this heavy burden, fix 
their gaze upon it, and look at it. And even though they may later take it up again 
and obstruct themselves with it, this burden will not then be the same as when it 
first arose. 

Now, the everyday behavior of a Buddha doing His practice is unobstructed. 
And to the extent that He is constrained by being a Buddha due to His having 
thoroughly mastered the path of ‘dragging oneself through mud and drowning 
oneself in water for the sake of others’, He is still beyond hindrances and 
obstructions. When in some lofty realm, He gives instruction for the lofty, and 
when in the world of ordinary human beings, He gives instruction for ordinary 
people. There is benefit in both the blossoming of a single flower and in the 
blossoming forth of the whole world, without there being even the slightest gap 
between them. As a result, He goes far beyond self and other, and there is a unique 
excellence in His comings and goings. He goes to the Tushita Heaven here and 
now, and He comes from the Tushita Heaven here and now, and His very here and 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


290 


now is the Tushita Heaven. He is content in His goings here and now, and He is 
content in His comings here and now, and His very here and now is His 
contentment. He goes far beyond the Tushita Heaven here and now, and He goes 
far beyond contentment here and now. He smashes to hundreds of bits both His 
contentment and the Tushita Heaven here and now, and He picks up and lets go of 
both His contentment and the Tushita Heaven here and now. He swallows both of 
them whole in one gulp. 

Keep in mind that what we call ‘contentment’ and the ‘Tushita Heaven’ are 
also spinning on the wheel of the six worlds* of existence, as are both the Pure 
Lands and the various Heavens. His daily activities are likewise the daily activities 
of the Pure Lands and the various Heavens. When He is greatly awake, they are 
likewise greatly awake. When He is greatly deluded, they are likewise greatly 
deluded. All this is simply a Buddha, when doing His practice, wriggling His toes 
in His straw sandals. There are times when His singular way of putting the Matter 
will be the sound from His breaking wind or the smell from His emptying His 

H 

bowels. Those with Nostrils will get a whiff of It. They catch It through the sense 
fields of their ears, their bodies, and their actions. And there are times when they 
get my very Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow. And It is also something that we 
realize through our practice and which cannot be obtained from someone else. 


When someone already has a broad and thorough grasp of the Great Way by 
understanding what life is and mastering what death is, that great saintly one leaves 
the matter of birth-and-death to the mind, and leaves the matter of birth-and-death 
to the body, and leaves the matter of birth-and-death to the Way, and leaves the 
matter of birth-and-death to birth and death. Although awareness of this principle is 
not something belonging to either the past or the present, yet, even so, the everyday 
behavior of a Buddha doing His practice is instantly practiced to the full. He 
immediately discerns and complies with the principle that the Way is an endless 
cycle, with body and mind continually arising and dying away. His practicing to 
the full and His illumining the Matter to the full are in no way forced actions, but 
greatly resemble what we do when our mind has wandered off into delusion: that 
is, when we observe the shadows in our mind, we then turn the light of our mind 
around to reflect on what we truly are. This brightness, which is a brightness 


7. ‘Those with Nostrils’ is a common Zen Buddhist term for those who are able to go beyond 
surface appearances to ‘sniff out’ the deeper, spiritual meaning behind an action done by 
someone who has awakened to the Truth. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


291 


beyond brightness, thoroughly permeates a Buddha doing His practice, and it 
manifests naturally within His actions. 

To grasp this principle of ‘one’s continually leaving it up to’, you must 
thoroughly explore what your mind is. In the unswerving stillness of this 
exploration, you will come to understand and recognize that the myriad turnings 
and shiftings within your mind are due to the brightness and openness of your 
mind, and that the three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form are simply great 
barriers within the mind. Also, even though what one has come to understand and 
recognize are simply the myriad thoughts and things that arise, this in itself has put 
into action ‘the homeland of our True Self’ and is the same the living experience of 
‘such a person’ * being ‘just the thing’. 

Thus, in ferreting out again and again what we are to take to serve as our 
model from what the Masters and Scriptures say and what skills we should seek 
that lie outside their words, there will be a catching on that goes beyond ‘catching 
on to’, and there will be a letting go that goes beyond ‘letting go of’. In such an 
undertaking, we need to ask ourselves what life really is. And what is death? And 
what is body and mind? And what is given and what is taken? And what is 
‘keeping true to’ or ‘violating’? Is it going in and out of the same gate without 
meeting ‘such a one’? Or is it our concealing our body while letting just our horns 
show ? 8 Or is it placing just one piece at a time on a Go game board and letting it 
lie there? Is it giving great consideration to the Matter until we resolve It? Or is it 
letting our thoughts mature until we realize It? Is It the One Bright Pearl? Or is It 
what the whole of the great Treasure House teaches? Is It the staff that supports an 
elderly monk? Or is It one’s Face and Eye? Is It what comes after thirty years of 
training? Or is It ten thousand years within a single thought? We should examine 
these matters in detail and we should not overlook anything in our examination. 
When we do our examination in detail, our whole Eye hears sounds and our whole 
Ear sees forms and colors. And further, when a mendicant monk’s single Eye is 
clearly open, the sounds, forms, and colors It sees will not be the thoughts and 
things before one’s eyes. There will appear His gentle countenance breaking into a 
smile and His twinkling eyes. This is the ever-fleeting quality of the everyday 
behavior of a Buddha doing His practice. It is not a matter of ‘being hauled about 
by things’; rather, it is a matter of ‘not hauling things about’. It is beyond our 
notion of something being ‘unborn and uncreated’ which actually arises dependent 
upon causal conditions. And It is beyond our Original Nature and the Ultimate 
Nature of things. It is beyond our simply abiding in our place. And It is beyond the 


8. This is a Zen Buddhist metaphor meaning that a person has implied more than they have 
actually said. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


292 


state of our Original Existence. It is not only our affirming that things are just as 
they are, it is simply being a Buddha doing His practice in His everyday behavior. 

Accordingly, the living activities of creating things and creating a self are 
well left up to our mind to do. And the everyday behaviors of getting rid of ‘life’ 
and getting rid of ‘death’ have been entrusted for the time being to Buddha. This is 
why there is the saying, “The myriad thoughts and things are simply our mind, just 
as the three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form are simply our mind.” Also, 
when we express the situation from a higher perspective, there is ‘simply our 
mind’, that is, there are simply the tiles* and stones of our walls and fences. 
Because ‘simply our mind’ is not simply our mind, so ‘the tiles and stones of our 
walls and fences’ are not the tiles and stones of walls and fences. This is the 
everyday behavior of a Buddha doing His practice, and it is the principle of leaving 
things to the mind and leaving things to things even while we are creating both a 
mind and things. 

Further, this goes beyond what is reached by someone’s initial realization or 
by their fundamental realization, and the like, so how much less could it be reached 
by those outside the Way, or by those in the two Lesser Courses,* or by those who 
are thrice wise and ten times saintly! This everyday behavior is not understood by 
one person after another, and it is not understood in one situation after another. It is 
like, for instance, a fish darting through the water, for being active is also 
something that points the Matter out at every instant. Is it a single iron rod? Is it 
both parts moving ? 9 The single iron rod is beyond being long or short: the two 
parts moving are beyond self and other. When you realize the fruits of your effort, 
which is your ability to hit the target through word or deed in response to your 
Master, then your majesty will envelop all the myriad things that arise, and your 
Eye will tower over the entire world. You will have a radiant brightness that goes 
beyond your mastery of letting go and holding back: this is the Monks’ Hall, the 
Buddha Hall, the Temple Kitchen, and the Temple Gate. Further, you will have a 
radiant brightness unrelated to letting go and holding back: it is the Monks’ Hall, 
the Buddha Hall, the Temple Kitchen, and the Temple Gate. And you will have an 
Eye that will penetrate everywhere in all ten directions, an Eye that takes in 
everything within the great earth. You will have a mind for the past and a mind for 
the future. Because the merit of this radiant brightness blazes up in eyes, ears, nose, 


9. To paraphrase, is the everyday behavior of a Buddha doing His practice like a single iron 
rod, which is the same at any time or place? Or is His everyday behavior like a worm that 
has been cut in two? Since both parts of the worm are moving independently of each other, 
by analogy the Buddha’s various behaviors would likewise seem to be independent of each 
other. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


293 


tongue, body, and mind, there are all the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds who 
maintain and rely upon Their not being known to exist, and there is the feral cat 
and the wild white ox who gamble on their being known to exist. When one has a 
ring for this ox’s nose and also has the eyes for It, then the Dharma gives 
expression to a Buddha doing His practice and sanctions a practicing Buddha . 10 


In pointing out the Great Matter to his assembly, Seppo Gison 
once said, “The Buddhas in the three temporal worlds exist within the 
Blazing Fire, turning the Great Wheel of the Dharma.” 

His disciple Gensha Shibi added, “Since the Blazing Fire is 
giving voice to the Dharma for the sake of all the Buddhas in the three 
temporal worlds, all the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds listen to 
It right on the spot where They are.” 

Meditation Master Engo commented on what they said in verse: 

We have Seppo, Monkey White well called, 

Along with Shibi, Monkey Black. 

Both together throw themselves into the moment at hand, 

So that gods appear and demons vanish. 

The Raging Fire spreading across the heavens is Buddha 
giving voice to Truth; 

The Raging Fire that spreads across the heavens is Truth 
giving voice to Buddha. 

The tangled nests of kudzu and wisteria vines are cut low 
before Its wind. 

One remark from Seppo and Shibi, and VimalakTrti* has 
been tested and bested. 

‘The Buddhas in the three temporal worlds’ refers to all the Buddhas, each 
and every one of Them. The Buddhas doing Their practice, consequently, are the 
Buddhas in the three temporal worlds. Of all the Buddhas everywhere, there is not 
One who is not in the three temporal worlds. When the words and ways of a 
Buddha express the three temporal worlds, they are completely expressed in just 


10. ‘The feral cat and the wild white ox’ refer to the untamed nature of those who are not doing 
Buddhist practice. Taming this nature is likened to inserting a ring in an ox’s nose in order to 
train it, whereas recognizing that the purpose of that training is to realize our Buddha Nature 
is likened to having the eyes for it. 



Shobogenzo : the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


294 


this manner. In our present inquiry into Buddhas doing Their practice, They are, 
accordingly, all the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds. Even if we know that 
They exist, even if we do not know that They exist, They are, beyond doubt, all the 
Buddhas of the three temporal worlds and They are ‘Buddhas doing Their 
practice’. 

And at the same time, in expressing ‘all the Buddhas in the three temporal 
worlds’, these three Old Buddhas—Seppo, Shibi, and Engo—each had their own 
way of putting the Matter. We need to learn the principle underlying what Seppo 
expressed as, “The Buddhas in the three temporal worlds exist within the Blazing 
Fire, turning the Great Wheel of the Dharma.” The training ground for the turning 
of the Wheel of the Dharma by all the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds is 
undoubtedly within the Blazing Fire: within the Blazing Fire is undoubtedly the 
training ground for Buddhas. Rigid teachers of Scripture and pedantic 
commentators cannot hear this, nor can non-Buddhists and those of the two Fesser 
Courses understand it. Be aware that the Blazing Fire of all the Buddhas will not be 
any other sort of fire. Also, you need to reflect upon whether any of those other 
sorts of fire are ablaze. You need to learn the teaching methods of our monastic 
tradition which are employed by the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds whilst 
They exist within the Blazing Fire. When They are present within the Blazing Fire, 
are the Blazing Fire and the Buddhas intimately connected? Or are the Two turning 
away from each other? Or are They one and the same both within and without ? 11 
Do They have a within and a without? Are Their within and without the same 
thing? Are Their within and without equally distant from each other? 

Turning the Great Wheel of the Dharma will be the turning of oneself and 
the turning of the opportune moment at hand. It is one’s ability to hit the target 
through word or deed in response to one’s Master, which will include a turning of 
the Dharma and the Dharma’s turning. This turning of the Great Wheel of the 
Dharma, which Seppo has already mentioned, encompasses a Dharma Wheel that 
is turning the Wheel of Fire, even though the whole of the great earth is already 
completely ablaze. And It will be a Dharma Wheel that sets all Buddhas in motion. 
It will be a Dharma Wheel that sets the Wheel of the Dharma in motion, and It will 
encompass a Dharma Wheel that sets the three temporal worlds in motion. 

Thus it is that the Blazing Fire is the great training ground wherein all 
Buddhas turn the Great Wheel of the Dharma. To try to analyze and measure this 
by spatial thinking, temporal thinking, human thinking, ordinary thinking, or 
saintly thinking, and the like, is to miss the mark. Since It cannot be measured by 


11. ‘Within and without’ translates a technical Buddhist tenn for what appears as the subjective 
‘inner world’ and the objective ‘outer world’. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


295 


those types of thinking, then, because It is the training ground for the turning of the 
Wheel of the Dharma by each and every Buddha of the three temporal worlds, and 
because the Blazing Fire exists, there is a training ground for Buddhas. 

Shibi remarked: “Since the Blazing Fire is giving voice to the 
Dharma for the sake of all the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds, 
all the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds listen to It right on the 
spot where They are.” 

Hearing these words, some may say that Shibi’s remark states the Truth better than 
Seppo’s remark, but this is not necessarily so. Keep in mind that Seppo’s remark is 
separate from Shibi’s remark. That is to say, Seppo is stating that the Buddhas in 
the three temporal worlds are turning the Great Wheel of the Dharma, whereas 
Shibi is stating that the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds are listening to the 
Dharma. Although Seppo’s remark is undoubtedly stating that the Dharma is being 
set in motion, it is not the case that the Dharma’s being set in motion necessarily 
involves the Dharma’s being heard. As a consequence, we cannot take what Seppo 
is saying to mean that the Dharma that has been set in motion will necessarily 
involve the Dharma being heard. In fact, Seppo is not saying that the Buddhas in 
the three temporal worlds are giving expression to the Dharma for the sake of the 
Blazing Fire, nor is he saying that the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds are 
turning the Great Wheel of the Dharma for the sake of the Buddhas in the three 
temporal worlds, nor is he saying that the Blazing Fire is turning the Great Wheel 
of the Dharma for the sake of the Blazing Fire. Is there any difference between 
speaking of turning the Wheel of the Dharma and actually turning the Great Wheel 
of the Dharma? Setting the Wheel of the Dharma in motion is beyond any voicing 
of the Dharma, so will the voicing of the Dharma necessarily exist for the sake of 
others? Accordingly, Seppo’s remark is one that does not fail to say what he meant 
to say. 

As part of your training with your Master, you will certainly need to 
thoroughly explore Seppo’s phrases ‘being within the Blazing Fire’ and ‘turning 
the Great Wheel of the Dharma’. Do not confuse them with what Shibi is saying. 
To penetrate what Seppo is saying is to make as your everyday behavior the 
everyday behavior of a Buddha doing his practice. The Blazing Fire causes Itself to 
exist within all the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds. This is beyond Its simply 
permeating one or two inexhaustible realms of thoughts and things, and beyond Its 
merely permeating one or two motes of dust. In gauging the turning of the Great 
Wheel of the Dharma, do not liken It to measuring something as being large or 
small, broad or narrow. The Great Wheel of the Dharma does not turn for one’s 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


296 


own sake or for the sake of others, nor does It turn for the sake of giving voice to It 
or for the sake of hearing It. 

Shibi’s way of putting it is, “Since the Blazing Fire is giving voice to the 
Dharma for the sake of all the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds, all the 
Buddhas in the three temporal worlds listen to It right on the spot where They are.” 
Even though this says that the Blazing Fire is giving voice to the Dharma for the 
sake of all Buddhas in the three temporal worlds, it does not go so far as to say that 
It sets the Wheel of the Dharma in motion, nor does it say that the Buddhas in the 
three temporal worlds set the Wheel of the Dharma in motion. And even though all 
the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds listen to It right on the spot where They 
are, how could the Wheel of the Dharma of all the Buddhas in the three temporal 
worlds possibly have set into motion the Blazing Fire? Does the Blazing Fire 
which voices the Dharma for the sake of all Buddhas in the three temporal worlds 
also turn the Great Wheel of the Dharma or not? Shibi also does not go so far as to 
say, “The Wheel of the Dharma is turning right now.” Nor does he say, “There is 
no turning of the Wheel of the Dharma.” 

Be that as it may, we need to consider whether Shibi is confused and 
understands the turning of the Wheel of the Dharma to mean expounding on the 
Wheel of the Dharma. If that is the case, then he is still in the dark about Seppo’s 
statement. Even though he would have understood that when the Blazing Fire 
voices the Dharma for the sake of the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds, all the 
Buddhas in the three temporal worlds listen to It right on the spot where They are, 
nevertheless, he would not have recognized that when the Blazing Fire turns the 
Wheel of the Dharma, the Blazing Fire also listens to It right on the spot. He does 
not say that when the Blazing Fire turns the Wheel of the Dharma, the Fire is 
blazing at the same time as It is turning the Wheel of the Dharma. Listening to the 
Dharma by the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds is the practice of all Buddhas; 
They are not influenced by anything else. So, do not regard the Blazing Fire as ‘the 
Dharma’, nor regard the Blazing Fire as ‘a Buddha’, nor regard the Blazing Fire as 
just a blazing fire. And, truly, do not make light of the remark by Master Seppo’s 
disciple. Would what he said simply be a case of his having thought that ‘Persians 
have red beards’ when, in fact, it was the case that ‘a Persian’s beard is red’ ? 12 

Even though Shibi’s remark may resemble these ways of looking at the 
Matter, there is something in it that you would do well to consider: namely, it 
reveals the strength you will need for exploring the Matter through your training. 
That is to say, you should explore through your training the Essential Nature and 


12. The quoted phrases derive from a remark made by Hyakujo Ekai, alluding to two different 
ways of saying the same thing. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


297 


the transitory forms It takes, which Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after 
Ancestor have accurately Transmitted. This is not connected with ‘ultimate reality 
and its transitory forms’ as worked out in the traditions of both the Mahayana* and 
the Lesser Courses by pedestrian teachers of Scriptures and commentaries. Shibi is 
describing the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds listening to the Dharma 
which, in the traditions of both the Mahayana and the Lesser Courses, is beyond 
‘ultimate reality and its transitory forms’. Such narrow-minded teachers only 
recognize that Buddhas have a way of voicing the Dharma that is limited to 
opportune occasions. They do not speak of all Buddhas listening to the Dharma, or 
speak of all Buddhas doing Their training and practice, or speak of all Buddhas 
realizing Buddhahood. 

Now, Shibi has already stated, “All Buddhas in the three temporal worlds 
listen to the Dharma right on the spot where They are.” This statement 
encompasses both the Essential Nature and the forms It takes in which all Buddhas 
listen to the Dharma. By all means, do not regard those who are able to give voice 
to It as being superior, and do not say that those who are listening carefully to the 
Dharma are inferior. If those who give voice to It are worthy of our respect, then 
those who listen to It are also worthy of our respect. 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said in verse: 

If any people give voice to this Discourse 
Then they will surely be able to see Me. 

But to express It for the sake of even one person 
Is indeed something difficult for them to do. 

So it follows from this that to be able to express the Dharma is to see Shakyamuni 
Buddha because, when ‘such a one’ comes to see ‘Me’, he is Shakyamuni Buddha. 
The Buddha also said in verse: 

After I am extinct, 

To hear and accept this Discourse 
And to inquire into Its meaning 
Will indeed be difficult to do. 

Keep in mind that hearing It and accepting It are also equally difficult to do, 
and there is no superiority or inferiority involved. Even though Those who are 
‘listening right on the spot where They are’ are Buddhas most worthy of respect, 
what They must be listening to right on the spot is the Dharma, because ‘Those 
who listen right on the spot to the Dharma’ are what Buddhas of the three temporal 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


298 


worlds are. All Buddhas have already reached spiritual fruition, so we do not speak 
of Their listening to the Dharma whilst in some developing stage, because They are 
already Buddhas in the three temporal worlds. Keep in mind that the Buddhas of 
the three temporal worlds, as They stand right on the spot listening to the Blazing 
Fire give expression to the Dharma, are Buddhas. It does not mean that They need 
to follow the teaching methods of our monastic tradition in exactly the same way 
as we do. And, in attempting to keep to our traditional methods, there have been 

i o 

those whose arrows have met in mid-air. The Blazing Fire is certainly expressing 
the Dharma for the sake of the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds. And on those 
occasions when heart and mind are stripped bare, blossoms burst forth on the iron 
tree and the world is redolent with their perfume. In other words, when it comes 
down to Their listening to the voicing of the Dharma by the Blazing Fire right 
where They are, what is it that ultimately manifests before Their very eyes? In 
everyday terms, it will be Wisdom surpassing the Master or it will be Wisdom 
equal to the Master. In thoroughly exploring that which is beyond the threshold of 
Master and disciple, it will be the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds. 

Engo said that when the ones we rightly call Monkey White and Monkey 
Black both throw themselves into the moment at hand, gods appear and demons 
vanish . 14 As to this statement, even though Seppo is manifesting the Blazing Fire 
from the same situation that Shibi is in, there could be some way in which Seppo 
does not enter into the situation in the same way that Shibi does. Be that as it may, 
is Shibi’s Blazing Fire the Buddhas or is he taking all the Buddhas to be the 
Blazing Fire? In the situations where black and white both act together, Shibi arises 
and disappears along with the gods and demons, but what Seppo has manifested 
through sound and form does not distinguish between black and white times. Even 
though this is so, you need to recognize that Shibi has ways of putting It that are 
quite right and ways of putting It that are not quite right, whereas Seppo has ways 
of putting It that take up the Matter and ways of putting It that let the Matter go. 

Now, Engo also has a way of putting the Matter that is not the same as either 
Shibi’s or Seppo’s. It is his saying, “The Raging Fire spreading across the heavens 


13. An image referring to a disciple’s response to a Master’s being ‘right on’, like two arrows 
shot from opposite directions hitting each other head on. 

14. Originally, Monkey White and Monkey Black were nicknames for two Chinese robbers who 
were famed for their great skill and daring. Seppo is associated with Monkey White through 
his name, which means White Peak, whereas Shibi is linked to Monkey Black by his name, 
which means Dark Sands. There is also the implication that even though the two expressed 
spiritual matters in superficially different manners, what they taught was of one and the 
same species. 



Shobogenzo : On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice 


299 


is Buddha giving voice to the Truth,” and “The Raging Fire that spreads across the 
heavens is Truth giving voice to Buddha.” This way of putting the Matter serves as 
a brilliant light for us present-day trainees. Even if we are in the dark about the 
Raging Fire, Its spreading across the heavens covers us, so that we have our share 
of It and others have their share too. Whatever is covered by the revolving heavens 
will completely be the Raging Fire. Why reject ‘this’ merely to adopt ‘that’? 

We should be glad that these bags of skin of ours have been able to hear His 
transforming Truth which has spread across the heavens, even though we’ve been 
bom in a country far from the land of our saintly Shakyamuni and live at a time 
distant from His. Even though you are in a place where you may hear what Engo 
called ‘Buddha giving voice to the Truth’, still, how deeply entangled are you in 
your failure to recognize ‘the Tmth giving voice to Buddha’? 

Thus, all the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds are expressed within 
these worlds by the Dharma, and all the various forms of the Dharma in the three 
temporal worlds have been expressed within these worlds by the Buddha. Only the 
heavens cover us, and their winds cut low the tangled nests of kudzu and wisteria 
vines. A single remark has clearly tested and bested Vimalaklrti and others as well. 
Thus, Dharma gives voice to Buddha, Dharma practices Buddha, Dharma awakens 
to Buddha, Buddha gives voice to Dharma, Buddha practices Buddha, and Buddha 
becomes Buddha. All of these, all together, comprise the everyday behavior of a 
Buddha doing His practice. Over the heavens and over the earth, over the past and 
over the present, those who have realized It do not trivialize It, and those who have 
clarified what It is do not debase It. 

Written during the second third of the tenth lunar month in the second year of the Ninji era (late 

November, 1241) at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple. 


Dogen 



23 

On What the Buddha Taught 

(Bukkyo) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse there are allusions to a poem attributed to 
Bodhidharma, which may be rendered as follows: 

The separate Transmission that is outside the Teachings 

Does not depend on the written word; 

It directly poin ts us to our human heart, 

So that we may see our True Nature and thereby become Buddha. 

Versions of this poem have often been used to support the view that the direct one-to-one 
Transmission, which is characteristic of the Zen Buddhist tradition, was apart from the Buddha’s 
Teachings that had been passed on in the form of the Scriptures. Further, since the Transmission 
was viewed as outside the Scriptures, the Scriptures were considered unnecessary for realizing 
Buddhahood and could, therefore, be ignored. Dogen considered this view as fallacious, since 
Transmission is not something outside—that is, apart from—what the Buddha taught, and the 
Scriptural Teachings, which are also part of what the Buddha taught, are not worthless or 
irrelevant to training. Further, Dogen understood the opening line of Bodhidhanna’s poem as 
saying that Transmission is ‘on the outside of the Teachings’. That is, Transmission is not 
something divorced from what the Buddha taught, but something that exists on the outside of 
what He taught (Transmission as an outer, concrete event) in contrast with what exists on the 
inside of what He taught (Scripture as an inner, expedient explanation). Hence, the Transmission 
and the Scriptural Teachings do not stand against each other, but together comprise ‘what the 
Buddha taught’. 


Practicing what the Buddha taught means making the words and ways of all 
the Buddhas manifest. Because this is what Buddhas and Ancestors have done for 
the sake of Buddhas and Ancestors, the Teachings have been accurately passed on 
for the sake of the Teachings. This is what the turning of the Wheel of the Dharma 
is. From within the Eye of this Wheel, these Teachings have caused all the 
Buddhas and Ancestors to manifest and to be carried into nirvana. For all the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, without fail, there is the emergence of each mote of dust 
and the passing away of each mote of dust, there is the emergence of whole 
universes and the passing away of whole universes, and there is their emergence 


300 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


301 


for a single instant and for oceans of kalpas.* Be that as it may, the emergence of a 
single mote of dust for a single instant has no function that is incomplete, and the 
emergence of a whole universe for oceans of kalpas is beyond any effort to supply 
something that is otherwise lacking. This is why it has never been said that any of 
the Buddhas who realized the Way in the morning and then passed away in the 
evening ever had any shortcomings in Their meritorious behavior. If it were said 
that one day is insufficient for Their meritorious behavior, then eighty years of a 
human life would not be long enough either. When we compare the human span of 
eighty years with ten or twenty kalpas, it is like one day is to eighty years. The 
meritorious behavior of this Buddha of eighty years and that Buddha of one day 
may be difficult to discern clearly. Were you to compare the merit accrued over life 
spans of long kalpas with the merit accrued over eighty years, you would not even 
approach having a doubt about the matter. For this reason, what the Buddha taught 
is, namely, His Teaching for Buddhas, and It is the completely meritorious spiritual 
behavior of Buddhas and Ancestors. It is not the case that Buddhas are lofty and 
far-reaching, whereas Their teaching of the Dharma is narrow and petty. You need 
to realize that when a Buddha is large, His Teaching is large, and when a Buddha is 
small, His Teaching is small. You need to realize that the Buddhas and Their 
Teachings are beyond such measurements as Targe or small’, and beyond such 
attributes as ‘good, bad, or indifferent’, and that these Teachings are not undertaken 
for the sake of self-instruction or for the instruction of others. 


A certain monk of our tradition once said: 

Our Venerable Shakyamuni, in addition to expounding the 
Scriptural Teachings during His lifetime, directly Transmitted to 
Makakasho the Dharma that the Supreme Vehicle is the One Whole 
Mind. This Dharma has come to be passed on from Successor to 
Successor . 1 Accordingly, His Teachings are judicious discussions 
adapted to the capacity of the listener, whereas the Mind is immutable 
Reality. This One Whole Mind which has been authentically 
Transmitted has been described as ‘the separate Transmission that is 
outside the Teachings’. It is beyond comparison with anything that is 
discussed in the Three Vehicles* and the twelve divisions of the 


* See Glossary. 

1. ‘The One Whole Mind’ (isshin) is an alternate tenn for Buddha Mind and Buddha Nature. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


302 


Scriptural Teachings . 2 Because the One Whole Mind is the Supreme 
Vehicle, it has been said that “It directly points us to our human heart, 
so that we may see our True Nature and thereby become Buddha.” 

As far as it goes, this statement is not about the everyday functioning of Buddha 
Dharma, for it offers no vital path that takes us beyond self, and it is not descriptive 
of the everyday behavior of one’s whole being. Hundreds, even thousands, of years 
ago, monks like this one were proclaiming themselves to be spiritual authorities, 
but if any of them had such a tale to tell as this, you should know that they had 
neither clarified nor understood what Buddha Dharma and the Buddha’s Way are. 
And why so? Because they do not know Buddha or His Teachings, or what Mind 
is, or what is inside, or what is outside . 3 The underlying cause of their not knowing 
is simply that they have never really heard the Buddha Dharma. Now, they do not 
know what the root and branchings are of that which they call ‘the Buddhas’. 
Never having learned what the bounds of the comings and goings of Buddhas are, 
they in no way resemble disciples of the Buddha . 4 Their saying that one only 
Transmits the One Whole Mind and does not Transmit what the Buddha taught is 
due to their not knowing the Buddha Dharma. They do not know the One Whole 
Mind of which the Buddha taught, nor have they heeded what the Buddha taught 
concerning the One Whole Mind. They say that the Teachings of the Buddha are 
apart from the One Whole Mind, but their ‘One Whole Mind’ is not the One Whole 
Mind. They say that the One Whole Mind is outside the Buddha’s Teachings, but 
their ‘Buddha’s Teachings’ are not what the Buddha taught. Even though they have 
passed on the fallacious remark that the Transmission is outside the Teachings, 
they have not yet comprehended what is inside and what is outside. 

How could the Buddhas and Ancestors who have directly Transmitted one- 
to-one the Buddha’s Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching have failed to 
directly Transmit one-to-one what the Buddha taught? And what is more, why 
would our venerable monk Shakyamuni have set up Teaching that has no place in 


2. The ‘twelve divisions’ refers to the twelve categories by which Scriptural writings are 
classified in the Mahayana tradition. A description of these categories appears later in this 
discourse. 

3. Dogen’s allusion here to ‘inside’ and ‘outside’ is ambiguous. In the present context, it most 
likely refers to what is or is not contained within what the Buddha taught. Later, when 
Dogen reinterprets the opening line of Bodhidharma’s poem, the meaning of these two terms 
shifts. 

4. That is to say, because they have rejected Scriptural Teachings, they have not learned about 
the Precepts, which supply the bounds within which Buddhas function, and therefore they do 
not behave as a true disciple of the Buddha does. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


303 


the everyday functioning of those in our Buddhist family? Our Venerable 
Shakyamuni has already endowed us with the Teachings that are directly 
Transmitted, so why would any Ancestor of the Buddha do away with Them? This 
is why what is called ‘the One Whole Mind that is the Supreme Vehicle’ is 
synonymous with the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural 
Teachings, which comprise the Smaller Treasure House and the Larger Treasure 
House . 5 

You need to recognize that what is called Buddha Mind is synonymous with 
the Buddha’s Eye, as well as with a broken wooden ladle,* all thoughts and things, 
and the three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form. As a consequence, It is also 
synonymous with the mountains, seas, and nations of the earth, as well as with the 
sun, moon, and stars. ‘What the Buddha taught’ is another name for everything that 
arises in nature. What is called ‘being outside’ is being right here in this situation. 
It is what is happening, right here in this situation. The term ‘the genuine 
Transmission’ means that there is a self within the genuine Transmission because it 
involves a direct Transmission from a self to a self. It directly Transmits from One 
Whole Mind to One Whole Mind, for there must be the One Whole Mind in a 
genuine Transmission. The One Whole Mind that is the Supreme Vehicle is 
synonymous with soil, stones, sand, and pebbles, and soil, stones, sand, and 
pebbles are synonymous with the One Whole Mind. Consequently, soil, stones, 
sand, and pebbles are synonymous with soil, stones, sand, and pebbles. If we speak 
of the direct Transmission of the One Whole Mind that is the Supreme Vehicle, it 
needs to be done in this manner. 

Be that as it may, the monk who asserted that there is a separate 
Transmission outside the Teachings has not yet grasped the intent behind this 
phrase. So, do not believe his erroneous explanation of a separate Transmission 
outside the Teachings and thereby misunderstand what the Buddha taught. If the 
matter were as such folks put it, are we to describe the Teaching as ‘a separate 
Transmission outside the Mind’? If we say that it is a separate Transmission 
outside the Mind, not even a phrase or half a line of verse could have been passed 
on. And if we do not speak of a separate Transmission outside the Mind, we cannot 
speak of a separate Transmission outside—that is, apart from—the Teaching. 


5. ‘The Larger Treasure House’ refers to the Mahayana Canon, whereas ‘the Smaller Treasure 
House’ refers to the Pali Canon, which is included within the Mahayana Canon through 
translations into Chinese or Tibetan. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


304 


djb 

CX) 

Makakasho, who was already the World-honored One’s successor, was in 
possession of the Treasure House of the Dharma and, having directly received the 
Transmission of the Treasure House of the True Dharma, was responsible for 
preserving the Buddha’s Way. To assert that the Buddha’s Teachings may not have 
been directly Transmitted to him would make the training and practice of the Way 
a one-sided affair. You need to realize that when one line of Scripture has been 
genuinely Transmitted, the whole Dharma has been genuinely Transmitted, and 
that when one line of Scripture has been genuinely Transmitted, the Transmission 
of the Mountain and the Transmission of the Water has taken place. In sum, this is 
synonymous with our utter incapacity to separate ourselves from the here and now. 

The world-honored Shakyamuni’s unsurpassed Enlightened Mind, which is 
the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, was directly Transmitted to 
Makakasho. It was not directly Transmitted to any of His other disciples. Beyond 
question, the Direct Transmission is Makakasho. This is why all persons—every 
single one of them, past or present—who have explored the Truth of the Buddha 
Dharma have all decided to explore the Scriptural Teachings, and in doing so they 
have, without fail, explored the Matter* by training under some Ancestor of the 
Buddha, and without seeking to train under anyone else. If they did not commit 
themselves to train with an Ancestor of the Buddha, theirs would not have been the 
right commitment. If you wish to consider whether your commitment is in accord 
with the Teachings, you need to determine that with an Ancestor of the Buddha. 
The reason for this is that the Ancestors of the Buddha possess the whole Wheel of 
the Dharma. To put it simply, only the Ancestors of the Buddha have clarified and 
have continued to correctly Transmit what the terms ‘It exists’ or ‘It does not exist’ 
means, and what the terms ‘being empty’ or ‘having form’ means. 


Haryo Kokan was once asked by one of his monks, “Are the 
intent of our Ancestor Bodhidharma and the intent of the Teachings 
the same or are they different?” 

The Master replied, “When a hen is cold, it perches in a tree; 
when a duck is cold, it enters the water.” 

When we explore this saying of Kokan’s through our training, we will certainly 
come face-to-face with Bodhidharma, our founding Ancestor within the Buddha’s 
Way, and we will certainly come to know the Teachings within the Buddha’s Way. 
Now, the monk’s asking about the intent of the Ancestor and the intent of the 
Teachings is equivalent to his asking whether the Ancestor’s intent was within the 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


305 


Way or was separate from It. The Master’s saying at this time, “When a hen is 
cold, it perches in a tree; when a duck is cold, it enters the water” expresses a 
sameness and a difference. Even so, this goes beyond the sameness versus 
difference that people are usually concerned with. As a consequence, because his 
remark goes beyond a discussion of sameness and difference, he may well be 
saying that it is ‘the same difference’. So it is as if he were saying, “Do not ask 
about sameness and difference.” 


Gensha Shibi was once asked by a monk, “Granting that the 
Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings 
are not essential, just what was the intent behind our Ancestral Master 
Bodhidharma’s coming from the West?” 

Master Shibi replied, “The Three Vehicles and the twelve 
divisions of the Scriptural Teachings not being absolutely essential.” 

The monk’s asking, “Granting that the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of 
the Scriptural teachings are not essential, just what was the intent behind the 
Ancestral Master’s coming from the West?” is conventionally thought of as his 
saying, “Since each of the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural 
Teachings constitutes one of the branches of a forked road, the intent behind the 
Ancestral Master’s coming from the West must lie elsewhere.” Those with this 
conventional view do not recognize that the Three Vehicles and the twelve 
divisions of the Scriptural Teachings constitute the very intent behind the Ancestral 
Master’s coming from the West. So how much less could they possibly 
comprehend that the sum total of the eighty-four thousand gates to the Dharma is 
nothing other than the intent behind the Ancestral Master’s coming from the West? 

Now let us explore why the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the 
Scriptural Teachings are not absolutely essential . 6 If there were a time when they 
were essential, what criteria would we use to determine this? In a situation where 
the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings are not 
essential, does our exploration of ‘the intent behind the Ancestral Master’s coming 
from the West’ manifest itself in our training? It may not be in vain that this 
question has come forth. 


6. The term ‘not absolutely essential’ refers to the middle way between asserting, on the one 
hand, that it is absolutely impossible for someone to realize the Truth without fonnally 
studying the Scriptures, and, on the other hand, asserting that because someone can realize 
the Truth independent of Scriptural study, the Scriptures are totally worthless and can be 
safely ignored by trainees. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


306 


Shibi said, “The Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural 
Teachings are not absolutely essential.” This statement is the Wheel of the Dharma. 
We need to explore through our training that wherever this Wheel of the Dharma 
turns, what the Buddha taught exists as the Buddha’s Teachings. The import of this 
is that the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings are 
the Wheel of the Dharma of the Buddha’s Ancestors. It turns at times and in places 
where there are Ancestors of the Buddha, and It turns at times and in places where 
there are no Ancestors of the Buddha, and It likewise turned before there was an 
Ancestor and will turn after there is an Ancestor. Moreover, It has the meritorious 
function of setting the Buddhas and Ancestors a-tuming. At the very moment when 
our Ancestral Master intended to come from the West, the Wheel of the Dharma 
became not absolutely essential. Saying that It is not absolutely essential does not 
mean that we do not use It or that It is broken down. It is simply that this Wheel of 
the Dharma is, at this time, turning the wheel of ‘not being absolutely essential’. 
Without denying the existence of the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the 
Scriptural Teachings, we should watch for the occasions when they are not 
absolutely essential. Because they are not absolutely essential, they are the Three 
Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings, and because they are 
the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings, they are 
beyond being the ‘Three Vehicles and twelve divisions of Scriptural Teachings’. 
This is why the Master said that the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the 
Scriptural Teachings were not absolutely essential. 

The following offers but one example of those Three Vehicles and twelve 
divisions of the Scriptural Teachings from among the number of examples that 
exist. 

The Three Vehicles 

First, there is the vehicle of the shravakas,* who realize the Truth by way of 
the Four Noble Truths. The Four Noble Truths are the Truth of the existence of 
suffering, the Truth that suffering has a cause, the Truth that suffering can cease, 
and the Truth of the Noble Eightfold Path which brings suffering to an end. 
Hearing of these and then making them their practice, shravakas free themselves 
from birth, aging, sickness, and death, and ultimately realize the perfection of 
nirvana. To make these Truths the basis of one’s training and practice, and then to 
assert that suffering and its cause are mundane, whereas its cessation and the path 
to cessation are what is paramount is an opinion that arises from the perspective of 
narrow-minded scholars. When the Four Noble Truths are practiced in accord with 
the Buddha Dharma, They are all realized by each Buddha on His own, just as all 
the Buddhas have done. The Four Noble Truths are all a matter of ‘the Dharma 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


307 


abiding in the place of the Dharma’. The Four Noble Truths are all manifestations 
of Truth. The Four Noble Truths are all Buddha Nature. As a consequence, They go 
beyond intellectual discussions of such matters as ‘non-arising’ and ‘non-activity’, 
and this is tied to the Four Noble Truths not being ‘absolutely essential’. 

Second, there is the vehicle of the pratyekabuddhas,* who realize the 
perfection of nirvana by way of the Twelve Links in the Chain of Dependent 
Origination. The Twelve Links in the Chain of Dependent Origination are first, the 
darkness of spiritual ignorance; second, the deliberate actions that derive from that 
ignorance; third, becoming aware of things; fourth, giving name and form to 
things; fifth, activating the six senses; sixth, making contact through the senses 
with what arises; seventh, being stimulated through one’s senses; eighth, craving; 
ninth, grasping after; tenth, causing to come into existence; eleventh, giving birth 
to; and twelfth, aging unto death. 

In making the Twelve Links in the Chain of Dependent Origination the basis 
of their practice, pratyekabuddhas explore causality in the past, present, and future, 
and talk in terms of a subject that sees and an object that is seen. Even so, they take 
up causal relationships one by one and explore them thoroughly through their 
training, but their doing so is not something that is absolutely essential to the 
turning of the Dharma Wheel, for it is not absolutely essential to see every link in 
the causal chain. Keep in mind that, since the darkness of spiritual ignorance is 
inseparable from the One Whole Mind, deliberate acts, becoming aware of things, 
and so forth, are also inseparable from the One Whole Mind. Since the darkness of 
ignorance is inseparable from cessation, then deliberate acts, becoming aware of 
things, and so forth, are also inseparable from cessation. Since the darkness of 
ignorance is inseparable from nirvana, deliberate acts, becoming aware of things, 
and so forth, are also inseparable from nirvana. We can speak in this way because 
what arises is also what ceases. ‘The darkness of ignorance’ is a phrase we use in 
talking. ‘Becoming aware of things’, ‘giving them name and form’, and so forth, 
are no different. Keep in mind that the darkness of ignorance, deliberate actions, 
and so forth, are not different from Seigen Gyoshi’s saying to his disciple Sekito 
Kisen, “I have a certain Hatchet and would give It to you, should you choose to 
reside on this mountain with me.” The darkness of ignorance, deliberate actions, 
becoming aware of things, and so forth, are not different from Sekito’s responding, 
“At the time when I was sent to you, I received your promise of being allowed to 
have your Hatchet, Reverend Monk, and so I would like to receive It .” 7 


7. Originally, Sekito, still in his teens, had gone to train at Sokei Monastery under the aged 
Daikan End. Just before Eno’s passing away, he advised Sekito to “go train under Gyoshi” 
(C. Hsing-ssu ch’ii ), but Sekito misunderstood what End had told him and thought he had 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


308 


Third, there is the vehicle of the bodhisattvas,* those who realize fully 
perfected supreme enlightenment by putting into practice the Teachings concerning 
the Six Paramitas. This ‘realizing’ of which they speak is beyond anything they do 
deliberately, beyond their doing nothing, beyond their initiating something, beyond 
their newly accomplishing something, beyond their having realized It in some 
remote past life, beyond what they originally intended to do, beyond anything they 
are attached to: it is simply their full realization of fully perfected supreme 
enlightenment. 

What we call the Six Paramitas—that is, the six practices that ferry all 
sentient beings to the Other Shore—are the practice of freely giving wealth and 
Dharma, the practice of observing the Precepts, the practice of patience, the 
practice of zealous devotion, the practice of meditation, and the practice of wise 
discernment. These, all together, constitute supreme enlightenment. They are 
beyond any discussion of ‘nothing arising’ or of ‘not deliberately doing anything’. 
They do not always treat the giving of wealth and Dharma as the first thing or 
enlightenment as the ultimate thing. It says in the Scriptures, “A keen-witted 
bodhisattva makes enlightenment the first thing and makes giving the ultimate 
thing. A slow-witted bodhisattva makes giving the first thing and enlightenment the 
ultimate thing.” 

Even so, patience can also be first, as can meditation. And there will be their 

o 

manifesting the Thirty-six Paramitas, which is their getting snares from snares. 

The word ‘paramita’ means reaching the Other Shore. Even though ‘the 
Other Shore’ is beyond any semblance or trace of coming or going, one’s arrival 
fully manifests, for arrival refers to one’s spiritual question. Do not think that 
training and practice merely lead you to the Other Shore, for there is training and 
practice on that Other Shore. When we do our training and practice, it is our arrival 
at the Other Shore, because this training and practice is invariably supplied with 
the capacity to make the whole universe manifest completely. 


been instructed to “go ponder the Matter” (C. Hsin-ssu ch ’ii). However, Nangaku Ejo, one of 
Eno’s two successors, understood what End had said and had Sekito go train under Seigen 
Gyoshi, Eno’s other successor. Gyoshi’s Hatchet characterizes the Dharma that is passed on 
at Transmission as That which cuts through all delusions and severs all karmic roots. 
Sekito’s remark expresses his commitment to Gyoshi as his Transmission Master. 

8. The Thirty-six Paramitas derive from the manifesting of each of the Six Paramitas within the 
practice of each one of the Six Paramitas. The Six Paramitas are like six traps for snaring the 
Truth, each of which produces another six traps, that is, the Thirty-six Paramitas. 




Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


309 


The Twelve Divisions of the Scriptural Teachings 

First, the Sutras : the Scriptures that are in accord with what the 
Buddha is reported to have said. 

Second, the Geyas : the reiterations in verse that extol the 
Dharma. 

Third, the Vyakaranas : the predictions of Buddhahood for all. 

Fourth, the Gathas: verses that are chanted. 

Fifth, the Udanas : the Buddha’s spontaneous voicings of the 
Dharma without His having been asked. 

Sixth, the Nidanas : the accounts of causes and coexisting 
conditions. 

Seventh, th eAvadanas: the parables. 

Eighth, the It ivr it takas: the past lives of the Bodhisattvas. 

Ninth, the Jatakas: the past lives of the Buddha. 

Tenth, the Vaipulyas : writings that extensively expound the 
Dharma. 

Eleventh, the Adbhutadharmas: stories of miraculous events. 

Twelfth, the Upadeshas: the commentaries. 


For the sake of others, the Tathagata gave voice directly to both the 
provisional Teachings and the True Dharma 9 on such matters as our entry into the 
world of the five skandhas* with its eighteen realms connected with our six senses: 
we call this body of Teaching the Sutras. Sometimes, by appending verses 
comprised of lines of four, five, six, seven, eight, or nine words, He extolled the 
Teaching on such matters as one’s entry into the world of the mundane skandhas: 
we call these verse passages the Geyas. Sometimes, He gave a direct account of the 
future of sentient beings, even to the point of predicting such things as the 
realization of Buddhahood by pigeons and sparrows: we call these predictions of 
Buddhahood the Vyakaranas. Sometimes, by means of individual poems, He gave 
an account of such things as entry into the fleshly skandhas: we call these poems 
the Gathas. Sometimes, He spontaneously talked about human concerns without 
anyone having asked Him a question: we call these talks the Udanas. Sometimes, 


9. An example of this occurs in the Burning House parable in the Lotus Scripture, where there 
is the provisional Teaching that there are three vehicles, whereas with the True Dharma there 
is, in fact, but One Vehicle. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


310 


He summarized matters that were not spiritually good in worldly societies and tied 
them to the Precepts: we call these summaries the Nidanas. Sometimes, He talked 
about the ways of the world by means of parables: we call these talks the 
Avadanas. Sometimes, He talked about events in worldly realms of the past: we 
call these talks the Itivrittakas . Sometimes, He talked about events in His own past 
lives: we call these talks the Jatakas. Sometimes, He talked about far-reaching, 
world-wide issues: we call these talks the Vaipulyas. Sometimes, He talked about 
wondrous, unprecedented events in the world: we call these talks the 
Adbhutadharmas . Sometimes, He asked hard questions concerning the ways of the 
world: we call these queries the Upadeshas. These divisions constitute His ways of 
teaching by ordinary modes of expression. He established these twelve divisions of 
His Teachings so that sentient beings might rejoice and take delight in them. 

It is rare to hear the names of the twelve divisions of the Scriptural 
Teachings. When the Buddha Dharma has spread throughout a society, one hears of 
them. When the Buddha Dharma has disappeared, they are not heard of, nor are 
they heard of when the Buddha Dharma has not yet spread abroad. Those who 
have put down good spiritual roots over a long time are able to meet the Buddha 
and hear them. Those who have already heard them will surely realize fully 
perfected supreme enlightenment in a short while. 

Each of these twelve divisions is called a Scripture. They are also called the 
twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings as well as the twelve parts of the 
Scriptures. Because each of the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings is 
equipped with the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings, there are one 
hundred forty-four divisions of the Scriptural Teachings. Because all the twelve 
divisions of the Scriptural Teachings are included within each of the twelve 

divisions of the Scriptural Teachings, they simply comprise the whole of the 

divisions of the Scriptural Teachings. And at the same time, They go beyond 

calculation in numbers, regardless of whether those numbers are above or below a 
hundred million. They are all the Eye of the Buddhas and Ancestors, the Bones and 
Marrow of the Buddhas and Ancestors, the daily activities of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors, the radiance of the Buddhas and Ancestors, the splendor of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors, and the meritorious behavior of the Buddhas and Ancestors. The 
one who encounters the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings encounters the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, and the one who speaks of the Buddhas and Ancestors 
speaks of the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


311 


Thus, Seigen’s letting his foot dangle is nothing other than the Three 
Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings . 10 And Nangaku’s 
expressing his understanding of his koan* by saying, “To describe It in words does 
not hit the bull’s-eye” is nothing other than the Three Vehicles and the twelve 
divisions of the Scriptural Teachings. Now, the meaning of Shibi’s expression, ‘not 
being absolutely essential’, is in no way different from this. When we understand 
the import of this, it simply refers to Ancestors of the Buddha, and to Them alone. 
Further, there is no being ‘half a person’ and there is no ‘one absolute thing’: it is 
‘nothing ever having arisen’. At this very moment, how is It? You should respond, 
“It is No-thing That Is Absolutely Essential.” 

Sometimes, there have been those who have spoken of nine parts, which 
could be called the nine divisions of the Scriptural Teachings. 

The Nine Parts 


First, the Sutras 

Second, the Independent Poems (Gathas) 

Third, the Past Lives of the Bodhisattvas (Itivrittakas) 

Fourth, the Jatakas 

Fifth, the Wondrous Events (Adbhutadharmas) 

Sixth, the Accounts of Causes and Coexisting Conditions 
(Nidanas) 

Seventh, the Parables (Avadanas) 

Eighth, the Appended Passages in Verse (Geyas) 

Ninth, the Commentaries (Upadeshas) 

Because the nine parts are each equipped with nine parts, there are eighty- 
one parts. Because the nine parts are each equipped with the whole of the parts, 
they are the nine parts. Without the merit of each part’s belonging to the whole, 
they could not be the nine parts. Because there is the merit of their belonging to the 
whole of the parts, the whole of the parts belongs to each part. This is why they are 
in eighty-one parts, why they are a part of This, why they are a part of me, why 
they are a part of the hossu,* why they are a part of the traveling staff,* and why 
they are a part of the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. 


10. When Sekito Kisen requested the Hatchet that Seigen Gyoshi had promised him, Seigen is 
said to have dangled his foot. Dogen states that this was Seigen’s way of passing on to 
Sekito the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings, which form 
the Hatchet of the Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


312 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said in verse: 

This Dharma, which is in nine parts, 

I have humbly offered, as It suits each sentient 
being. 

For entering the Great Vehicle, It is the very 
source, 

Which is why I have voiced these Teachings. 

You need to realize that the words ‘I’ and ‘this’ both refer to the Tathagata . 11 His 
Face and Eye, Body and Mind customarily come into view through this Dharma. 
This T and ‘this’ are already the nine-part Dharma, so the nine-part Dharma must 
therefore be both ‘I’ and ‘this’. One phrase or one verse in the present will be the 
nine-part Dharma, and because this T is synonymous with ‘this’, He has humbly 
given voice to It, in conformity with the needs of sentient beings. Thus, since all 
sentient beings live their lives from within the here and now, He has, accordingly, 
given voice to these Teachings, and since they die their deaths from within the here 
and now, He has, accordingly, given voice to these Teachings. Even for the sake of 
their momentary behavior and the fleeting expressions on their faces, He has, 
accordingly, given voice to these Teachings. And since, in His transforming each 
and every sentient being, He would help them all to enter the Buddha’s Way, He 
has, accordingly, given voice to these Teachings. These sentient beings are 
followers of the ‘I’ that is this nine-part Dharma. These followers follow where He 
goes, follow where they themselves go, follow where their life goes, follow where 
the ‘I’ goes, and follow where the ‘this’ goes. Because these sentient beings are, 
unquestionably, the ‘this’ of His ‘I’, they are every part of the nine-part Dharma. 

What He called ‘the very source for entering the Great Vehicle’ is also called 
‘awakening to the Great Vehicle’, ‘practicing the Great Vehicle’, ‘heeding the 
Great Vehicle’, and ‘giving expression to the Great Vehicle’. Thus, it goes beyond 
saying that a sentient being has spontaneously realized the Way, for they are a part 
of It. Accordingly, sentient beings have realized the Way. Entering is the source, 
and the source means from beginning to end. The Buddha expresses the Dharma, 
and the Dharma expresses the Buddha. The Dharma is expressed by the Buddha, 
and the Buddha is expressed by the Dharma. The Blazing Fire expresses both the 
Buddha and the Dharma. The Buddha and the Dharma both express the Blazing 
Fire. 


11. That is, what the T refers to is inseparable from the Dharma that this T has voiced, since 
the epithet ‘Tathagata’ applies to one who has gone beyond any sense of a personal self. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Buddha Taught 


313 


In these Teachings, there is good reason for giving voice to the whys and 
wherefores. Even if the Buddha had intended not to expound these Scriptures, it 
would have been impossible. This is why He said that the Why expounded this 
Scripture . 12 What the Why expounds fills the heavens, and what fills the heavens is 
what the Why expounds. Both this Buddha and that Buddha, with one voice, 
proclaim ‘this Scripture’; both one’s own True Self and the True Self of others 
expound the Why as ‘this Scripture’. Thus, He expounded this Scripture, and ‘this 
Scripture’ is synonymous with ‘what the Buddha taught’. You need to know that 
the Buddha’s Teachings, which are as innumerable as the sands of the Ganges, are 
the awakening stick and the ceremonial hossu, the traveling staff and the Fist. 

In sum, you need to know that such things as the Three Vehicles and the 
twelve divisions of the Scriptural Teachings are the Eye of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors. How could those who have not opened their Eye to This possibly be 
descendants of the Buddhas and Ancestors? How could those who have not 
understood It and come forth with It possibly Transmit one-to-one the True Eye of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors? Those who have not realized the Treasure House of 
the Eye of the True Teaching are not Dharma heirs of the Seven Buddhas.* 

Given to the assembly on the fourteenth day of the eleventh lunar month of the second year of the 
Ninji era (December 17, 1241) in the Monks ’Hall in Kosho-ji Temple, Kyoto Prefecture. 

Redelivered to the assembly on the seventh day of the eleventh lunar month in the third year of 
the Ninji era (November 30, 1242) in the Monks’ Hall in Kosho-ji Temple, Kyoto 
Prefecture. 


12. Dogen gives a twist to the meaning of the last line of the Buddha’s verse by treating the term 
for ‘why’ as a noun, ‘the Why’. 



24 

On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 

(Jinzu) 

Translator’s Introduction: The term jinzu was widely used both within and outside Buddhism 
to refer to what were considered esoteric, supernatural, or even magical powers, which many 
persons apparently sought, often with the motive of gaining power and prestige or of having 
some advantage over others. Traditionally there were six of these abilities which, in Buddhism, 
functioned as: (1) the ability to freely deal with external situations or circumstances as needed 
(2) the ability to see what is truly going on, (3) the ability to hear what someone is truly saying, 
(4) the ability to know what someone’s true intentions are, (5) the ability to recognize what 
someone’s kanna from a past life is, and (6) the ability to kn ow when someone has cleansed that 
karma. All but the sixth were presumably attainable by anyone; only Buddhas and arhats could 
realize the last one. 

On the basis of remarks made by various Ancestral Masters, Dogen explains that there is a 
greater ability, one that surpasses all other marvelous abilities. This marvelous spiritual ability 
involves one’s natural functioning in everyday life after having dropped off body and mind with 
its attendant greeds, hatreds, and delusions; that is, it is just the everyday doing of whatever 
needs to be done. Performing these everyday acts is, in itself, an expression of this greater 
marvelous spiritual ability. Further, in that such behavior involves the natural functioning of 
one’s six senses, Dogen identifies them as the six marvelous spiritual abilities. 


The marvelous spiritual ability that we are speaking of here is the very food 
and drink of those who are in the Buddha’s family, and the Buddhas have not 
wearied of it even to the present day. There are the six marvelous abilities, and 
there is the one whole marvelous spiritual ability, and there is the transcending of 
marvelous spiritual abilities, and there is the unsurpassed spiritual ability. The last 
is our three thousand acts of a morning and our eight hundred acts of an evening, 
which we take as the normal state of things. Though it is said that this spiritual 
ability arises along with Buddhahood, it goes unrecognized in Buddhas: though it 
is said that it vanishes along with a Buddha, it does not thereby destroy a Buddha. 
When a Buddha goes up to the high heavens, it likewise goes along: when a 
Buddha comes down to earth, it comes along too. It is present both when Buddhas 
do the practice to realize the Truth and when they have proved the Truth for 
Themselves. They are as still as the snow-capped peaks and resemble the trees and 


314 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


315 


rocks . 1 The Buddhas of the past were the disciples of Shakyamuni Buddha. They 
came to Him out of devotion to the kesa* and invariably held aloft a stupa.* At one 
such time, Shakyamuni Buddha said, “The marvelous spiritual ability of all 
Buddhas is a wonder to behold.” This is why you need to know that, in the present 
as well as in the future, things will be no different. 


Meditation Master Isan Reiyu was an Ancestor of the thirty-seventh 
generation directly from the Tathagata Shakyamuni. He was a Dharma heir of 
Hyakujo Ekai. Of the present-day Ancestors of the Buddha who have appeared 
throughout the world, many are not distant descendants of Isan, and they are 
distant descendants of Isan. 

Once when Isan was lying down asleep, his disciple Kyozan 
Ejaku came in to call upon him. Thereupon, Isan rolled over, turning 
his face to the wall as he lay there. 

Kyozan said, “It is just me, your disciple Ejaku. Pray, venerable 
monk, stay just as you are.” 

Isan made an effort to rise just as Kyozan was leaving, and he 
called out, “Ejaku, my disciple!” 

Kyozan came back. 

Isan said, “This old monk would like to tell you his dream. 

Please listen to it.” 

Kyozan lowered his head, preparing to listen. Isan said, “Try 
and interpret my dream, and I’ll listen.” 

Kyozan fetched him a basin of water and a hand towel. 

Isan then washed his face. After he had finished washing his 
face, he sat for a bit, whereupon his disciple Kyogen Chikan came in. 

Isan said to him, “Disciple Ejaku and I have just been putting into 
practice our marvelous spiritual ability, which is on a level above all 
others, one that is not the same as those found in the Lesser Course.”* 

Kyogen said, “Your disciple Chikan was just sitting outside, so 
I am aware of all that went on.” 


1. ‘Snow-capped peaks’ is often used in Zen Buddhism as a reference to those who have been 
successfully training for a long time. Similarly, ‘trees’ are trainees who have not yet cut 
down the tree of self, and ‘stones’ are trainees who are now unresponsive to the arising of 
defding passions. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


316 


Isan said, “My disciple, you should endeavor to express it.” 

Thereupon, Kyogen made a cup of tea and brought it to him. 

Isan, praising them, said, “The marvelous spiritual ability and 

wise discernment of the two of you have far surpassed even that of 

Shariputra and Moggallana .” 2 

If you would know what the marvelous spiritual ability of those in our 
Buddha family is, you should explore through your training what Isan has asserted. 
Because it is not the same as the inferior abilities of the Lesser Course, a person 
who undertakes this exploration is, as a consequence, called a student who is 
exploring the Matter,* and anyone who does not undertake this exploration is not 
such a student of Buddhism. It is this marvelous spiritual ability and wise 
discernment that Successor after Successor has mutually Transmitted. What is 
more, do not undertake to study the spiritual abilities of non-Buddhists and those 
of the Lesser Courses in India, and do not take up what is studied by scholastics 
and their like. 

Now, in exploring Isan’s marvelous spiritual ability, even though it is spoken 
of as being unsurpassed, it is beyond that, for it is on a level above and beyond 
anything else. That is to say, after Isan had lain down, there was his turning of his 
face towards the wall as he lay there, there was his endeavoring to arise, there was 
his calling out to his disciple Ejaku, there was his referring to his having had a 
dream, there was his sitting for a short while after he had washed his face, and 
there was Kyozan’s lowering his head to hear and his fetching a basin of water and 
a towel. 

Nevertheless, Isan said, “Disciple Ejaku and I have just been putting into 
practice the marvelous spiritual ability, which is on a level above all others, one 
that is not the same as those found in the Lesser Course.” We need to explore what 
this marvelous spiritual ability is, for it is what the Ancestral Masters who truly 
Transmit the Buddha Dharma have spoken of. Do not fail to mention the telling of 
a dream or the washing of the face, for you must ascertain that such actions are 
marvelous spiritual abilities that are on a level above all others. 

To say that it is ‘not the same as those found in the Lesser Course’, means 
that it is not the same as the small ideas and small opinions associated with the 
Lesser Course, nor will it be anything like those of the ‘three times wise and ten 
times saintly’.* These persons all practice the five lesser spiritual abilities, and they 
only attain a small idea of their True Self: they do not come near to the greater 
spiritual ability of the Ancestors of the Buddha. This is an ability of Ancestors of 


2. Shariputra and Moggallana were two of Shakyamuni Buddha’s ten chief disciples. The 
former was known for his wise discernment and the latter for his spiritual abilities. 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


317 


the Buddha, a marvelous spiritual ability that goes beyond Buddhahood. People 
who would model themselves on this marvelous spiritual ability must not be 
impressed by devilish people and others who are outside the Way. Academic 
students of Scriptures have not yet heard of such an ability or, if they have heard of 
it, they find it difficult to trust in. Those of the Two Lesser Courses, those who are 
outside the Way, those who lecture on Scriptures, scholarly commentators, and the 
like, are taught about the lesser spiritual abilities but do not leam about the greater 
marvelous spiritual ability. All Buddhas abide in and keep to the greater marvelous 
spiritual ability, and They Transmit this marvelous spiritual ability of Buddhas. 
Were it not for this ability, the basin of water and the towel would not have been 
fetched, nor would Isan have lain there with his face turned towards the wall, nor 
would he have washed his face and then sat up for a bit. 

Such things as the lesser spiritual abilities do also exist, enveloped within the 
capacity of this greater spiritual ability. The greater marvelous spiritual ability is in 
contact with the lesser spiritual abilities, but the lesser spiritual abilities are not 
aware of the greater marvelous spiritual ability. These lesser spiritual abilities have 
been described as ‘a hair swallowing the vast ocean’ and ‘a poppy seed enclosing 
Mount Sumeru’. They are also synonymous with ‘the upper part of the body 

■j 

emitting water and the lower part of the body emitting fire’. Also, the first five 
spiritual abilities, and even the sixth spiritual ability, are all lesser spiritual abilities. 
Those people who devote themselves to these abilities have not yet experienced the 
marvelous spiritual ability of a Buddha, even in their dreams. The five spiritual 
abilities, along with the sixth spiritual ability, are called lesser spiritual abilities 
because they are all tainted by their practice being considered as separate from 
enlightenment and because they are confined to some time or some place. They 
reside in life but do not manifest after one’s death; they belong to oneself but do 
not belong to someone else. Though they may manifest in this land of ours, they 
may not manifest in all other countries; though some may manifest them without 
trying, others cannot manifest them when they would. 


3. This is an allusion to a passage in the Lotus Scripture, wherein a mother asks her two sons to 
display various wondrous abilities for the sake of their father, a Brahman who does not 
follow the Buddhist Way, so that he will join the three of them in going to visit the Buddha. 
With their father in mind, the two sons perfonn various wondrous transfonnations, such as 
“walking, standing, sitting, and reclining within space, the upper part of their bodies 
emitting water and the lower part of their bodies emitting fire.” A similar act, called the 
‘Twin Wonder’, was performed by the Buddha when He went back to visit His family after 
His enlightenment. 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


318 


This greater spiritual ability is not like that. The Teachings, practice, and 
realization of all Buddhas alike are made fully manifest through their marvelous 
spiritual ability. Not only is it fully manifested within the vicinity of all Buddhas, it 
is also fully manifested above and beyond Buddhahood. The marvelous spiritual 
ability, which is the way Buddhas teach, is truly mind-boggling. It manifests even 
before someone has a body, and its manifestation is not confined to past, present, 
or future. Were it not for the marvelous spiritual ability of the Buddha, then all the 
Buddhas’ rousing Their mind to realize Buddhahood, Their training and practice, 
Their enlightenment, and Their realizing nirvana would not yet exist. Right this 
minute, the inexhaustible Ocean of the Dharma Realm is constantly present and 
unchanging, all of which is the marvelous spiritual ability of Buddha. Not only 
does a single hair swallow up this vast Ocean, a single hair sustains and retains this 
vast Ocean; a single hair manifests this vast Ocean; a single hair disgorges this vast 
Ocean; a single hair uses this vast Ocean. Do not take as your lesson from this that 
when a single hair swallows up and disgorges the whole Dharma Realm, then, 
since there is only one whole Dharma Realm, the Dharma Realm can no longer 
exist. 

A single poppy seed’s enclosing all of Mount Sumeru is also like this. And 
there is a poppy seed that naturally disgorges Mount Sumeru and a poppy seed that 
naturally manifests the Ocean of the Inexhaustible Treasure House of the Dharma 
Realm. There is also a single poppy seed that intentionally spits out Mount Sumeru 
and a single poppy seed that intentionally makes the Ocean of the Inexhaustible 
Treasure House of the Dharma Realm manifest. When a single hair and a single 
poppy seed disgorge the vast Ocean, they spew It out in one instant and spew It out 
for ten thousand kalpas.* Because ten thousand kalpas and one instant, alike, have 
been spewed out from a hair and a poppy seed, from whence have the hair and the 
poppy seed been obtained? They have been obtained precisely from the marvelous 
spiritual ability. Since this ‘having been obtained’ is synonymous with the 
marvelous spiritual ability, it means that this ability simply gives birth to itself. 
Furthermore, you need to explore the fact that it does not appear and disappear 
within the three times of past, present, and future. All Buddhas joyfully disport 
within this marvelous spiritual ability. 

djb 


Lay Disciple Ho’on was an eminent person who was seated among the 
Ancestors. He not only trained under Baso Doitsu and Sekito Risen but also had 
many meetings and encounters with Masters who truly walked the Way in our 
tradition. He once said in verse: 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


319 


The marvelous spiritual ability manifests its enlightened 
functioning 

In our carrying water and our hauling firewood. 

You need to thoroughly explore this principle through your training. ‘Carrying 
water’ refers to the custom of loading up and toting water. Sometimes a disciple 
loads up and totes this water for his own sake, and sometimes he does it for the 
sake of others. This is what is meant by being a Buddha of marvelous spiritual 
abilities. Although knowledge itself is a transient thing, the marvelous spiritual 
ability is always a marvelous spiritual ability. Even if someone is unacquainted 
with it, what it teaches is not subject to fading out or to disappearing. Even if 
people are ignorant of it, what it teaches arises spontaneously. Even if they do not 
know that carrying water is a marvelous spiritual ability, the spiritual ability of 
carrying water is not subject to regression. 

‘Hauling firewood’ means carrying wood for fuel. For instance, it is like 
what the Sixth Ancestor did of old. Even though he may not have recognized his 
marvelous spiritual abilities in his three thousand acts of a morning or may not 
have had the marvelous spiritual abilities in mind during his eight hundred acts of 
an evening, these acts were still a full manifestation of his marvelous spiritual 
ability. 

Truly, those who meet and pay attention to the enlightened functioning of 
the marvelous spiritual ability of all the Buddhas and Tathagatas will, beyond 
doubt, realize the Way. This is why the realization of the Way by all the Buddhas— 
every one of Them—has unquestionably been fully accomplished through the 
effects of this marvelous spiritual ability. As a consequence, you should explore 
through your training that even though we were speaking just now of ‘the emitting 
of water’ of the Lesser Course as being a lesser spiritual ability, ‘carrying water’ is 
a greater spiritual ability. Carrying water and carrying firewood have never been 
abandoned, for people have not neglected them. Thus, these actions have been 
passed down from the distant past to the present day without a single person, even 
for a moment, falling away from them or turning them aside: this is due to the 
functioning of their marvelous spiritual ability. This is the greater marvelous 
spiritual ability, which is beyond any similarity with the inferior abilities of the 
Lesser Course. 

djb 

Once when Tozan Ryokai was attending on Ungan Donjo, 

Ungan asked him, “What is the enlightened functioning of my disciple 
Ryokai’s marvelous spiritual ability?” 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


320 


With hands folded in shashu,* Tozan then came and stood right 
in front of him. 

Ungan again asked him, “What is the enlightened functioning 
of your marvelous spiritual ability?” 

Tozan then, wishing him well, bowed in respect and took his 

leave. 

In this account, the marvelous spiritual ability is present as Tozan’s hearing his 
Master’s words and completely understanding the import behind them and as the 
particulars of what he did in response fitting together with the Truth, like a box 
with its lid. By all means, recognize that the enlightened functioning of Ungan’s 
marvelous spiritual ability has certainly produced descendants, persons who did 
not spiritually regress. Ungan must certainly have been one of the Highest 
Ancestors, a person spiritually unsurpassed. Do not idly speculate on whether he or 
his descendants could in any way resemble non-Buddhists or those of the Two 
Lesser Courses. 

In the Buddha’s Way, there are spiritual transformations and spiritual 
abilities associated with the upper part of the body and the lower part of the body. 
The whole universe in all ten directions, right now, is the one whole True Body of a 
shramana . 4 Strange as it may seem, the waters from the nine mountains and the 
eight oceans to the Ocean of Buddha Nature and the Ocean of Buddha Wisdom are 
the waters emitted from the upper part of his body, the lower part of his body, and 
the middle part of his body. In addition, they are the waters that are emitted from 
the upper part of what is not the body, the lower part of what is not the body, and 
the middle part of what is not the body. This extends to the emitting of fire also. 
And this is not limited to such things as water, fire and wind, it is also the upper 
part of his body emitting Buddhas, and the lower part of his body emitting 
Buddhas, and the upper part of his body emitting Ancestors, and the lower part of 
his body emitting Ancestors, and the upper part of his body emitting immeasurable 
kalpas of time, and the lower part of his body emitting immeasurable kalpas of 
time, and the upper part of his body emitting the Ocean of the Dharma Realm, and 
the upper part of his body absorbing the Ocean of the Dharma Realm. And what is 


4. Although ‘shramana’ is a tenn widely used in reference to Buddhist monks in general and 
novices in particular, more specific definitions describe a shramana as someone who has 
renounced the world, has let go of the defiling passions of greed, hatred, and delusion, and 
practices compassion for all beings. Hence, the tenn could equally well apply to a lay 
Buddhist who is completely committed to the practice of the Way. Similarly, even though 
the grammatical gender of the Sanskrit word shramana is masculine, its usage by Dogen is 
neutral and would not have excluded women. 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


321 


more, his spitting out six or seven nations of the world or his swallowing up two or 
three of them is no different. The four elements, the five elements, the six elements, 
all elements, or immeasurable elements at this very moment, alike, are his 
marvelous spiritual ability which gives rise to them and makes them disappear: 
they are his marvelous spiritual ability to swallow them up and to spit them out . 5 It 
is his swallowing up and spitting out each and every aspect of the great earth and 
the vast expanse of space at every moment. Being twirled about by a poppy seed 
becomes a measure of his spiritual ability: being dangled by a hair becomes a 
measure of his spiritual ability. They arise along with That which is beyond 
anything our consciousness can recognize, and they abide in That which is beyond 
anything our consciousness can recognize, and they take Their true refuge in That 
which is beyond anything our consciousness can recognize. The ever-changing 
characteristics of the marvelous spiritual ability of Buddhas have no connection 
with something short or something long, so, in all seriousness, how can one 
possibly undertake to evaluate Them simply by making comparisons? 


Long ago, when a holy man who had attained the first five 
spiritual abilities was attending on the Buddha , 6 he asked Him, “The 
Buddha has six spiritual abilities and I have five of them. What, pray, 
is that sixth one?” 

The Buddha then called out to him, saying, “Holy man with the 
five spiritual abilities!” 

The holy man responded with a “Yes?” 

The Buddha said, “That is the one spiritual ability which you 
should have asked me about.” 

We need to explore this account carefully. How could the holy man possibly 
have known that the Buddha had six spiritual abilities? The Buddha had 
immeasurable spiritual abilities and wise discernment, and was not limited to 
merely six abilities. Even though the holy man said that he saw just six abilities, it 
was beyond him to attain even six spiritual abilities, so how much less could he 
allow for other spiritual abilities, even in his dreams? Now, let us ask something. 
Even though the holy man would have said that he had seen the Venerable 


5. The four elements are earth, water, fire, and wind; the five are the four elements plus space; 
the six are the five elements plus consciousness. 

6. A ‘holy man’ refers to a Hindu ascetic. 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


322 


Shakyamuni, could he truly say that he had ‘seen Buddha ’? 7 Even though he might 
say that he had ‘seen Buddha’, could he truly say that he had met the Venerable 
Shakyamuni? Even though one can encounter the Venerable Shakyamuni, even 
though one may say that he has ‘seen Buddha’, we need to ask, has such a person 
encountered ‘the Holy One with five spiritual abilities’ yet? Through exploring 
these questions, we can leam the use of the vines that embrace and the vines that 
are severed . 8 How could saying that the Buddha has six marvelous spiritual 
abilities possibly reach even the level of counting the riches of one’s neighbor? 

Now, what is at the heart of the Venerable Shakyamuni’s saying, “That is the 
one spiritual ability which you should have asked me about?” He does not say that 
the holy man has the one spiritual ability, nor does He say that the holy man lacks 
it. Even though He gave expression to the natural functioning of that one spiritual 
ability, how could the holy man have possibly penetrated what that one spiritual 
ability is? For, even though the holy man had five abilities, they were not five of 
the abilities encompassed within the six spiritual abilities that the Buddha had. 
Even though the abilities of the holy man were seen through by the Buddha’s use 
of His spiritual abilities, how could the holy man’s abilities possibly see through to 
the spiritual abilities of a Buddha? If the holy man had seen through to even one 
spiritual ability of the Buddha, he could have seen right through to Buddha from 
this spiritual ability. When we look at a holy man, there is that which resembles a 
Buddha’s spiritual abilities, and when we look at the behavior of a Buddha, there is 
that which resembles the abilities of a holy man, but you should realize that the 
latter’s abilities are not what the marvelous spiritual abilities of a Buddha are. 
When there is no penetration to the Truth, the five spiritual abilities are in no way 
akin to Buddha. 

At the heart of what the Venerable Shakyamuni was saying is, “Of what use 
is your asking about the sixth spiritual ability? You could have asked about any of 
the abilities,” and “You should have asked about the unsurpassed spiritual ability 
and about the one marvelous spiritual ability, for in no way is a holy man a match 
for the one spiritual ability.” Thus, the marvelous spiritual abilities of a Buddha 
and the abilities of others bear the same name of ‘spiritual abilities’, yet the 
spiritual abilities of the two are different by far. 


7. To ‘see Buddha’ is a Zen tenn for seeing Buddha Nature either in oneself or in another. 

8. ‘The vines that embrace’ refers to the Master-disciple relationship in which both supply 
support for each other. ‘The vines that are severed’ refers to entangling relationships that 
need to be severed. Dogen will explore these two references in Discourse 47: On ‘The Vines 
That Entangle: The Vines That Embrace’ ( Katto ). 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


323 


djb 

Thus it was that Rinzai Gigen once quoted the following poem by a man of 
old: 

The ways in which the Tathagata displayed His whole 
being 

Were for the purpose of responding to how people felt. 

Fearing lest people give rise to nihilistic views, 

He provisionally put forth hollow terms. 

His speaking expediently of His ‘thirty-two bodily marks ’ 

And of His ‘eighty physical characteristics ’ was but an 
empty sound , 9 

For His physical body is not His True Body, 

And That which is beyond characteristics is His True 
Form. 

Great Master Rin z ai then commented on this poem: 

A Buddha has six spiritual abilities that boggle the mind. But all 
heavenly beings, holy men, asuras,* and mighty demons also have 
spiritual abilities, so surely they must be Buddhas as well. Right? 

O my fellow Buddhist trainees, make no mistake! When the 
asuras were defeated in battle against Indra, Lord of the Trayastrimsha 
Heavens, they took eighty-four thousand of their kith and kin under 
their governance, and concealed themselves within the hollows of 
lotus roots. Surely this was not being saintly, was it? 

In what I, a mountain monk, have just imparted to you 
concerning these lesser spiritual abilities, all refer to karmically* 
inherited powers or powers induced by drugs or sorcery. Well, the six 
marvelous spiritual abilities of a Buddha are not like those powers. 

When Buddhas enter the realm of forms and colors, They are not 
captivated by forms or colors; when They enter the realm of sounds, 

They are not captivated by sounds; when They enter the realm of 
odors, They are not captivated by smells; when They enter the realm 
of tastes, They are not captivated by tastes; when They enter the realm 
of tactile sensations, They are not captivated by what They physically 


9. The thirty-two marks were considered to be the signs of a true world ruler, whereas having 
the eighty characteristics in addition to these thirty-two marks was viewed to be the signs of 
a genuine Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


324 


feel; when They enter the realms of thoughts and things, They are not 
captivated by whatever arises there. Thus, when someone arrives at 
the point where form and color, sound, smell, taste, touch, and 
thoughts and things are all characteristics that are empty of any 
substance, there can be nothing that binds this follower of the Way, 
who has gone beyond karmic conditionings. Even though these 
characteristics are what the five skandhas* spew forth, they are simply 
the bases for this follower’s marvelous spiritual abilities as he treads 
the earth. 

O my fellow Buddhist trainees, the True Buddha has no set 
shape and the True Dharma has no fixed form. You are simply 
fashioning imitations and creating forms built upon what is 
ephemeral. Though you may even attain those things you seek, they 
will all be ghosts of wild foxes and will not be the true Buddha, for 
these ghosts are nothing but the views and opinions of non-Buddhists. 

Accordingly, the six marvelous spiritual abilities of all Buddhas are not 
something that can be matched by any of the various lofty beings and devilish 
people or by those of the Two Lesser Courses, nor are they something such persons 
can fathom. The six marvelous spiritual abilities of the Buddha’s Way are what 
have been directly Transmitted only to the disciples of the Buddha within the 
Buddha’s Way, one-to-one, and They have not been passed on to other persons. 
The six marvelous spiritual abilities of a Buddha are directly Transmitted within 
the Buddha’s Way. Those to whom they have not been directly Transmitted, one-to- 
one, cannot comprehend the six marvelous spiritual abilities of a Buddha. You 
should explore through your training with your Master that those to whom the six 
marvelous spiritual abilities of Buddhas have not been directly Transmitted, one- 
to-one, will not be persons within the Way of the Buddhas. 


Hyakujo Ekai once said: 

When our eyes, ears, nose, and tongue are undefiled by the 
various material and immaterial things that arise, we call this 
‘receiving and keeping to a four-line Dharma poem’ and also ‘the four 
stages* of arhathood’. And when the six sense gates leave no trace, we 
call this ‘the six marvelous spiritual abilities’. Simply, at this very 
moment when we are smoothly going on, unhindered by all the 
various material and immaterial things that arise, and having brought 
to an end our dependency on our discriminatory thinking, then this too 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


325 


is called the ‘the six marvelous spiritual abilities’. Not claiming these 
marvelous spiritual abilities as one’s own is what we call not 
‘possessing’ spiritual abilities. The tracks of Bodhisattvas* who do not 
‘possess’ spiritual abilities, as spoken of here, cannot be traced, for 
They are persons above and beyond Buddhahood. They are the most 
mind-boggling of persons. In and of Themselves, They are as great as 
the gods. 

The marvelous spiritual abilities that Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after 
Ancestor have Transmitted are just like this. The marvelous spiritual abilities of all 
Buddhas are above and beyond Buddhahood. As such, They are indeed the most 
mind-boggling of persons and as great as the gods in and of Themselves. They are 
Bodhisattvas who do not ‘possess’ spiritual abilities. They are persons who have 
ended Their dependency on discriminatory thinking. They are persons who have 
spiritual abilities but do not act upon them. They are persons who are not hindered 
by anything that arises. The Buddha’s Way, right now, has the six marvelous 
spiritual abilities. All Buddhas have habitually Transmitted and kept to Them for 
ever so long. There is not even one Buddha who has failed to Transmit and keep to 
Them, for if such a one did not Transmit and keep to Them, he would not be a 
Buddha. These six marvelous spiritual abilities of the Buddhas make Their senses 
clear so that the six sense gates leave no traces. 

As someone of old said in verse about Buddhas leaving no trace: 

Their wondrous spiritual functioning through Their six 
senses will be both empty and not empty 
And the halo of light of Their manifestation will take 
forms and be beyond form. 

‘Their taking forms and being beyond form’ will be Their leaving no traces. When, 
without leaving traces, we do our training and practice, explore the Matter through 
our training with our Master, and realize enlightenment, we do not create 
disturbances through our sense gates. ‘Not creating disturbances’ means that ‘one 
who creates disturbances deserves thirty blows from the Master’s staff’. 

So, you need to thoroughly explore the six marvelous spiritual abilities 
through your training in accord with the preceding. Apart from the legitimate 
descendants in our Buddha family, who would even hear that this principle exists? 
Others have simply mistaken their meaningless feasting on externals for the daily 
behavior of returning to one’s True Home. Further, even though the four stages of 
arhathood are common fare in the Buddha’s Way, there is no academic scholar of 
the Scriptures who has been genuinely Transmitted. How could that bunch who are 
bent on counting grains of sand—those folks who are aimlessly wandering about in 



Shobogenzo: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


326 


delusion—possibly realize the fruits of these stages? The sort of people who are 
satisfied with having realized something small have not yet even come close to 
exploring the Matter in depth; Buddhas have Transmitted the Way only to 
Buddhas. The so-called ‘four stages of arhathood’ are synonymous with receiving 
and retaining a four-line Dharma poem. What we call ‘receiving and retaining a 
four-line Dharma poem’ is our eyes, ears, nose, and tongue all being undefiled by 
the various material and immaterial things that arise. ‘Being undefiled’ means ‘not 
being stained with desires’. ‘Not being stained with desires’ refers to our everyday 
mind: it is our continually cutting through whatever arises here and now. The 
genuine Transmission of the six marvelous spiritual abilities and the four stages of 
arhathood within the Buddha’s Way has been like this. If teaching is in any way 
different from this, you must recognize that it is not the Buddha Dharma. Thus, the 
Buddha’s Way is invariably arrived at through the function of one’s marvelous 
spiritual abilities. Who could possibly doubt that, in arriving There, a drop of water 
swallows and spews forth a vast ocean, and a speck of dust picks up, and lets go of, 
a lofty mountain? These are simply one’s marvelous spiritual abilities, and nothing 
else. 

Given to the assembly at Kannondori in Kdshohorin-ji Temple, on the sixteenth day of the 
eleventh lunar month in the second year of the Ninji era (December 19, 1241). 

Copied by me in the office of the Abbot s chief assistan t at Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province 
on the first day of mid-spring in the second year of the Kangen era (March 11, 1244). 

Ejo 



25 

On the Great Realization 

(Daigo) 


Translator’s Introduction: The great realization of which Dogen speaks in this discourse does 
not refer to an intellectual understanding of what the Buddhas and Ancestors have taught but to 
the direct experience of one’s True Nature, hence his describing it as being ‘great’. In a few 
contexts, the more familiar words ‘enlightenment’ and ‘awakening’ have been used to render the 
term go in the title, which in Japanese fashion is read as satori, the colloquial equivalent for the 
more technical term kensho, ‘the encountering of one’s True Nature’, both words referring to a 
knowing that arises only from direct experience. 


The Great Way that Buddha after Buddha has Transmitted has continued on 
without interruption, and the merits of training that Ancestor after Ancestor has 
revealed have spread far and wide. As a result, having fully manifested the great 
realization and having attained the Way without necessarily realizing that They 
have done so, They reflect on what They have realized and take delight in it. Then, 
emerging from Their realization, They let go of it and act freely, for this is what the 
everyday life of Buddhas and Ancestors is. They have the twenty-four hours of the 
day, which They use for whatever needs to be taken up; They have the twenty-four 
hours of the day, which They use for whatever needs to be laid aside. And They 
take delight in mudballs, as well as in Their heartfelt and spirited commitment, 
which this skeleton key has opened . 1 From the time of Their great realization on, 
Buddhas and Ancestors invariably go to the ultimate in Their spiritual training and 
exploration, which fully manifests in this manner. At the same time, the full 
attainment of the great realization is not to be construed as what a Buddha or an 
Ancestor is, nor is one’s fully being a Buddha or an Ancestor to be construed as 
attaining the great realization in full. The Buddhas and Ancestors spring forth from 


1. A mudball is often used in Zen Buddhist texts as a metaphor for one’s Buddha Nature, 
whereas ‘taking delight in Their heartfelt and spirited commitment’ refers to single-minded 
practice. 

Kanreisu, translated here as ‘skeleton key’, refers to a special key that is used to open a 
gateway (here, the gateway to spiritual liberation and freedom) or to a device for resolving 
the fundamental spiritual question (namely, the matter of life and death). In the present 
context, it alludes to someone using the key as a device for accessing spiritual delight. 


327 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Realization 


328 


the bounds of the great realization, and the great realization is one’s Original Face 
that springs forth from a place above and beyond ‘Buddha’ and ‘Ancestor’. 

At the same time, the inborn abilities of human beings are of many kinds. 
For instance, there are those who innately know what life really is. Once bom, they 
free themselves from the sufferings and delusions of living. That is, through their 
own bodily existence they thoroughly master what life really is, beginning, middle, 
and end. And there are those who realize the Tmth through learning. They 
undertake study and ultimately master themselves. In other words, they thoroughly 
exhaust the skin and flesh, bones and marrow of learning. And there are those who 
know what Buddha is. They go beyond those who realize the Tmth through living 
and those who realize the Tmth through learning. They transcend the bounds of 
self and other, are unbounded in the here and now, and are beyond having opinions 
when it comes to knowing self and other. That is to say, they have a knowledge that 
has no teacher. They are not dependent on a good spiritual friend, nor on Scriptural 
writings, nor on the nature of things, nor on external forms; they do not try to open 
up and turn themselves around, nor do they try to be interdependent with others; 
rather, they are completely transparent, with nothing hidden. Of these various 
types, do not conclude that one is smart and another dull. Each type fully manifests 
the merits from their training. 

As a consequence, you would do well to explore through your training 
whether there are any beings, sentient or non-sentient, who cannot come to know 
the Tmth simply by living their daily life. Any who have come to know the Tmth 
through living life will have come to realize that Tmth as the result of their living 
an everyday life. Once they have awakened to the Tmth, they will reveal It in their 
everyday lives as they do their training and practice throughout their lives. Thus, 
the Buddhas and Ancestors, who are already Trainers and Tamers of Human 
Beings , 2 have come to be called ‘Those who have fully realized what life really is’ 
because They have fully grasped what realization means. It will be your realization 
of what life is that leads you to partake of the great realization, because it will 
manifest from your study of Their realization. 

Accordingly, They have experienced the great realization by accepting the 
three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form; They have realized the great 
realization by accepting all the hundreds of things that sprout up; They have 
realized the great realization by accepting the four elements;* They have realized 


2. ‘Trainer and Tamer of Human Beings’ is one of the ten epithets by which Shakyamuni 
Buddha is known. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Realization 


329 


the great realization by accepting the Buddhas and Ancestors; They have realized 
the great realization by accepting Their own spiritual question. All of Them, 
altogether, have accepted the great realization, and experienced the great 
realization as well. The very moment when realization occurs is ‘the now’. 


Rinzai Gigen once said, “Were we to search great T’ang China for a single 
person who was not enlightened, it would be difficult to find that one.” Now what 
Great Master Rinzai is saying here is the very Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow 
of the genuine lineage, so there is no reason to expect that it is erroneous. What he 
calls ‘in great T’ang China’ means ‘everywhere his eyes can see’. And it has no 
connection with ‘the whole universe’, nor is it limited to some tiny bit of land. If 
we seek in any concrete place for a single person who is not enlightened, it will be 
difficult to find that one. The self that was one’s self yesterday was not 
unenlightened, and the self that is another’s self today is not unenlightened. Should 
you seek among the mountaineers or fisherfolk of past or present, ultimately you 
will still not find any who are unenlightened. Should you trainees explore Rinzai’s 
words in this manner, you will not have spent your time in vain. 

Even so, you should also explore through your training the intentions of the 
Ancestors of our Soto Zen tradition. In short, just for the moment, I would like to 
discuss something with Rinzai: If you, Rinzai, know only that an unenlightened 
person is hard to find and do not know that an enlightened person is also hard to 
find, this is still not enough to be affirmed, and it is difficult to say that you have 
thoroughly explored even the matter of an unenlightened person being hard to find. 
Even though, in seeking for someone who is not enlightened, it is hard to find even 
one, did you ever encounter a person who was half-enlightened, and whose 
countenance and genial demeanor were impressive in their openness? Even though, 
in your seeking for one person in great T’ang China who was unenlightened, you 
found it difficult to find even one, do not consider this to be the end of the matter. 
You should have tried looking for two or three great T’ang Chinas within a single 
person or within half a person. Is such a one difficult to find? Is such a one not 
difficult to find? When someone is in possession of the chief purpose for which we 
train, that person can be trusted as a thoroughly enlightened Ancestor of the 
Buddha. 

djb 


Kegon Kyujo was a Dharma heir of Tozan. Kyujo was his 
personal name. A monk once asked him, “What is it like when a 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Realization 


330 


person who has experienced the great realization returns to being 
deluded?” 

The Master replied, “A broken mirror does not shed its light 
again: it would be difficult for a fallen blossom to climb back up on 
the tree.” 

This question is indeed the essential question, and it provides an excellent 
opportunity for giving Teaching to one’s community. Had this question not been 
raised in the assembly at Kegon Monastery, it would not have been expounded, and 
had it not been answered by one of Tozan’s Dharma heirs, the response would not 
have been so inspired. This must truly be the training monastery of a fully 
enlightened Ancestor of the Buddha. 

As to a person who has experienced the great realization, we cannot say that 
the great realization has been with that person from the outset, nor has that person, 
upon experiencing the great realization, stored it up somewhere outside or apart 
from himself, nor is the great realization something encountered in the human 
world only by those who are in the last stages of old age. Such a person does not 
forcibly drag it out of himself, yet, without fail, such a one experiences the great 
realization. Such a one does not treat merely an absence of delusion as the great 
realization. Neither does such a one aim at becoming a deluded person first so that 
he may then plant and sprout the seeds of the great realization. Moreover, although 
a person of great realization experiences the great realization, a person of great 
delusion also experiences the great realization. Just as there are persons of great 
realization, so there are Buddhas of great realization, and there is earth, water, fire, 
wind, and space in the great realization, and there are pillars* of the temple and 
stone lanterns* in the great realization. We are now raising questions about those 
who have experienced the great realization. The question about those who have 
experienced the great realization being capable of reverting to delusion is asking 
something that truly needs to be asked. And Kegon does not shun the issue, for he 
cherishes the old ways in monastery life, since they are the meritorious ways of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Let us focus for the moment on the following questions: When one who has 
experienced the great enlightenment reverts to delusion, will that person be exactly 
the same as one who has not experienced the great realization? At the time when 
one who has experienced the great enlightenment reverts to delusion, does that 
person take the great realization and make it into something delusory? Does the 
person revert to delusion by taking some delusion from within someone or 
someplace else and then use it to cover up his great realization? Also, does the 
person who has experienced the great realization as a whole person, then destroy 
his great realization when he reverts to delusion? And also, does what is called ‘the 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Realization 


331 


reversion to delusion of a person who has experienced the great realization’ treat 
the holding onto an instance of great realization as being a reversion to delusion? 
You need to explore these questions thoroughly, one by one. Further, is it the great 
realization on the one hand and a reverting to delusion on the other hand? Be that 
as it may, you need to know that, in your commitment to your spiritual exploration 
through training, you will leam that a person who has experienced the great 
realization has reversions to delusion. You need to know that the great realization 
and reversion to delusion are intimately connected matters. 

Accordingly, ‘taking a thief to be our child’ does not describe ‘reverting to 
delusion’, nor does ‘taking our child to be a thief’ describe ‘reverting to delusion’. 
The great realization will be ‘taking a thief to be a thief’, whereas reverting to 
delusion is ‘taking our child to be our child’. ‘Adding a bit too much to what is 
large’ is the great realization, whereas ‘taking a bit away from what is little’ is what 
reverting to delusion is. As a consequence, when we search for and try to 
comprehend a person who has reverted to delusion, we will encounter someone 
who has experienced the great realization. We need to carefully scrutinize, right 
now, whether we ourselves are deluded or not, for it is by this that we humbly 
encounter the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

The Master said, “A broken mirror does not shed its light again: 

it would be difficult for a fallen blossom to climb back up on the tree.” 

This instruction to his assembly applies to the very moment when the mirror 

■j 

shatters. However, it is not helpful to devote one’s mind to the time when the 
mirror has not yet been shattered and then focus on exploring the phrase ‘a broken 
mirror’. Now, some of you may understand the main point of Kegon’s remark 
about a broken mirror not shedding its light again and it being difficult for a fallen 
blossom to climb back up on the tree as his asserting that someone who has 
experienced the great realization does not revert to delusion again. And you may 
express this by saying that someone who has experienced the great realization does 
not lose his light again and that someone who has experienced the great realization 
finds it difficult to climb back up on the tree of self. But Kegon’s assertion goes 
beyond your exploring the Matter* in this manner. And some of you may think that 
the monk is asking something akin to, “What is the everyday life of a person who 
has experienced the great realization like?” to which the reply might be, “There are 
times when one reverts to delusion.” But the original account is not like this. 


3. That is, we are now to understand the phrase ‘a broken mirror’ as ‘a mirror breaking’ and ‘a 
fallen flower’ as ‘a flower falling’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Realization 


332 


What the monk is asking is, “What is it like at the time when a person who 
has experienced the great realization reverts to delusion?” and therefore he is 
asking for clarification about the very moment of reverting to delusion. The 
Master’s remark that “a broken mirror does not shed its light again: it would be 
difficult for a fallen blossom to climb back up on the tree” fully expresses such a 
moment as this. When a fallen blossom is just a fallen blossom, even though it may 
have floated up to the top of a hundred-foot pole, it is still a fallen blossom. 
Because a broken mirror is just a broken mirror right here and now, even though it 
may reflect a bit of life, it will be not be able to shed its light again. Taking up the 
points expressed as ‘a broken mirror’ and ‘a fallen blossom’, you should explore 
the moment when someone who has experienced the great realization reverts to 
delusion. At that moment, the great realization is like becoming Buddha, and 
reverting to delusion is akin to being an ordinary human being. And this statement 
is not something that we should study as if we were speaking of ‘returning to being 
an ordinary human being’ or speaking of ‘leaving behind traces whilst submitting 
oneself to the Source’. 

Others may assert something to the effect that, when people act contrary to 
their great realization, they become ordinary human beings, but we are not saying 
here that their great realization is violated, or that their great realization has 
vanished, or that delusion has arrived. We must not let ourselves think the way 
these ordinary people do. Truly, the great realization is boundless, and the 
reversion to delusion is boundless. There is no delusion that obstructs the great 
realization; for every three instances of the great realization that come along, we 
may create half an instance of slight delusion. On account of this, there are snow¬ 
capped mountains that undergo the great realization for the sake of snow-capped 
mountains, as well as trees and stones undergoing the great realization by 
borrowing from trees and stones . 4 

The great realization of all Buddhas is Their attaining the great realization 
for the sake of sentient beings: the great realization of sentient beings is their 
attaining the great realization of all Buddhas. This realization will not be connected 
with what came before or with what will come after. The great realization at this 
very moment is beyond self and beyond other. It is not something that comes to us 
from somewhere outside, yet it fills in the ditches and fills up the valleys 


4. ‘Snow-capped mountains’ is often used in Zen Buddhism as a reference to those who have 
been successfully training for a long time. Similarly, ‘trees’ are trainees who have not yet cut 
down the tree of self, and ‘stones’ are trainees who are now unresponsive to the arising of 
defiling passions. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Realization 


333 


everywhere. It is not something that departs from us, yet it is incompatible with 
any pursuit after some ‘other’. And why is that? Because it has departed from 
chasing after whatever is ‘other’. 

djb 


The monk Keicho Beiko had a monk go ask Kyozan, “Do 
people nowadays even attempt to make use of the great realization?” 

Kyozan replied, “While spiritual realization is not nonexistent, 
the question is how can we avoid relegating it to a matter of secondary 
importance?” 

The monk went back and reported this to Beiko. Beiko 
committed himself to exploring this deeply. 

The ‘nowadays’ of which the monk spoke is the ever-present now. Although we 
think in terms of past, present, and future thousands of myriad times, all such 
thoughts arise only in the present moment. Unquestionably, each person lives in the 
now. And sometimes it is their Eye that arises in the present, and sometimes it is 
their Nose that arises in the present. 

“Do people nowadays even attempt to make use of the great 
realization?” 

We need to examine these words slowly and carefully, allowing them to penetrate 
our feelings and our thoughts. In present-day Great Sung China, shaven-headed 
dolts, among others, go around saying, “The path to spiritual realization is my 
fundamental aim.” Talking like this, they vainly wait around for spiritual 
realization. But they are not illumined by the Light of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 
They indolently stumble about instead of going and training under a genuine good 
spiritual friend. Even when the ancient Buddha was in the world, they would not 
have freed themselves from suffering and delusion. 

The present question as to whether people attempt to make use of the great 
realization is not saying that spiritual realization does not exist, nor is it saying that 
it does exist, nor is it saying that it comes to one from elsewhere. It is saying, “Do 
they attempt to make use of it?” It was as though he had said, “The spiritual 
realization of people nowadays has somehow been realized.” For instance, had he 
said that someone has attained a spiritual realization, it would sound as if it had not 
continually existed. Had he said that a spiritual realization had come to someone, it 
would sound as if that spiritual realization had continually existed somewhere else. 
Had he said that someone had become spiritually awakened, it would sound as if 
spiritual realization had a beginning. He did not speak of it like this and it is not 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Realization 


334 


like this. Even so, when he spoke of what spiritual realization is really like, he 
asked whether one attempts to make use of spiritual realization. 

On the other hand, in speaking of spiritual realization, Kyozan said, “While 
spiritual realization is not nonexistent, the question is how can we avoid relegating 
it to a matter of secondary importance?” In so saying, he is stating that even that 
which is of secondary importance is still spiritual realization. His saying that it has 
become of secondary importance is as if he had said, “You have become spiritually 
awakened!” or “You have realized a spiritual awakening!” or “A spiritual 
realization has come to you!” Even to say “You have become it” or “It has come to 
you” states that it is a spiritual realization. As a consequence, while regretting the 
fact that it has been relegated to a matter of secondary importance, he seems to be 
denying that a matter of secondary importance exists. A matter of secondary 
importance which springs from spiritual realization may be taken to be genuinely 
of secondary importance. Accordingly, even if it were of secondary importance, 
even if it were one among hundreds of thousands of matters of importance, it 
would still be a spiritual realization. It is not true that when it is of secondary 
importance, it is necessarily left over from something that previously existed as a 
matter of primary importance. For example, while we treat the T of yesterday as 
our T, yesterday we spoke of our T of today as if it were a second person. 
Kyozan is not saying that the spiritual realization of this very moment did not exist 
yesterday, nor is he asserting that it is something that just began now: this is how 
we explore the Matter through our training. Accordingly, the heads of some who 
have experienced the great realization are black, and the heads of some who have 
experienced the great realization are white . 5 

Given to the assembly at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple at springtime, on the twenty- 
eighth day of the first lunar month in the third year of the Ninji era (March 1, 1242). 

Copied by me on the twenty-seventh day of the first lunar month in the second year of the 
Kangen era (March 7, 1244) in Echizen Province at the old temple of Kippo-ji where I 
had hung up my traveling staff and presented it in writing to the great assembly of 
ordinary people as well as those in lofty positions. 

I recopied this in the spring of the same year, on the twenty-first day of the third lunar month 
(April 29, 1244), whilst serving in the inner recesses of the training temple of Kippo-ji in 
Echizen Province. 

Ejo 


5. That is, youth (black hair) and old age (white hair) are of no relevance when it comes to 
experiencing the great realization. 



26 

On Wanshi’s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation’ 

(Zazen Shin) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse Dogen uses the term zazen shin in two different 
senses. The first is given as the title of this discourse and is the name for a poem by Meditation 
Master Wanshi that Dogen quotes near the end of this work. The second sense is found at the 
very end of this discourse in the title of a poem by Dogen, The Needle of Seated Meditation, 
which is based on Wanshi’s poem. Dogen’s poem refers to the use of seated meditation to spur 
one on and to help trainees unblock themselves spiritually, just as an acupuncture needle would 
unblock them physically. 

The word zazen is used by Dogen in this discourse for two different states. The first refers to 
‘sitting in meditation’, that is, physically sitting down in order to practice meditation. The second 
refers to ‘seated meditation’, that is, being spiritually centered no matter where one is or what 
one is doing, neither pushing away nor denying anything as it arises, nor clinging to anything, 
including some specific form of meditating. To truly do seated meditation is to be, as Dogen 
says, seated Buddha. 


At Kannondori, Koshohorin-ji Temple. 

Right after Great Master Yakusan Igen had finished a period of 
meditation , 1 a certain monk asked him, “As you were sitting there all 
still and awesome like a mountain, what was it that you were thinking 
about?” 

The Master answered, “What I was thinking about was based 
on not deliberately thinking about any particular thing.” 

The monk then asked, “How can what anyone is thinking about 
be based on not deliberately thinking about something?” 

The Master replied, “It is a matter of ‘what I am thinking about’ 
not being the point.” 

Having heard about this state described by Great Master Yakusan, we need 
to investigate through our training what ‘sitting as still as a mountain’ means and 
directly Transmit this, for this is how the thorough exploration of sitting as still as a 


1. Yakusan would have been sitting together with his community of monks in the Meditation 
Hall. 


335 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


336 


mountain is passed on through the words and ways of Buddhas. Even though it is 
said that the way in which Buddhas think about things while being all still and 
awesome like a mountain differs, Yakusan’s way of putting it is certainly one way 
among them. It is his ‘thinking about’ not being based on deliberately thinking 
about any particular thing. It includes ‘thinking about’ as his Skin and Flesh, Bones 
and Marrow, and it includes ‘not thinking about’ as his Skin and Flesh, Bones and 
Marrow. 

The monk asked, “How can what anyone is thinking about be 
based on not deliberately thinking about something ?” 

Even though the condition of not thinking about anything in particular is of ancient 
vintage, how can one possibly think about it? How can thinking not go on while 
sitting ever so still, and why did the monk not pierce through to what goes above 
and beyond simply being ever so still? Had he not been as befuddled as some are in 
our more recent, degenerate times, he would have had the ability to persist in his 
inquiry into being ever so still. 

The Master replied, “It is a matter of ‘what I am thinking about’ 
not being the point.” 

Even though his statement, “It is a matter of ‘what I am thinking about’ not being 
the point,” is a gem of clarity, in our consideration of the condition of not 
deliberately thinking about anything in particular, we invariably employ what he 
described as “‘what I am thinking about’ not being the point.” There is a someone 
involved in not deliberately trying to think about something, and that someone is 
maintaining and supporting an I. Even though being ever so still is synonymous 
with that I, meditation is not merely an I thinking about something; it is the I 
offering up its being as still and awesome as a mountain . 2 Even though its being 
ever so still is being ever so still, how can its being ever so still possibly think 
about being ever so still? 

As a consequence, being as still as a mountain is beyond the considerations 
of Buddhas, beyond the considerations of Dharma, beyond the considerations of 
having awakened, and beyond the considerations of intellectual understanding. The 
Matter* that Yakusan has directly Transmitted one-to-one in this way has been 
handed down for thirty-six generations, descending directly from Shakyamuni 
Buddha, and from Yakusan to Shakyamuni Buddha, there are thirty-six 


2. The ‘I’ to which Dogen is referring here is not the egoistic false self, but a natural function 
of the right effort of sitting still. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


337 


generations. The practice of not thinking about anything in particular has been 
directly Transmitted in this manner. 

Despite all this, there has been befuddled and unreliable talk in recent years, 
saying that if a person can fully eliminate all thoughts by devotedly sitting in 
meditation, this is the basis for true stillness . 3 4 This viewpoint does not even come 
up to that of scholars who study the Lesser Course.* It is even inferior to the paths 
that the common and lofty people pursue, so how can we possibly speak of such 
befuddled people as folks who are exploring the Buddha Dharma? In modern-day 
Great Sung China, people devoted to such ways are numerous, which, lamentably, 
will be the destruction and ruin of the Way of the Ancestors. 

Also, there is a type of person among the Chinese who says, “Doing one’s 
utmost to sit in meditation is the essential practice, whether as a beginner or as 
someone who has come to training late in life.” But this is not necessarily the daily 
behavior of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Actively walking about, as well as sitting, 
was Their meditation practice. Their body was quiet and tranquil whether They 
were speaking or silent, moving about or inactive, so don’t you depend solely upon 
that method just now quoted. Many of the folks who call themselves followers of 
Rinzai are of that limited view. Someone has been remiss in passing on to them the 
awakened life of the Buddha Dharma, and so they speak in that way. What is a 
‘beginner’? What person is not a beginner? And where do such folks find a 
beginner’s attitude of mind? 

Keep in mind that, in our thorough investigation of what has been 
established for exploring the Way, we do our utmost to put our seated meditation 
into practice. This practice has, as its main point, our “acting as a Buddha without 
pursuing ‘becoming a Buddha .’” 5 Moreover, because ‘acting as a Buddha’ is 
beyond ‘becoming a Buddha’, our spiritual question manifests before our very 
eyes. Again, our emulation of Buddha is beyond becoming a Buddha, so that when 
we break up the nets and cages that confine us, our sitting like a Buddha sits does 
not hinder our becoming a Buddha. Right at such a moment of sitting still, there is 
the strength that has been present for thousands of times, nay, for tens of thousands 
of times, to enter into being either a Buddha or a demon. And our stepping forward 


3. That is, when we look forward from Shakyamuni, Yakusan is an Ancestor, and when we 
look back to Shakyamuni from our present position, Yakusan is a Buddha. 

4. That is, such befuddled persons take ‘blissing out’ to be the true goal of meditation. 

5. ‘Acting as a Buddha’ implies living one’s daily life in accord with the Precepts and as a 
moment-by-moment meditation, without adding some goal like ‘becoming a Buddha’. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


338 


or stepping back is intimately connected with our capability to fill in the ditches, 
even to fill in the valleys. 

djb 


While Baso Doitsu was training under Meditation Master 
Nangaku Ejo, he privately received the Mind seal.* One day while 
Baso was sitting in meditation, Nangaku came to where he was and 
asked him, “O great virtuous one, what is the aim of your sitting in 
meditation ?” 6 

This question needs to be calmly, yet diligently, investigated, because we need to 
look in detail at what Nangaku might be asking. Does he have in mind that there is 
something above and beyond sitting in meditation? Or has there never been a 
practice that can be considered as more special than sitting in meditation? Or 
should we not aim at anything at all? Or, is he asking Baso whether some goal has 
manifested from his sitting in meditation at the present time? We should desire the 
True Dragon more than we desire the carved dragon. And we need to learn that 
both the carved dragon and the True Dragon possess the ability to summon up 
clouds and rain . 7 Do not esteem what is far off, and do not belittle what is far off; 
just acquaint yourself with what is far off. Do not belittle what is near at hand, and 
do not esteem what is near at hand; just acquaint yourself with what is near at 
hand. Do not treat your eyes lightly, and do not attach great importance to your 
eyes. And do not attach great importance to your ears, and do not treat your ears 
lightly. Just make your ears and your eyes sharp and clear . 8 

Baso responded, “My aim is to become a Buddha.” 


6. As other accounts of this koan story make clear, the incident took place some considerable 
time after Baso had had a kensho and had been Transmitted by Nangaku. During this 
interval, Baso had sat in his hut doing his meditation day after day regardless of the weather, 
even to the point of sitting in the deep snow that covered the floor of his hut. 

7. The allusion is probably to the story of a Chinese artist who was so skilled at fashioning 
carved dragons that they could summon up clouds and rain. One day, a real dragon showed 
up in his studio and the experience totally overwhelmed him. The carved dragon referred to 
here is an analogy for the skilled practice of sitting in meditation, whereas the appearance of 
the True Dragon would be associated with experiencing a kensho, which goes beyond any 
notions one may have of what a kensho really is. 

8. The eyes are associated with clearly seeing the way things are, whereas the ears are 
associated with accurately understanding what things truly are. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


339 


We need to arrive at a clear understanding of what Baso is saying here. When he 
speaks of becoming a Buddha, what exactly does he mean? Is he asserting that 
becoming a Buddha means being made into a Buddha by a Buddha? Or is he 
asserting that becoming a Buddha means making a Buddha into a Buddha? Or is he 
asserting that becoming a Buddha is the emergence of one or two aspects of a 
Buddha? Is his aiming to become a Buddha the result of his having dropped off 
body and mind, or is his aiming at becoming a Buddha itself the dropping off of his 
body and mind? Or is he asserting that aiming at becoming a Buddha is tangled up 
with one’s aims, despite the fact that becoming a Buddha applies to all things? 

Keep in mind that what Baso is saying is that his sitting in meditation is 
certainly done with the goal of becoming a Buddha, and that his sitting in 
meditation is certainly done with the wish to become a Buddha. Such a wish can 
precede becoming a Buddha, and it can arise after becoming a Buddha, and it can 
arise at the very moment of becoming a Buddha. To question a bit further, how 
many instances of becoming a Buddha has this single wish entangled? And this 
entanglement can become entwined with other entanglements. At such a time, the 
entanglements involved in cases of completely becoming a Buddha are, beyond 
doubt, directly related to ‘completely becoming a Buddha’, and, in every single 
case, they are due to having a goal. We should not try to avoid having a purpose. 
When we try to avoid having a purpose, we grieve for ourselves and lose our very 
life, and when we grieve for ourselves and lose our very life, it is due to our 
entanglement with having a goal. 

Thereupon, Nangaku picked up a roof tile and began rubbing it 
on a rock. Seeing this, Baso asked him, “Reverend Master, what are 
you doing that for?” 

Truly, who would fail to see that he was polishing a tile? Even so, the question 
meant, “What are you going to make from polishing a tile in that way?” What he is 
going to make is undoubtedly a polished tile. Here and in other worlds—different 
though they may be—Nangaku’s polishing a tile will have a significance that will 
never cease. It is not simply a matter of taking one’s own personal view not to be a 
personal view: we positively ascertain that there is a purpose to all our myriad 
activities which we need to explore through our training and practice. Keep in 
mind that, just as we might not recognize or understand a Buddha when we 
encounter a Buddha, so when we encounter the Water we may not recognize It, or 
when we see a ‘mountain’ we may not recognize it either. And jumping to the 
conclusion that there can be no pathway into the Dharma that is right before one’s 
eyes is not the way to explore the Buddha Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


340 


Nangaku said, “I am polishing the tile to make it into a Mirror.” 

We need to clarify the import of this statement. Nangaku undoubtedly has a reason 
for saying, “I am polishing the tile to make it into a Mirror,” for Baso’s spiritual 
question is fully manifesting and there cannot be false teaching. Even though a tile 
is a tile and a mirror is a mirror, keep in mind that there are ever so many factors 
involved when we strive to clarify Nangaku’s reason for polishing it. Both the 
Ancient Mirror and the Bright Mirror will be attained through polishing a tile to 
make a Mirror . 9 If we do not know that all such Mirrors come from polishing a tile, 
we will fail to grasp what the Buddha’s Ancestor was saying, we will not receive 
the benefit of what the Buddha’s Ancestor said, and we will not experience what 
the Buddha’s Ancestor breathed forth. 

Baso then asked, “How can you possibly make a mirror by 
rubbing a tile?” 

Truly it was the Iron Man polishing a tile , 10 without calling on the strength of 
anyone else, and, even so, polishing a tile does not make a mirror. Although he is 
just pointing to making a mirror, this pointing itself is the immediate making . 11 

Nangaku replied, “How can you possibly make yourself into a 
Buddha by sitting in meditation?” 

It is evident that there is a reason for sitting in meditation other than ‘waiting to 
become a Buddha’: obviously, becoming a Buddha does not depend on sitting in 
meditation. 

Baso asked, “Well, what then is the right way?” 

Even though what is being said looks like an earnest question directly involving 
Baso at this very moment in time, it is also a question that refers to the way things 
are elsewhere at this very moment in time. For example, call to mind a time when a 
close friend encounters a close friend: his being my friend is also my being his 

friend. The “what?” of one and “the right way” of the other are the manifestations 

12 

of both perspectives at the same time. 


9. Dogen explores this allusion in Discourse 19: On the Ancient Mirror (Kokyo). 

10. The ‘Iron Man’ is a term used to portray the level of strength and determination one needs in 
order to be successful in one’s training. 

11. That is, making a physical mirror takes time, whereas spiritually ‘making a mirror’ is 
instantaneous. 

12. The ‘close friends’ are disciple and Master: when the disciple asks his or her spiritual 
question (the “what?”), the Master supplies the direction for the disciple to look in (the 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


341 


Nangaku said, “It is like someone who has hitched up his cart. 

If the cart is not moving, is prodding the cart the right thing to do or is 
prodding the ox the right thing to do?” 

Now then, as to his words “if the cart is not moving,” what does ‘the cart’s moving’ 
mean, and what does ‘the cart’s not moving’ mean? For instance, is the water’s 

1 o 

flowing synonymous with the cart’s moving? Is the water’s not flowing 
synonymous with the cart’s moving? We could say that flowing is the water’s not 
moving. It could even be that the water’s moving is beyond ‘flowing’. Thus, in our 
investigating his saying “if the cart is not moving,” even when there is ‘no 
movement’, we need to explore the Matter through our training with a Master, and 
even when there is not ‘no movement’, we still need to explore the Matter with a 
Master, because there will be a time for each situation. Nangaku’s words “if it is 
not moving” go beyond his having made a one-sided assertion that some thing is 
not moving. 

In Nangaku’s saying “Is prodding the cart the right thing to do or is prodding 
the ox the right thing to do?” can there be both a prodding of the cart and a 
prodding of the ox? Will prodding the cart and prodding the ox be equivalent or 
not? There is no method for prodding a cart in the secular world. Although worldly 
people do not have a method for prodding their cart, we know that in the Buddha’s 
Way there is a method for prodding one’s cart: it is the very eyes of one’s spiritual 
exploration through training with one’s Master. 

Even though we learn what methods there are for prodding a cart, they will 
not be the best ones for prodding an ox, a matter we should devote ourselves to 
examining in detail. Though methods for prodding an ox are common enough in 
the everyday world, we should ask about the Buddhist way of prodding an ox by 
exploring the Matter through our training with a Master. Is the ox we are prodding 
a water buffalo, or is it the Iron Ox, or is it an ox coated with mud? Will a riding 
crop be our prod, or will the whole universe be our prod, or will one’s whole heart 
and mind be our prod? Should we beat it till the Marrow gushes forth, or hit it with 
our Fist? There will be a Fist hitting a Fist and an Ox prodding an Ox. 


“right way”). Although this may appear as a sequence in a dialogue, according to Dogen, the 
answer to the question of “what?” is the “What.” 

13. Nangaku’s remark and Dogen’s commentary on it are clearly not intended to be taken on a 
literal level, but to be viewed within the context of Buddhist training in meditation. One 
possible interpretation would equate the ox with the trainee’s will to train, the cart to his 
vehicle of training—namely, serene reflection meditation—and the water with what appears 
to be going on spiritually within his training. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


342 


Baso made no response to that last remark by Nangaku, something that we 
should not idly overlook. There was his casting aside the tile to catch a jewel: he 
was turning his head and changing his expression. Further, nothing and no one can 
rob him of his making no response. 

Nangaku, again wishing to instruct him, said, “If, as you imply, 
you would explore ‘seated meditation’, explore ‘seated Buddha.’” 

In exploring this statement through your training with a Master, you should, by all 
means, try to grasp what the pivotal moments were for the Ancestors in our 
lineage. If you do not know precisely what “explore ‘seated meditation’” means, 
well, Nangaku knew it as exploring ‘seated Buddha’. How could anyone possibly 
say that exploring ‘seated meditation’ is exploring ‘seated Buddha’ unless that 
person were a child or grandchild of a genuine heir? Truly, you need to recognize 
that a beginner’s meditation is their first time of doing seated meditation, and that 
one’s first time of doing seated meditation is the first instance of being seated 
Buddha. 

To explain what ‘seated meditation’ meant, Nangaku said, “If 
you would explore what ‘seated meditation’ is, meditation is not 
simply a matter of sitting or lying down.” 

What he is now saying is that seated meditation is doing seated meditation and is 
not a matter of, say, being physically seated or lying down . 14 Once we have 
received the direct, one-to-one Transmission that it is not a matter of sitting or 
lying down, our limitless acts of sitting and lying down are nevertheless what we 
are. What need do we have to search for whether our spiritual bloodline is within 
us or within someone else? Why get into discussions about delusion and 
enlightenment? Who would want to take up the matter of ‘how to cut off defiling 
passions by developing wise discernment’ merely as an intellectual pursuit? 

Nangaku said, “When you would investigate ‘seated Buddha’, 
you need to know that Buddha is not some set form.” 

When we want to express what this is getting at, this is the best way to do it. The 
fact that seated Buddha may manifest as one Buddha or as two Buddhas is because 
having no fixed form is one of Its glorious attributes. To state that Buddha has no 
fixed form is to state what the form of a Buddha is, and because a Buddha has no 


14. That is, the ‘seated’ in ‘seated meditation’ does not refer to a physical position during 
meditation but to a meditative state of mind. ‘Being seated or lying down’ implies all four of 
the modes of everyday human behavior: standing, moving, sitting, and lying down. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


343 


fixed form, it is difficult to avoid being seated Buddha. Thus, because the absence 
of any fixed form is one of Its glorious attributes, when you investigate doing 
seated meditation through practice, it is your being seated Buddha. 

Who within the realm of non-abiding thoughts and things would choose not 
to be a Buddha, and who, pray, chooses to be a Buddha? By letting go of choosing 
before any choice arises, one becomes seated Buddha. 

Nangaku said, “When you are seated Buddha, this then is your 
killing off‘Buddha .’” 15 

In your exploring ‘seated Buddha’ through your training with a Master, there is the 
spiritually beneficial act of killing off ‘Buddha’. The very moment of our being 
seated Buddha is killing off ‘Buddha’. In our attempt to seek out the fine, 
distinguishing marks and brilliance from killing off ‘Buddha’, they will 
undoubtedly be due to our being seated Buddha. Although the term ‘to kill off’ 
may resemble the way we speak of killing in the world, it cannot really be the 
same. Also, you need to explore through your training the statement that seated 
Buddha is killing off ‘Buddha’ by asking what form this might take. Taking up the 
point that inherent within the spiritual activity of Buddha there is the killing off of 
‘Buddha’, we need to explore through our training whether we ourselves have 
killed off our false self or have not yet killed off our false self. 

“If you are clinging to some form of sitting, you will not arrive 
at the principle of killing off ‘Buddha.’” 

‘Clinging to some form of sitting’ means throwing away and acting contrary to the 
aspect of being seated. This underlying principle, as Nangaku has already stated, is 
that when we are ‘practicing seated Buddha’, it is not possible for us not to cling to 
some form of being seated. Even though Nangaku’s saying ‘clinging to some form 
of sitting’ is a gem of clarity, when we do cling to some form of sitting, we will not 
arrive at the principle of killing off ‘Buddha’. To kill off ‘Buddha’ is what I call 
‘the dropping off of body and mind’. Those who have not yet truly sat still do not 
possess this Teaching. This ‘dropping off’ is the moment of just sitting; it is the 
person who is just sitting; it is Buddha just sitting; it is learning seated Buddha. 
Sitting that is simply a person’s sitting down or reclining is not a Buddha’s just 
sitting. Even though a person’s sitting naturally resembles a seated Buddha or a 
Buddha sitting, there are those persons who are becoming Buddha and there are 
those persons who are engaged in ‘becoming a Buddha’. Even though there are 


15. “Killing off ‘Buddha’” would encompass dropping off any notion we might have of what 
Buddha really is. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


344 


people engaged in ‘becoming a Buddha’, not everyone has become a Buddha. A 
Buddha is not everyone, and because all Buddhas are not simply all people, a 
person is not necessarily a Buddha and a Buddha is not necessarily a person. The 
same holds true for being seated Buddha. 

The same also holds true for Nangaku as an outstanding Master and Baso as 
a strong disciple. Baso is the one who realized ‘becoming Buddha’ by being 
‘seated Buddha’. Nangaku is the one who pointed to ‘seated Buddha’ for the sake 
of making a Buddha. In Nangaku’s assembly, there was such marked devotion to 
effort, and in Yakusan’s assembly, there was his Teaching concerning the nature of 
meditation. Keep in mind that Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor 
has taken being seated Buddha to be Their essential function, and They have 
wholeheartedly made use of this essential function. Those who have not used it are 
simply those who have not encountered it, not even in their dreams. 

In broader terms, in both India and China, to say that the Buddha Dharma 
had been passed on invariably meant that seated Buddha had been passed on. This 
is because seated Buddha is the essential function. When the Buddha Dharma is 
not passed on, doing seated meditation is not passed on. What Successor after 
Successor has received is just this principle of doing seated meditation. Any who 
have not yet had this principle directly Transmitted to them are not Ancestors of the 
Buddha. Without illuminating this one Teaching, we will not illuminate the myriad 
Teachings or the myriad actions that They have taken. Whoever does not illuminate 
the myriad Teachings cannot be called clear and bright, and is not someone who 
has gained the Way, so how could such a one be an Ancestor of the Buddha either 
now or in the past? Therefore, we should have no doubt that the Ancestors of the 
Buddha have, without question, directly Transmitted, one-to-one, the practice of 
seated meditation. 

To be illuminated by the radiance of the Buddhas and Ancestors is to devote 
ourselves to exploring through our training what this practice of seated meditation 
is. Befuddled people, misunderstanding what a Buddha’s radiance is, wonder 
whether it could be like sunlight or moonlight, or like the play of light in a jewel, 
or even like the dancing of a flame. Sunlight and moonlight are merely karmic* 
forms arising from the turning of the wheel within the six worlds of existence:* 
they cannot compare with a Buddha’s radiance. A Buddha’s radiance is exhibited 
by accepting and keeping to a single verse of Scripture, by maintaining, 
supporting, guarding, and protecting a single Teaching, and by directly 
Transmitting, one-to-one, the practice of seated meditation. If people had never 
reached the point where they were illumined by His radiance, then maintaining and 
supporting this Teaching would not be possible, and no one would trust and accept 
It. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


345 


djb 

Thus, even in the past there were few people who recognized that to sit in 
meditation means doing seated meditation. On the mountains of present-day Great 
Sung China, many heads of top-ranking monasteries are ignorant of seated 
meditation and have not learned it. There are some who have a clear understanding 
of it, but they are few. In these temples, the times for sitting in meditation have 
always been set. And all the monks, from the Abbot on down, have taken sitting in 
meditation as a dutiful task. To spur their trainees on, they have advised them to sit 
in meditation. Yet those Abbots who have actually understood the practice are few. 
As a result, from past times to recent generations, there have been one or two 
veteran monks who have recorded their mottoes for sitting in meditation, one or 
two veteran monks who have compiled methods for sitting in meditation, and one 
or two veteran monks who have set down maxims for sitting in meditation. Yet 
among all their mottoes for sitting in meditation, nowhere are there any that we can 
adopt, as their methods for sitting in meditation are ill-informed in terms of their 
application to daily conduct. They have been set down by people who do not know 
seated meditation and to whom seated meditation has not been directly 
Transmitted, one-to-one. Their maxims for sitting in meditation are in the Ching-te 
Era Record of the Transmission of the Lamp , and their mottoes for sitting in 
meditation, among others, are in the Chia-tai Era Record of the Lamp Whose Light 
Reaches Everywhere. Even though these monks spent their whole lives making 
pilgrimages to Zen monasteries far and wide, how sad that they lacked the diligent 
effort to truly sit in meditation even once. To sit truly was not for them, and so their 
efforts did not lead them to encounter themselves. Their failure to truly sit in 
meditation was not due to any distaste for their body and mind, but to their 
unwillingness to make a genuine effort, so therefore they precipitously wandered 
off into delusion. The writings they have collected up are merely an outer show of 
‘coming back to the Source’, or ‘returning to the Origin’, or convey useless 
methods for concentrating on one’s breathing or for focusing on tranquility. These 
methods do not even approach the four steps of Tendai meditation: seeing into 
one’s heart, training through meditation, taking delight in doing it, and putting it 
into one’s daily practice. Nor do they approach the perspective of the ten 
bodhisattva* stages leading to Buddhahood. So how could they possibly have 
received the direct, one-to-one Transmission of the seated meditation of Buddha 
after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor? Scribes in the Sung dynasty were wrong 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


346 


to record such writings, and we present-day trainees should set them aside and not 
even look at them . 16 

Only the kindly advice for seated meditation compiled by Meditation Master 
Wanshi Shogaku, the Abbot of Keitoku-ji Temple on Mount Tendo in Keigen 
Prefecture in Great Sung China, is the Teaching of a true Ancestor of the Buddha: 
it is the acupuncture needle of seated meditation and is right for realizing the Way. 
It alone has a radiance that lights up the inside and outside of the realms of 
thoughts and things. Wanshi is an Ancestor of the Buddha for past and present 
Ancestors of the Buddha. Earlier and later Buddhas have been spurred on by this 
needle of his. Ancestors of the present and Ancestors of the past have come forth 
from this needle. And here is this very needle of seated meditation. 

My Friendly Advice for Seated Meditation 
Compiled by Meditation Master Wanshi Shogaku 

The important function for Buddha after Buddha 
And the pivotal moment for Ancestor after Ancestor 
Is to know It without ‘stirring anything up ’ 

And to be illumined without setting up an opposite. 

When one knows It without stirring anything up, 

Such knowing is naturally humble: 

When one is illumined without setting up an opposite, 

Such illumination is naturally subtle. 

Since that knowing is naturally humble, 

There is never a discriminating thought: 

Since that illumination is naturally subtle 
There is never the least outward sign of It. 

Since there is never a discriminating thought, 

That knowing is wondrous, with nothing left to be 
dealt with: 

Since there is never the least outward sign of It, 

That illumination is complete, with nothing left 
unrealized. 


16. The works Dogen is referring to all have the word zazen in their titles and might mislead his 
disciples to assume that ‘seated meditation’, as Dogen is using the term, is what those works 
are talking about. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


347 


The water is now so clear you can see to its depths, 

As fish swim by at their leisure: 

The sky is now so clear it is boundless, 

As birds fly off, leaving no trace. 

The point of this needle of seated meditation is the Great Function which 
manifests before our very eyes. It is our everyday behavior when we look beyond 
words and forms. It is our glimpsing That which existed ‘before “father” and 
“mother” was born’.* It is our seeing that it is good not to slander Ancestors of the 
Buddha. It is our never avoiding the chance to let go of self and to cast away body 
and mind. It is our having a head as large as a Buddha’s seated upon the neck of an 
ordinary person. 

The important function for Buddha after Buddha 

Beyond doubt, Buddha after Buddha has treated Buddha after Buddha as the 
important function: when that important function has manifested, that is what 
seated meditation is. 

The pivotal moment for Ancestor after Ancestor 

My former Master went beyond using such words as these. The principle 
underlying this is just what ‘Ancestor after Ancestor’ means. It involves the 
Transmission of the Teaching and the Transmission of the robe. In general, every 
single instance of turning one’s head and changing one’s expression is what the 
essential function of Buddha after Buddha has been. And every single case of 
changing one’s expression and turning one’s head is what the pivotal moment has 
been for Ancestor after Ancestor. 

To know It without stirring anything up 

‘To know’ does not mean ‘to perceive’, for our perceptions are a small gauge of It. 
Nor is this the knowing associated with intellectual understanding, for intellectual 
understanding is but a mental construct. Hence, ‘to know’ is ‘to not stir things up’, 
for when we do not stir things up, we ‘know’. Do not broadmindedly judge it to be 
something everyone knows and do not narrow-mindedly limit it to one’s own 
personal knowledge. That phrase, ‘not stirring things up’, is equivalent to saying, 
“When clear-mindedness comes, be clear-minded, and when dark-mindedness 
comes, be dark-minded .” 17 It is the same as saying, “By sitting, to break through 
the skin that our mother bore.” 


17. ‘Clear-mindedness’ refers to those times when the darkness of ignorance has cleared away; 
‘dark-mindedness’ refers to other times when we cannot see our way clearly. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


348 


To be illumined without setting up an opposite 

This ‘being illumined’ is not the ‘being illumined’ associated with being 
completely out in the open, nor is it ‘spiritual illumination’. Rather, it is our not 
setting up opposing conditions that constitutes being illumined. Illumination does 
not change into a condition, because conditions are the very things illuminated. 
‘Not setting up opposites’ means that, throughout the universe, there has never 
been anything hidden and that a shattered world does not stick out its head. It is 
what is humble, it is what is subtle, and it is what is beyond being interdependent 
or independent. 

Since that knowing is naturally humble, 

There is never a discriminating thought 

This means knowing what discriminating thinking is, without necessarily having to 
make use of some external assistance. This knowing is of a concrete form and that 
concrete form is of mountains and rivers. These mountains and rivers are humble. 
This humility is subtle. Our making use of this knowing is as lively and free- 
moving as fish swimming about in water. Our becoming a dragon does not depend 
on our being on one side of Emperor Yu’s Gate or the other . 18 To straightaway 
employ even a single instance of this knowing is to make use of a pinch of the 
whole world with its mountains and rivers, and, exerting our whole strength, to 
know . If what we know lacks the familiarity of mountains and rivers, we will not 
have a single instance of true knowing or even half an understanding of It. We 
should not regret that discriminative wisdom has come to us late, since Buddha 
after Buddha has been fully manifested by means of it. ‘There is never’ means 
‘already’. ‘Already’ means ‘discriminative wisdom has fully manifested’. Thus, 
‘there is never a discriminating thought’ means that not even a single person has 
been encountered . 19 

Since that illumination is naturally subtle 
There is never the least outward sign of It 

‘The least’ refers to ‘the whole universe’. Even so, this illumination is naturally 


18. Emperor Yu’s Gate—also known as the Dragon Gate—is a gorge on the Yangtze River. 
Legend has it that any fish swimming up through the gorge turns into a dragon. This was 
used as a metaphor for someone who succeeded in passing the difficult imperial civil service 
examination. To paraphrase Dogen’s remark, those who are truly doing seated meditation 
are ‘seated Buddha’, whether they realize it or not. They do not need to pass some 
examination to prove their being ‘seated Buddha’. 

19. That is, ‘self and other’ has been transcended. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


349 


subtle. This is why it is as if it had not yet come about. Do not doubt your eyes and 
do not trust your ears. Clarify through direct experience what the Principle is that 
lies beyond deliberative thinking, and do not grab hold of some criterion of what It 
is by relying on how it is worded: this is what being illumined is. This is why there 
is no duality: this is why there is nothing to grab hold of. It is to say, in effect, 
“While keeping to the view that this experience is rare and relying on its being 
complete, I still harbor doubts .” 21 

The water is now so clear you can see to its depths, 

As fish swim by at their leisure 

‘The Water is clear’ does not mean that the water connected with the sky is the 
Clear Water that one can see to Its very depths. Still less is the Water of ‘the Water 
is clear’ that which thoroughly cleanses things in the outer, material realm. The 
Water which is unbounded by any bank or shore, That is the immaculate Water 
which one penetrates to Its very depths. When fish swim by through this Water, 
there is nowhere that they may not go. Even though their swimming may progress 
for who knows how many myriad miles, It is immeasurable and It knows no limit. 
There is no bank to measure It by, and there is no space in which It floats. Being 
without a bottom to sink to, there is no one who can measure It. Even were one to 
discuss various ways of measuring It, It is simply the immaculate Water whose 
depths can be seen. The meritorious act of seated meditation is like this swimming 
of fish. Who can reckon what a thousand miles or ten thousand miles are? The 
action of going down to the very bottom is synonymous with our not trying to trace 
some bird’s trackless path. 

The sky is now so clear it is boundless, 

As birds fly off, leaving no trace 

‘The Sky is clear’ is something unconnected with the heavens. The emptiness 
connected with the heavens is not the Clear Sky. Even less does That which 
pervades everywhere—be it in this place or in that—refer to the clear sky. What is 
not hidden or revealed either inside or out is what ‘the Clear Sky’ is. 

When birds fly through this Sky, this is just one method of ‘flying through 
the Sky’. The action of flying through the Sky is beyond anything we can measure. 
Flying through the Sky is the whole universe, because the whole universe is flying 
through the Sky. Even though we do not know what the extent of this flying is, in 


20. That is, do not doubt your direct experience of It and do not rely on your understanding of 
how someone else has described It. 

21. That is, I doubt that I ‘know it all’. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


350 


asserting it with a statement that is beyond some form of reckoning, Wanshi 
asserted it as “flying off, leaving no trace.” It means “being able to go straight off, 
having no strings tying down one’s feet.” When the Sky is flying off, the birds 
are also flying off. When the birds are flying off, the Sky too is flying off. Among 
the sayings which thoroughly explore ‘flying off’ is the one that says, “Only here 
do we exist.” This is the acupuncture needle of being ever so still. How many 
thousands of journeys have vied to tell us, “Only here do we exist?” This is 
Meditation Master Wanshi’s kindly advice for doing seated meditation. 

Among the maxims for doing seated meditation by veteran monks over the 
generations, there have not been any like this one of his. If any stinking skin bags* 
anywhere wished to state the Matter like this needle of seated meditation has, even 
if they exhausted their strength for one or two lifetimes, they would not be able to 
do so. Its likes are not to be seen anywhere today. Wanshi’s needle stands alone. 

When my former Master was giving Teaching in the Lecture Hall, he would 
constantly be remarking, “My Old Buddha Wanshi!” He never spoke like this 
about anyone else. When we have the Eye to recognize ‘such a person’,* we will 
also recognize the sound of an Ancestor of the Buddha. We need to remember that 
this Ancestor of the Buddha existed in Tozan’s lineage. It is now some eighty 
years since Meditation Master Wanshi’s death. Having encountered his kindly 
advice for doing seated meditation, I have compiled my own needle of seated 
meditation. It is now the eighteenth day of the third lunar month in the third year of 
the Ninji era (April 19, 1242). When I reckon the time from his death on the eighth 
day of the tenth lunar month in the twenty-seventh year of the Shoko era (1157) to 
the present year, it is just short of eighty-five years. The needle of seated 
meditation that I have now compiled is as follows: 

The Needle of Seated Meditation 

The important function for Buddha after Buddha 
And the pivotal moment for Ancestor after Ancestor 
Is to let It manifest without deliberately thinking about 
anything 

And to realize It without creating complications. 


22 . A quote from Master Tozan, alluding to the practice of tying down the feet of captured birds 
to prevent their flying away. 

23. Wanshi was a Dharma heir of Tanka Shijun, who was in Tozan Ryokai’s line. Dogen’s 
Master was a direct descendant of Choryo Seiryo, Tanka Shijun’s other Dharma heir. 



Shobogenzo: On Wanshi s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation ’ 


351 


When one lets It manifest without thinking about anything, 

Such a manifestation is naturally close to us: 

When one realizes It without creating complications, 

Such a realization is naturally a direct experience. 

When that manifestation is naturally close to us, 

There is not the least bit of defdement: 

When that realization is naturally a direct experience 
There is not the least difference between Host and guest. 

When the closeness is without the least bit of defdement, 

That closeness is put aside and falls away: 

When one directly experiences that there is not the least 
distinction between Host and guest, 

Out of that experience come no set plans, as we diligently 
continue to train. 

The water is so clear you can see down to the bottom, 

As fish swim by, just as fish do: 

The sky is now boundless, penetrating the heavens, 

As birds fly off just as birds do. 

While Meditation Master Wanshi’s advice for seated meditation is by no means 
incorrect, 1 just wanted to express the Matter in this way. 

In sum, descendants of the Buddha’s Ancestors need to explore through their 
training with their Master that seated meditation is undoubtedly the one Great 
Matter. This is the genuine seal that is Transmitted directly, one-to-one. 

Written down at Koshohorin-ji Temple on the eighteenth day of the third lunar month in the third 
year of the Ninji era (April 19, 1242). 

Given to the assembly at Kippo-ji Temple in Yoshida Prefecture, Etchu Province, during the 

24 

winter of the eleventh month in the fourth year of the same era (December 1243) A 


24. Dogen’s community was staying at Kippo-ji Temple while they were building Eihei-ji 
Temple. 



27 


On Experiencing That Which Is 
Above and Beyond Buddhahood 

(Butsu Kojo Ji) 

Translator’s Introduction: This discourse is one of the most opaque in the Shobogenzo, not 
because the underlying meaning is difficult to grasp, but because of the extensive use of Zen 
Buddhist metaphors. Even though ‘translations’ and paraphrases of these metaphorical references 
are supplied for most occurrences, some of these allusions would require such extensive notation 
to clarify the meaning for readers who are unfamiliar with them that their meaning must be left 
to the reader to intuit through a study of Dogen’s remarks. 

The reason why this discourse has such recourse to metaphoric language is that Zen Masters 
were being asked to use words to describe a state that words cannot readily convey. Someone 
who has gone above and beyond Buddhahood has entered a realm of existence in which there is 
no longer the same sense of a personal identity, an identity which those who have a false sense of 
self take to be who they really are. 


Tozan, our Founding Ancestor from Yun-chou Province, was the direct 
successor and heir of Donjo of Mount Ungan in T’an-chou Province. Tozan was an 
Ancestor of the thirty-eighth monastic generation descending from the Tathagata, 
who was the thirty-eighth Ancestor counting back from him. 1 

There was once a time when Great Master Tozan addressed his 
assembly, saying, “Once I had directly experienced That which is above 
and beyond Buddhahood, I had the ability to say a few words about It.” 

Thereupon, a monk asked, “And what were the words you spoke?” 

The Master said, “When I spoke about It, my acharya,* you did not 
hear It.” 

The monk asked, “Are you listening, Venerable Monk?” 

The Master said, “When I am not speaking about It, I am waiting 
to hear It.” 


1. That is, it makes no difference whether one regards Ancestors as descending from the 
Tathagata or as counting back to the Tathagata, since all Ancestors are the same in essence as 
the Tathagata. 

* See Glossary. 


352 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 353 


The words quoted just now about experiencing That which is above and beyond 
Buddhahood are those of our Ancestor, Great Master Tozan. Other Ancestors of the 
Buddha have habitually explored through their training what the Great Master said 
and have directly experienced That which is above and beyond Buddhahood. You 
need to understand that experiencing That which is above and beyond Buddhahood 
is above and beyond any innate cause or any fulfillment of effects. 2 Even so, when 
the Ancestors experienced ‘not hearing It when words are spoken about It’, they 
did not fail to penetrate into the meaning of this through their training. Until you 
have actually arrived at That which is above and beyond Buddhahood, you will not 
have directly experienced That which is above and beyond Buddhahood. Until you 
can put It into words, you have not directly experienced That which is above and 
beyond Buddhahood. It is above and beyond any mutual appearance or 
disappearance, and It is above and beyond any mutual giving or receiving. 3 Thus, 
the time when what is spoken of fully manifests is the time of experiencing That 
which is above and beyond Buddhahood. The time when That which is above and 
beyond Buddhahood fully manifests is the time when the acharya fails to hear. 

‘The acharya not hearing’ means “The experience of That which is above 
and beyond Buddhahood is inaudible to you,” and “At the time when words are 
spoken, the acharya does not hear It.” Keep in mind that the Master’s speaking 
with words is not tainted by being heard or by not being heard. For this reason, 
speaking is not connected with hearing or not hearing. 

‘You, my acharya’ is contained within ‘what does not hear’ and within ‘what 
is put into words’. In other words, it is encountering ‘such a person’* and not 
encountering ‘such a person’; it is both ‘this’ and ‘not this’. At the moment when 
the acharya is speaking, he is an acharya who is not listening. The essential 
meaning of ‘his not listening’ is his not listening by dint of his being tongue-tied, 
by dint of his being hindered by what is going on in his ears, by dint of his eyes 
being blinded by the Master’s luminosity, and by dint of his being blocked up in 
body and mind. This is why he did not hear. Taking these points up again, we do 
not treat them as ‘putting It into words’. Not listening goes above and beyond 
‘being put into words’: it is simply not hearing at the time when It is put into 
words. From beginning to end, the Founding Ancestor’s words, “When I spoke 
about It, my acharya, you did not hear It,” are like wisteria vines relying on 
wisteria vines for support. Even so, it will resemble what is spoken being entwined 
with what is spoken; it is being obstructed by what is spoken. 


2. In other words, It is beyond training and enlightenment. 

3. This sentence describes various aspects of the one-to-one Transmission that are transcended. 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 354 


When the monk asked, “Are you listening, Venerable Monk?” he was saying 
in effect, “It is not that you, Venerable Monk, are listening to your own words, 
since the one who is asking the question is not the Venerable Monk, and my 
question goes beyond ‘speaking words.’” Even so, the monk was trying to ask 
whether he should train himself to listen and speak simultaneously. For example, 
he was trying to leam whether speaking is just speaking and whether listening is 
just listening. And although the question had been put that way, it goes beyond the 
disciple’s tongue to fully express. 

The words of our Founding Ancestor Tozan, “When I am not speaking about 
It, I am waiting to hear It,” need to be studied thoroughly in order to clarify their 
meaning. That is, at the time of putting It into words, one is not simultaneously 
listening to It. Fistening will fully manifest at the time when one is not speaking. It 
is not that one idly disregards the time of not speaking, waiting for ‘not speaking’ 
to occur. At the moment of just listening, one does not consider putting It into 
words to be something extraneous, because such a thought is truly something 
extraneous. At the time when there is just listening, it is not that speaking of It has 
departed and exists solely as a side issue. And at the time when there is speaking of 
It, it is not that ‘just listening’ has closely hidden itself within the eyes of the one 
speaking and then suddenly thunders forth. As a consequence, even if someone is 
the acharya, at the time when It is spoken of, that person does not hear It. Even if 
the someone is the ‘I’, the time when there is no speaking is one of just listening, 
and this is comparable to “I have the ability to say a few words about It” and to “I 
have directly experienced That which is above and beyond Buddhahood.” It is, for 
example, the direct experience of just listening at the time when someone else is 
engaged in speaking about It. This is why Tozan said, “When I am not speaking 
about It, I am waiting to hear It.” Although he spoke thus, experiencing That which 
is above and beyond Buddhahood is not an experience prior to the Seven Buddhas* 
but an experience that is above and beyond the Seven Buddhas. 

Our Founding Ancestor Tozan once pointed out to his assembly, 

“You need to know that there are people who are above and beyond 
Buddhahood.” 

At the time, there was a monk who asked him, “What is a 
person who is above and beyond Buddhahood?” 

The Great Master replied, “A non-Buddha.” 4 


4. That is, someone who is beyond any fixed idea of what a Buddha is. 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 355 


Ummon once commented on Tozan’s reply, “We cannot name 
It, nor can we describe It, so we speak of It as ‘a non-.’” 

Hofuku once commented, “Buddha is something ‘non-.’” 

And Hogen once commented, “Calling upon expedient means, 
we call such a one a Buddha.” 5 

Generally speaking, an Ancestor of the Buddha who is above and beyond being ‘an 
Ancestor of the Buddha’ would be our Founding Ancestor Tozan. The reason for 
that is, even though there are many others who have the countenance of a Buddha 
and an Ancestor, they have not even dreamt of the term ‘being above and beyond 
Buddhahood’. Even if it had been explained to the likes of a Tokusan or a Rinzai, 
they could not have attested to it through their direct experience. And even if the 
likes of a Ganto or a Seppo had worked their own bodies to a nubbin through 
training, they would never have tasted a Master’s Fist. 6 7 8 Such phrases as “The 
direct experience of That which is above and beyond Buddhahood,” “I have the 
ability to say a few words about It,” and “You need to know that there are people 
who are above and beyond Buddhahood,” which our Founding Ancestor spoke, 
cannot be mastered experientially short of training for one, two, three, four, or five 

n 

triply immeasurable hundreds of great kalpas. And, by all means, there will be 

o 

those who have the ability to explore the Subtle Path through their training. 

It is imperative that you know that there are those who are above and beyond 
Buddhahood. In other words, theirs is a life of playing with what is left after body 
and mind have dropped off. Even so, we can recognize the Old Buddha by His 
raising of a Fist. When you have already caught sight of Him in this manner, you 
will know that there is Someone who is above and beyond Buddhahood, and that 
there is no one who is above and beyond Buddhahood. 9 What I am pointing out to 
the community at present is not that you must become someone who is above and 


5. That is, we call such a one a Buddha for want of a better term. 

6. Both Ganto and Seppo were disciples of Tokusan. 

7. That is, just short of never. 

8. One of three ways taught by Tozan for training disciples, the Subtle Path is the path by 
which the Master leads the trainee to a profoundly deep inner realm beyond the opposites. 
The next way is the Bird’s Way wherein, like a bird in flight, the Master’s way of training 
disciples moves freely and unobstructedly, leaving no karmic traces behind. The final way is 
Extending the Hand, whereby the Master makes use of various expedient means to guide the 
trainee. 

9. There is ‘no one’ because self has dropped off. 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 356 


beyond Buddhahood, nor that you must encounter someone who is above and 
beyond Buddhahood, but simply that you must know that there are those who are 
above and beyond Buddhahood. When you can grasp this fundamental point, you 
will no longer attempt to know whether there is someone who is above and beyond 
Buddhahood or whether there is no one who is above and beyond Buddhahood, for 
that one who is above and beyond Buddhahood is a non-Buddha. Should there be a 
time when some doubt arises as to what a non-Buddha is, you should consider that 
such a one is not called a non-Buddha because he or she existed before the historic 
Buddha, or because he or she came after the historic Buddha, or because he or she 
has transcended the historic Buddha: he or she is a non-Buddha simply because 
such a one has gone above and beyond Buddhahood. Such a one is called a non- 
Buddha because he or she has dropped off a Buddha’s countenance and a Buddha’s 
body and mind. 

djb 


Meditation Master Join Koboku from the eastern capital—who 
was a Dharma heir of Fuyo Dokai—once addressed his community, 
saying, “Once you directly know that there is the experience of That 
which is above and beyond Buddhahood, you will indeed have the 
ability to give voice to It. Now, my virtuous Zen monks, say right off! 
What is your experience of That which is above and beyond 
Buddhahood? 

“There is a child within the human family. His six sense organs 
are lacking, his seven kinds of consciousness are incomplete. He is the 
Great Icchantika, one lacking the seed of Buddha Nature. When he 
meets a Buddha, he slays ‘Buddha’: when he meets an Ancestor, he 
slays ‘Ancestor’. The Celestial Halls cannot house him: even the Hells 
have no gateway that can hold him. O great assembly! are you 
acquainted with ‘such a person’ *?” 10 


10. In this quotation. Join is describing the function of Buddha Nature after someone has 
awakened to the Truth and gone above and beyond Buddhahood. What remains is not 
something outside of or apart from being a human (that is, it is ‘a child within the human 
family’), although the distinction of being male or female is no longer relevant. Having let 
go of all attachment, It functions as if the six sense organs were lacking. Similarly, the 
conviction has dropped away that the six sense organs, the judgmental, intellective mind, 
and the ‘awakened mind’ constitute all there is to being completely awakened. As the Great 
Icchantika, It functions beyond conventional notions of good and evil, and lacks the seed of 
Buddha Nature, because It is already the fruition of Buddha Nature. Distinctions, such as 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 357 


Then, after a good long time, he said, “The one facing you now 
is not from Sindh. He sleeps a lot and also talks a lot in his sleep.” 

‘His six sense organs are lacking’ means that a person has exchanged his eyes for 
black nuts from a bo-tree, his nostrils for bamboo tubes, and his skull for a toilet 
spatula. Pray, what could be the underlying principle of these exchanges? It is 
because of this principle that his six senses are lacking. Because his six senses are 
lacking, he has become a Golden Buddha after having passed through the furnace, 
and he has become a Mud Buddha after having passed through the Great Ocean, 
and he has become a Wooden Buddha after having passed through fire. 

‘His seven kinds of consciousness are incomplete’ is synonymous with a 
‘broken wooden ladle’.* Even though it is said that he ‘slays Buddha’, he 
encounters Buddha, and because he encounters Buddha, he slays ‘Buddha’. Were 
he to aim at entering the Celestial Halls, the Celestial Halls would immediately 
collapse. Were he to encounter the Hells, the Hells would suddenly fall away. 
Consequently, when he comes face-to-face with someone, his face breaks out into a 
smile, and he asks for nothing from Sindh. 11 He sleeps a lot and also talks a lot in 
his sleep. Keep in mind that the principle of this is that ‘both the mountains know 
themselves and the earth knows itself’ and that ‘the whole body of jewels and 
stones are smashed into hundreds of pieces’. You should take your time to explore 
through your training what Meditation Master Koboku pointed out to his assembly. 
Do not do it hastily. 

djb 


When Doyo of Mount Ungo went to train under Tozan, who 
was the Founding Ancestor of our lineage, Tozan asked him, “O 
acharya, what is your name?” 12 
Ungo responded, “Doyo.” 


‘Buddha’ and ‘Ancestor’, have been done away with, because they are inherently dualistic 
and no longer relevant. Finally, the worlds of existence, such as heavenly and hellish states, 
do not restrict It. 

11. ‘Something from Sindh’ is a metaphor for asking for the very best someone can offer that is 
appropriate to the situation; here, the reference is to not asking for anything from another. 
Dogen will take up this metaphor in Discourse 79: On ‘The King Requests Something from 
Sindh’ (O Saku Sendaba). 

12. In some Zen Buddhist contexts, such as the present one, acharya is simply a polite form of 
address for any monk, since in a monastery a monk may leam from any of his fellow 
trainees. 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 358 


The Founding Ancestor then said to him, “Speak again, but 
from a place above and beyond the conventional.” 

Ungo responded, “Were I to speak from a place above and 
beyond the conventional, then this T would not be called Doyo.” 

Tozan said, “When I was with Ungan, what I answered him was 
in no way different.” 

We certainly need to look in detail at what the Master and disciple are now 
saying. “Were I to speak from a place above and beyond the conventional, then this 
T would not be called Doyo” was Doyo’s speaking from above and beyond 
Buddhahood. You need to explore through your training that, in the Doyo who had 
just come, there is That which is not called Doyo and which is above and beyond 
‘Doyo’. At the time when he manifested the principle of “Were I to speak from a 
place above and beyond the conventional, then this T would not be called Doyo,” 
he was the True Doyo. Even so, do not say that he would be Doyo even in a place 
above and beyond the conventional. When he heard the Founding Ancestor’s 
words, “Speak again, but from a place above and beyond the conventional,” were 
he to have said, “Speaking from a place above and beyond the conventional, I am 
nevertheless named Doyo,” this would still be his speaking from a place above and 
beyond the conventional. And why do I say so? Because Doyo, in a twinkling, has 
leapt into the True Doyo’s brain and concealed himself there. Although we say that 
he has concealed himself there, he openly reveals his True Form. 

When Sozan Honjaku went to train under our Founding 
Ancestor Tozan, the latter asked him, “O acharya, what is your 
name?” 

Sozan replied, “Honjaku.” 

The Founding Ancestor said, “Speak again, but from a place 
above and beyond the conventional.” 

Sozan responded, “I cannot say it.” 

The Founding Ancestor asked, “Why on earth can’t you say 

it?” 

Sozan responded, “Because It is not called Honjaku.” 

The Founding Ancestor approved of this response. 

I would comment that it is not that there are no words in that place above and 
beyond Buddhahood, it is just a matter of “I cannot say it.” Why does he not say it? 
Because his True Self is not called Honjaku. Since this is so, the words from the 
place that is above and beyond are not spoken, and the unspoken words of that 
place above and beyond are unnamed, and the unnamed Honjaku is a term from 
that place above and beyond. As a result, Honjaku is unnamed. Since this is so, 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 359 


there is a non-Honjaku, there is the Unnamed which has dropped everything off, 
and there is a Honjaku that has been dropped off. 


Meditation Master Banzan Hoshaku once said, “Among thousands of saintly 
persons, none have Transmitted the one path to That Which is Above and Beyond.” 
The phrase ‘the one path to That Which is Above and Beyond’ is the wording of 
Banzan alone. He did not speak of what is above and beyond, nor did he speak of 
those who are above and beyond; he spoke of the one path to That Which is Above 
and Beyond. His main point is that even though thousands of saintly ones may 
have come forth in great profusion, they have not Transmitted the one path to That 
Which is Above and Beyond. ‘To not Transmit’ can also mean that the thousands 
of saintly ones have preserved a part of something that is above and beyond being 
Transmitted. We can study the Matter* in this way too. And there is still something 
more that needs to be said: thousands of saintly ones and thousands of wise ones 
do indeed exist, and even so, wise and saintly though they may be, the one path to 
That Which is Above and Beyond is above and beyond the realm of the wise and 
saintly. 

djb 

<X> 


Meditation Master Chimon Koso was once asked by a monk, 

“What is this thing about ‘That which is above and beyond 
Buddhahood?”’ 

The Master answered, “I hold the sun and moon aloft atop my 

staff.” 

That is, his saying that one’s staff holds aloft the sun and moon is the same as 
‘experiencing going above and beyond Buddhahood’. When we explore through 
our training the staff of the sun and moon, then the whole universe is thrown into 
darkness, which is our going above and beyond Buddhahood. And it is not that the 
sun and moon are the staff: what is atop the head of the staff is what is atop the 
whole staff. 


Meditation Master Dogo of Tenno-ji Temple, while still a 
novice in the assembly of Kisen, asked, “What is the Great Intent of 
Buddha Dharma?” 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 360 


Master Sekito replied, “It is above and beyond anything that 
can be grasped, above and beyond anything that can be 
comprehended.” 

Dogo asked, “As you have gone above and beyond, is there any 
other way you have of putting It?” 

The Master replied, “The vast expanse of space does not hinder 
the white clouds as they float by.” 

As I see the matter, Sekito was a second-generation descendant of Daikan Eno. The 
monk Dogo of Tenno-ji was a younger monastic brother of Yakusan. There was the 
time when he asked, “What is the Great Intent of Buddha Dharma?” This question 
is not one that beginners or those who have entered training late in life are equal to. 
This can only be asked when someone has already heard of the Great Intent and 
been able to understand what It is. 

Sekito responded, “It is above and beyond anything that can be grasped, 
above and beyond anything that can be comprehended.” You need to know that 
within the Buddha Dharma, the Great Intent exists at our first moment of spiritual 
awareness and It exists at the stage of our ultimate, full awakening. That Great 
Intent is not something to be grasped. Giving rise to the intention to train, doing the 
training and practice, and realizing the Truth do indeed exist, and they too are not 
something to be grasped. That Great Intent is not something to be comprehended. 
Training-and-enlightenment does indeed exist and training-and-enlightenment is 
not some ‘thing’ that exists, for it is not anything to be grasped or comprehended. 
Again, that Great Intent is neither something to be grasped nor something to be 
comprehended. It is not that the Noble Truths and training-and-enlightenment do 
not exist: it is that they are not something to be grasped or comprehended. And it is 
not that the Noble Truths and training-and-enlightenment exist only for a while, it 
is just that they are not something to be grasped or comprehended. 

Dogo asked, “As you have gone above and beyond, is there any other way 
you have of putting It?” That is, if there is another way the Master has of putting 
It, it will be a manifestation of the Master’s having gone above and beyond, for 
‘another way of putting It’ is synonymous with skillful means, and ‘skillful means’ 
is synonymous with all the Buddhas and all the Ancestors. Although the Master 
stated it in the way that he did, a further way may indeed exist. Even though a 
further way may exist, it is not something that will exclude ‘a further way does not 
exist’, for that could also be a Master’s assertion. 

“The vast expanse of space does not hinder the white clouds as they float 
by” were Sekito’s very words. Moreover, his use of the words ‘vast expanse of 
space’ is not something that puts a limit on the vast expanse of space. Although his 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 361 


saying ‘the vast expanse of space’ does not hinder the vast expanse of space from 
floating by, his ‘white clouds’, by its very nature, also does not limit the white 
clouds. The white clouds’ floating by is unhindered, and the floating by of white 
clouds does not hinder the vast expanse of space from floating by. Not to be limited 
by others is also not to be limited by oneself. It is not the case that in order for a 
face-to-face meeting to take place, there be no limits except the one that each 
person does not hinder the other. Because of this, there are no limits between 
Master and disciple. This expresses the ultimate reality and the outer form of 
Sekito’s statement, “The vast expanse of space does not hinder the white clouds as 
they float by.” At that very moment, Sekito raised the eyebrows of the one who 
was exploring the Great Intent through his training, and the trainee caught a 
glimpse of the Buddha coming to meet him and encountered the Ancestor coming 
to meet him: he met himself coming and met the other coming. This has been 
considered the principle of ‘asking once and being answered ten times’. As to the 
‘asking once and being answered ten times’ of which I am now speaking, the one 
who asks once must be ‘such a person’ and the one who gives ten replies must also 
be ‘such a person’. 


djb 

CX) 

Obaku once said: 

Well now, persons who have left home life behind to become 
monks need to realize that there is an aspect of the Matter that has 
come down to them from the past. For example, it is like Great Master 
Gozu Hoyu, who realized the Truth while training under the Fourth 
Chinese Ancestor Daii Doshin. Even though Gozu’s voicing of the 
Dharma had breadth and depth, he still never comprehended the key 
point of what was above and beyond Buddhahood. 13 When you have 
the eyes and the brains for this, you will be able to distinguish 
between false and true religious groups. 

The Matter that has come down from the past, which Obaku alluded to in this way, 
is the Matter that has been genuinely Transmitted down to us by Buddha after 
Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor. We call that Matter the Wondrous Heart of 
Nirvana, which is the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. Even 
though we say that It exists within us, we need to recognize It. And even though 


13. That is, he never understood that one goes on, always becoming Buddha, even after an 
initial realization of the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 362 


we say that It exists within us, It is still beyond the intellect’s ability to grasp. 
Without the genuine Transmission of Buddha after Buddha, one cannot encounter 
It even in one’s dreams. Obaku was a Dharma child of Hyakujo and even surpassed 
Hyakujo. And, as a Dharma grandchild of Baso, he even surpassed Baso. Generally 
speaking, among the Ancestors of those three or four generations, none could stand 
shoulder-to-shoulder with Obaku. It is Obaku alone who made it clear that Gozu 
lacked both horns. 14 Other Buddhas and Ancestors have never recognized this. 

Meditation Master Hoyu of Mount Gozu was a venerable monk of high 
standing who trained under the Fourth Chinese Ancestor. His teaching was broad 
and deep. Truly, when we compare him with academic teachers of Scriptures and 
scholarly commentators, among those who came to eastern lands from the West he 
was neither inadequate nor lacking. Yet even so, sad to say, he had not recognized 
the key point of what lay above and beyond Buddhahood and was therefore unable 
to state what the key point of being above and beyond Buddhahood was about. 
Because he did not know what this key point was, how could he possibly 
distinguish between the false and the true? He was simply a person who had 
merely studied words. To know the key point of what lies above and beyond 
Buddhahood, to train and practice with this key point, and to awaken to this key 
point are unreachable for ordinary, run-of-the-mill people. Yet wherever there is a 
genuine effort to train, It will manifest without fail. 

What is called ‘the experience of going above and beyond Buddhahood’ is 
synonymous with arriving at Buddhahood, and then going on above and beyond 
until one once again meets Buddha. It is the same as sentient beings’ meeting 
Buddha. Since this is so, then if one’s encountering Buddha is simply on a par with 
a sentient being’s encountering ‘a Buddha’, then this will not be ‘meeting 
Buddha’. 15 If one’s encountering Buddha is just like a sentient being’s 
encountering ‘a Buddha’, that person’s meeting Buddha will be illusory. How 
much less could it be the experience of going above and beyond Buddhahood! You 
need to know that the experience that is above and beyond, of which Obaku 
speaks, is above and beyond what is envisioned by those folks nowadays with 
limited insight. Simply, there have been those whose expressions of the Dharma 


14. There is a play on words here that is lost in translation. The name Gozu means ‘bull’s head’. 
To say that he lacked both horns alludes to his not yet having experienced full spiritual 
maturity. 

15. ‘Meeting Buddha’ is the topic of Discourse 59: On Encountering Buddha (Kembutsu). 
There, as here, Dogen distinguishes between our ability to see Buddha Nature in someone 
else and our ability to recognize our own Buddha Nature. 



Shobogenzo: On Experiencing That Which Is Above & Beyond Buddhahood 363 


were below those of Gozu and there have been those whose expressions of the 
Dharma were equal with those of Gozu, and even so, they may well have been the 
younger and older Dharma brothers of Gozu. How could they possibly know the 
key point of what is above and beyond Buddhahood? Others, such as those ‘thrice 
wise and ten times saintly’,* do not know the key point that lies above and beyond 
Buddhahood. How much less could they open or close the key point of what lies 
above and beyond! This point is the very eyes for your exploring the Matter 
through your training with your Master. If you know what the key point of going 
above and beyond Buddhahood is, you will be a person who has gone above and 
beyond Buddhahood, for you will have realized what lies above and beyond 
Buddhahood. 

Given to the assembly at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple on the twenty-third day of the 
third lunar month of the Ninji era (April 24, 1242). 

Copied by me, based on an unrevised manuscript written in the grass style, at Eihei-ji Temple on 
a day during the summer retreat in the first year of the Shogen era (1259). 

Ejo 



28 

On That Which Comes Like This 

(Immo) 


Translator’s Introduction: Immo is a word that comes from colloquial Sung dynasty Chinese. 
English equivalents would include ‘this’, ‘that’, ‘thus’, ‘in this way or manner’, ‘like this’, and 
‘in such a way as this’. It was used by the Chinese Zen Masters to designate ‘That Which Is’, the 
Ultimate Reality which goes beyond any words we can employ to describe It. The word was also 
used when describing someone who knows through direct experience what the tenn ‘That Which 
Is’ is pointing to, namely, ‘such a person’ or ‘such a one’. 


Doyo of Mount Ungo was a Dharma heir of Tozan. He was a Dharma 
descendant of the thirty-ninth generation from Shakyamuni Buddha, and he is the 
rightful ancestral heir of Tozan’s tradition. One day, Doyo gave Teaching to his 
assembly, saying: “If you wish to experience That Which Is, you need to be ‘such a 
person’.* If you are already ‘such a person’, why be worried about experiencing 
That Which Is?” In other words, any who wish to realize the Great Matter* of That 
Which Is must themselves be ‘such a person’. Since they are already ‘such a 
person’, why would they be worried about experiencing That Which Is? The point 
of this is that the supreme enlightenment we are heading for is what, for the 
present, I am calling immo. This condition of supreme enlightenment is such that 
even the whole universe in all the ten quarters is but a trifling bit of supreme 
enlightenment, and that enlightenment is far beyond the whole universe. Even we 
are all merely accessories within this whole universe in all the ten quarters. And by 
what means are we to know that That Which Is exists? In a word, we know that it 
is so because both our body and mind together make their appearance within the 
whole universe, yet neither is ours to possess. 

This body is already not ‘me’ and each life flows on through time; it is 
beyond our ability to halt it for even a moment. Where has the ruddy face of our 
youth gone? Were we to seek it out, it has left not a trace. When we look deeply, 
we see that the myriad things of the past will not come back again. A heart that is 
sincere, likewise, does not remain fixed, but comes and goes, moment by moment. 
We may say that there is truth in this sincere heart, but it is not something that 


* See Glossary. 


364 



Shobogenzo: On That Which Comes Like This 


365 


lingers behind within the vicinity of a personal self. Even so, there is something 
that unboundedly gives rise to the intention to realize enlightenment. After this 
intention has arisen, we abandon those things that we used to play around with, 
desiring to hear what we have not yet heard and seeking to realize what we have 
not yet realized—and this is not solely something of our own doing. Keep in mind 
that, because you are ‘such a person’, this is so. How do we know that we are ‘such 
a person’? Just by our wishing to gain the experiencing of That Which Is do we 
know that we are ‘such a person’. You already have the countenance of ‘such a 
person’, so you must not worry yourself now over experiencing That Which Is. 
Even though you may be worried, this is also an experiencing of That Which Is, 
and It is beyond being something to worry about. Further, you should not be 
surprised that the experience of That Which Is is present in such a state. Even 
though you are in such a state of surprise and doubt, this too is That Which Is. And 
That Which Is is also described as being beyond surprise. This state cannot be 
measured by the reckoning of a Buddha, or by the reckoning of the mind, or by the 
reckoning of the Dharma Realm, or by the reckoning of the whole universe. It will 
simply be “Since you are already ‘such a person’, why are you worried about 
experiencing That Which Is?” 

So, the True Nature of sound, color, and form is That Which Is, the True 
Nature of body and mind is That Which Is, and the True Nature of Buddhas is That 
Which Is. For example, we understand that when we fall, we rely on the ground 
being there, as it is, existing just as it is, and that when we get up, we rely on the 
ground being there, existing just as it is, so we should not be surprised that our 
falling down has also relied on the ground being there. 1 

There is a Teaching that has been voiced from ancient times, one that has 
been voiced in India and from the heavens above. It says in effect, “If, because of 
the ground, you fall down, you will get up, also because of the ground: should you 
try to get up independent of the ground, ultimately, that is impossible.” In other 
words, those who fall down on the ground will invariably get up on the ground. 
Were they to attempt to get up apart from the ground, they will not succeed. 


1. In this section of the discourse, references to ‘the ground’ have more than one meaning. 
When we fall (that is, act contrary to a Precept), we rely on ‘hitting the ground’ somewhere 
along the line, and we depend on this ‘grounding’ to help us get up and go on, trying to keep 
to the Precepts. At the same time, what we are ultimately relying on is That Which is Our 
Spiritual Ground. Further on in the discourse, Dogen will use the phrase ‘by relying on the 
ground’ in the sense of relying on what is concrete in our life, which cannot be relied on 
except in relation to That Which Is Like Empty Space. When we fall while relying on this 
Empty Space, we can arise by admitting to the things that we have done. 



Shobogenzo: On That Which Comes Like This 


366 


Following through on what has just been described, we take it as an 
expression of the beauty of a great awakening and have made it into a path for 
freeing ourselves from body and mind. Therefore, should someone ask us what the 
principle underlying ‘realizing the Way of all Buddhas’ is, we would say that it is 
like someone who has fallen to the ground relying on the Ground for arising. When 
you explore this through your training with a Master, you need to penetrate into 
and rise above the past, the future, and this very moment of the present. Whether 
we are really awake or unawakened, whether we return to our delusions or lose our 
delusions, whether we are hindered by ‘awakening’ or hindered by delusion—all of 
these illustrate the principle of someone who has fallen on the ground relying on 
the Ground to get up. This is an expression of the Way of those in the heavens 
above and the earth below: it is an expression of the Way in both India and the 
lands to the east. It is an expression of the Way from the past to the present and into 
the future: it is an expression of the Way of Old Buddhas and of New Buddhas. 
And further, this expression of the Way is never incomplete in its expression, nor 
does its Truth ever wane. 

Be that as it may, to understand the expression only in this way and to fail to 
understand it in any other way is as if one had not explored this statement 
thoroughly with one’s Master. Even though the expression of an Old Buddha has 
been passed on to us in such a manner, yet, when as an Old Buddha ourselves, we 
hear the expression of an Old Buddha, we will be hearing That which transcends 
Buddhahood. 

Although it was not stated in India or in lofty circles, there is another 
principle being asserted here. Namely, if someone who has fallen on the ground 
should seek to arise by relying on the ground, though he spends immeasurable eons 
at the task, he will never be able to get up. He can get up by means of the one 
single, absolute Path. That is, someone who has fallen on the ground arises by 
relying on Empty Space, and someone who has fallen in empty space can arise by 
relying on the Ground. If there were no ‘That Which Is’, one could not rise. All the 
Buddhas and all the Ancestors were no different from this. 

Were someone to ask such a question as, “How far apart are Empty Space 
and the Ground?” you should reply, “Empty Space and the Ground are a hundred 
and eight thousand miles apart. If you should fall upon the ground, by all means 
get up by relying on Empty Space, for ultimately there is no such principle as 
arising apart from Empty Space. If you should fall while relying upon empty space, 
you will unquestionably arise by relying on the Ground, for ultimately there is no 
such principle as arising apart from the Ground.” If someone has never asserted the 



Shobogenzo: On That Which Comes Like This 


367 


Matter like this, that person has never known or seen the dimensions of Ground 
and Empty Space. 

djb 


Our Seventeenth Ancestral Master, the Venerable Sogyanandai, 
declared Kayashata to be his Dharma heir. One time, upon hearing a 
temple bell that was hanging in a hall being rung by the wind, he 
asked Kayashata, “Is it the wind we hear or is it the bell we hear?” 

Kayashata replied, “It is beyond the sounding of the wind and 
beyond the sounding of the bell: it is the sounding of my own Mind.” 

The Venerable Sogyanandai asked, “And, say, just what is your 
own Mind?” 

Kayashata replied, “It is equivalent to saying that everything is 
altogether tranquil in its stillness.” 

The Venerable Sogyanandai said, “Well done! Excellently 
done! Who other than you, my disciple, could succeed to our Way!” 
Thereupon, he Transmitted to Kayashata the Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching. 

Here, in a state beyond the sounding of the wind, we learn what the sound of our 
Mind is. When we are beyond what the sounding of the bell is, we leam what the 
sound of our Mind is. Even though the sound of our Mind is like this, everything 
is, nonetheless, altogether tranquil in its stillness. 

This story was Transmitted from India to the eastern lands, and from ancient 
times to the present day. It has been considered a standard for learning the Way, but 
many have misunderstood it, saying, “Kayashata’s assertion that it is neither the 
sounding of the wind nor the sounding of the bell but the sounding of our mind 
means that, at the very moment of when a sound occurs, there is an arising of 
discriminative thought, and this arising of discriminative thought is what we call 
‘mind’. If this mental awareness did not exist, how could we possibly be conscious 
of a ringing sound? Since hearing results from this awareness, we can certainly call 
it the foundation of hearing, which is why he said that it is the sounding of his 
mind.” This is a false understanding. Such people say things like this because they 
lack the assistance of a genuine teacher. For instance, it is comparable to the 
interpretations of scholars who write commentaries on topics like subjectivism and 
proximate conceptualization. Commentaries like these are not profound 
explorations of the words of a Buddha. 

On the other hand, those who have explored the Matter with a genuine heir 
of the Buddha’s Way speak of the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching 



Shobogenzo: On That Which Comes Like This 


368 


on supreme enlightenment in terms of ‘stillness’ and ‘not acting willfully’ and 
‘meditative states’ and ‘invocations’. The underlying principle is, if one thought or 
thing is truly still, all the myriad thoughts and things are also still along with it. If 
the wind’s blowing is still, then the bell’s ringing will be still: hence, Kayashata 
spoke of everything being altogether tranquil in its stillness. He was saying that the 
sounding of Mind is beyond the sounds of the wind, and the sounding of Mind is 
beyond the sounds of the bell, and the sounding of Mind is beyond the sounds of 
the mind. Having diligently explored his realization of what is intimately 
connected with That Which Is, he was able to simply state it, and he could also 
have said that it is the sound of wind, the sound of bell, the sound of blowing, and 
the sound of sounding. It is not a matter of “Why be worried about experiencing 
That Which Is?” but rather of “Why get stuck on experiencing That Which Is?” 


Before our Thirty-third Ancestor, Meditation Master Daikan Eno, had 
shaved his head, he was residing at Hossho-ji Temple in Kuangchou Province, 
when he overheard two monks arguing. One was asserting that the banner was 
moving. The other was asserting that the wind was moving. The argument went on 
like this, back and forth without letup, until the Sixth Ancestor said, “It is not the 
wind that is moving, nor the banner that is moving: it is your minds, dear sirs, 
which are moving.” Upon hearing this, the two monks forthwith accepted what he 
said. 

These two monks were from India. What the Sixth Ancestor was asserting 
by speaking these words for their sake was that the wind, the banner, and the 
movement all exist within Mind. Though people today may hear the Sixth 
Ancestor’s words, they do not understand the Sixth Ancestor’s meaning. How 
much less can they put into words what the Sixth Ancestor is expressing! Why do I 
say this? Because hearing the words “You, dear sirs, are Mind moving,” people 
today take it as literally asserting, “It is your minds, dear sirs, which are moving,” 
and thus fail to encounter the Sixth Ancestor, or comprehend the Sixth Ancestor, or 
be a Dharma offspring of the Sixth Ancestor. Now, as descendants of the Sixth 
Ancestor, we can also say what the Sixth Ancestor said, and we can say it because 
we have obtained the Body, Hair, and Skin of the Sixth Ancestor. And we can state 
it this way, “Of course, your mind may move, but what is more, you yourselves, 


2. The Sixth Ancestor’s remark is ambiguous. Later in the text, Dogen will interpret it as, “The 
matter is beyond the wind moving and beyond the banner moving: you are the Mind 
moving.” 



Shobogenzo: On That Which Comes Like This 


369 


dear sirs, Move.” Why do we say it in this way? Because That which is moving is 
‘Moving’, and because ‘you, dear sirs,’ means you , dear sirs. And we have put it 
this way because all of you are already ‘such a one’. 

In his former days, the Sixth Ancestor sold firewood in Hsinchou Province. 
He was thoroughly familiar with the mountains and the water, and, having put forth 
his efforts beneath the pine trees, he severed the roots. But how could he have 
known of the ancient Teachings that illumine the Mind when someone is seated at 
ease by the Bright Window, and from whom could he have learned about cleansing 
and removing stains? He was in the marketplace when he heard someone reciting 
a Scripture. It was not something that he himself had expected, nor was it 
something that someone else had encouraged him to do. While still a child, he was 
bereft of his father, and, when he was grown, he took care of his mother. Little did 
he know that concealed beneath those clothes of his was a Jewel that would light 
up the heavens and the earth. Having suddenly been illumined by hearing the 
Scripture, he departed from his elderly mother and went searching for a good 
spiritual friend—all of which is uncommon behavior among human beings, for 
who can treat lightly the bonds of affection for one’s parents? But in attaching 
greater weight to the Dharma, he treated as lighter his debt of filial gratitude and 
renounced his worldly obligations. This is the principle expressed by the verse: 

When those who have spiritual wisdom hear It 
voiced, 

They are able to trust and understand It at once. 

What we call ‘spiritual wisdom’ cannot be learned from someone else, nor is it 
something that we ourselves give rise to. Since wisdom can Transmit wisdom, 
wisdom will seek out wisdom. The five hundred bats naturally had wisdom within 
themselves; moreover, they clung to neither their body nor their mind. 3 4 And when 


3. Although this sentence and the previous one have their literal meanings, there is also the 
metaphorical meaning of his having learned the Dharma as It is expressed by things in 
nature, and, through his devotion to his physical labor, he also learned how to sever the roots 
of his delusions. However, he was poor and illiterate, so he could not study Scriptures at his 
leisure, and he did not know of anyone under whose guidance he could do the spiritual 
practice of cleansing his karma. 

4. An allusion to a story of five hundred bats who were living in a tree. A traveler, passing by, 
stopped to build a fire to keep warm while he read a Scripture aloud. When the fire set the 
tree ablaze, the bats stayed where they were, preferring to be burned alive rather than miss 
hearing a single word of Scripture, and this they could do because they were not attached to 
body or mind. 



Shobogenzo: On That Which Comes Like This 


370 


the ten thousand swimming fish heard the Dharma, they were immediately able to 
understand It, not because of any conditions or causes, but simply because they had 
wisdom ever present within themselves. 5 It is not something that comes to us, nor 
is it something that enters us. For instance, it is like the Lord of the East meeting 
the spring. 6 Wisdom is beyond discriminative thought and beyond an absence of 
discriminative thinking, as well as beyond intentions and beyond an absence of 
intentions. Even less would it be related to something’s being large or small, and 
even less still could we discuss it in terms of delusion and enlightenment! The 
point is that the Sixth Ancestor had no clue as to what the Buddha’s Dharma was, 
never having heard It before, and therefore he was neither attached to It nor 
desirous of It. But once he heard the Dharma, he held his filial bonds to be less 
binding and put his false sense of self out of his mind. This happened because the 
body and mind of someone who has wisdom is already something that does not 
belong to any personal self. This is what is called ‘being able to immediately trust 
and understand It’. 

We do not know how many rounds of birth and death we have already spent 
returning again and again to various useless delusions, even while possessing this 
wisdom. It is like rocks covering up a jewel: the jewel is unaware that it is covered 
up by rocks and the rocks are unaware that they are covering up a jewel. When 
human beings recognize this jewel, they seize upon it. This is not something that 
the jewel expectantly awaits nor is it something that the rocks have been waiting 
for, and it does not depend on a spiritual awakening on the part of the rocks nor is 
it something that the jewel thinks about. That is to say, even though a human being 
and wisdom are unaware of each other, the Way is invariably overheard by the 
person’s wisdom. 

There is a saying in the Lotus Scripture: 

Those in whom wisdom is absent doubt that it exists 

And, by acting thus, they miss their chances for ever so long. 

Wisdom is not necessarily ‘something that is present’ and it is not necessarily 
‘something that is absent’, but rather, at a certain moment, there is the presence of 
the pine trees of spring and the chrysanthemums of autumn are not to be found. At 


5. An allusion to ten thousand fish who were dying because the water in which they lived 
began to dry up. Upon hearing someone reading a Scripture aloud, they escaped from their 
suffering and were reborn as celestial beings in the Tushita Heaven. 

6. The Lord of the East is the spirit of springtime who shows up the moment that spring 


arrives. 



Shobogenzo: On That Which Comes Like This 


371 


the time of this absence of wisdom, the whole of the highest supreme 
enlightenment becomes something doubtful, and every thought and thing also 
becomes doubtful. At this time, one misses one’s chances for ever so long by 
acting from this doubt. Words that should be heard and Dharma that should be 
awakened to both become something doubtful. In the whole universe—which we 
do not possess—there is nowhere that is hidden to us, for the whole universe is a 
single iron rod thousands of miles long, and no one possesses it. Even though twigs 
bud in accord with this, as the Lotus Scripture says: 

Within the Buddha lands in the ten quarters, 

There is only the Teaching of the One Vehicle. 

And even though leaves fall in accord with this, as the Lotus Scripture also says: 

The Dharma abides in Its place in the Dharma, 

And the forms of the world are ever recurring. 

Because this is already the way things are, wisdom’s being present and wisdom’s 

n 

not being present is what the face of the sun is to the face of the moon. 


Because the Sixth Ancestor was ‘such a person’, he could clearly discern the 
Truth. Ultimately, he paid a visit to Mount Obai, prostrating himself before 
Meditation Master Daiman Konin, who allowed him to lodge in the servants’ hall. 
Day and night, he pounded rice. 

A bare eight months had passed when, late in the night, Konin 
himself came unseen to the rice-pounding shed and asked the Sixth 
Ancestor, “Is the rice white yet?” 

The Sixth Ancestor said, “It is white, but it has not yet been 
winnowed.” 

Konin struck the mortar three times, whereupon the Sixth 
Ancestor tossed the rice three times in the winnowing-basket. 

It is said that at this moment Master and disciple became mutually in accord with 
the Truth. They may not have known it themselves, and it is something others may 
not understand, but the Transmission of the Dharma and the Transmission of the 
Robe must certainly have occurred at that very moment. 


7. That is, wisdom is inherent in the Cosmic Buddha (the sun) and is reflected in our Buddha 
Nature (the moon). 



Shobogenzo: On That Which Comes Like This 


372 


djb 

CX) 

Sekito Kisen of Mount Nangaku was once asked by his disciple 
Yakusan, “I have a rough understanding of the Three Vehicles* and 
the twelve divisions of the Scriptures, but I have heard that here in the 
south, there is a direct pointing to the human heart whereby one sees 
his True Nature and becomes Buddha. With deepest respect, I pray 
that you, Venerable Monk, out of compassion, will instruct me.” 

This was Yakusan’s request. Yakusan, since early on, had been a lecturer and had 
thoroughly penetrated the meaning of the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions 
of the Scriptures. So it seems that he was not in the dark about the Buddha 
Dharma. In those former times, separate traditions had not yet arisen, so just 
clarifying the meaning of the Three Vehicles and the twelve divisions of the 
Scriptures was considered the customary way to study what the Scriptures taught. 
Nowadays there are many who, from thickheadedness, have set up their own 
standards with which to evaluate the Buddha Dharma, but this is not customary in 
the Buddha’s Way. 

The Great Master said, “Being ‘such a person’ is unattainable, 
not being ‘such a person’ is unattainable, and both being ‘such a 
person’ and not being ‘such a person’ are together unattainable. 8 How 
about you? What do you think?” 

This is what the Great Master said for the benefit of Yakusan. Truly, because being 
‘such a person’ and not being ‘such a person’ are altogether unattainable, being 
‘such a person’ is unattainable and not being ‘such a person’ is unattainable. Being 
‘such a person’ is what we mean by immo. It is not a matter of the usefulness of 
words having limits or not having limits. You need to explore through your training 
that being ‘such a person’ is unattainable and that what is unattainable is being 
‘such a person’. It is not that being ‘such a person’ and being unattainable are of 
concern only to the evaluations of a Buddha. To understand them intellectually is 
unattainable; to understand them through direct experience is unattainable. 


8. That is, seeing what one’s True Nature is and thereby becoming Buddha is not something to 
be obtained, since enlightenment already is. 



Shobogenzo: On That Which Comes Like This 


373 


djb 

CX) 

Meditation Master Daikan Eno of Mount Sokei once gave instruction to 
Nangaku saying, “What has come about like this?” 9 These words show that 
Nangaku’s being ‘such a person’ is beyond doubt because he is beyond intellectual 
understanding. And because “What has come about like this” is the What, you 
should thoroughly explore through your training that all the myriad things that 
comprise the universe are, beyond any doubt, the What. And you should 
thoroughly explore through your training that each and every single thing is, 
beyond any doubt, the What. The What is not subject to doubt, for It is That Which 
Comes Like This. 


Given to the assembly at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple on the twenty-sixth day of the 
third lunar month in the third year of theNinji era (April 27, 1242). 

Copied by me in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant on the fourth day of the fourth month in the 
first year of the Kangen era (April 24, 1243). 

Ejo 


9. There is a play on words in this remark. Though it appears to be a question, it is actually a 
direct statement meaning, as Dogen will indicate, “The What has come about like this.” 



29 

On Ceaseless Practice 

(Gyoji) 

Translator’s Introduction: Gyoji is Dogen’s longest discourse in the Shobogenzo. It was 
apparently given to his disciples in written form, and, because of its length, it was bound in two 
fascicles, identified as the upper part and the lower part. Since the lower part is simply a 
continuation of the upper, the two have not been treated here as separate works. In the original 
text, an alternate name was given at the end of the lower part: The Ceaseless Practice of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors (Busso Gyoji). 

Gyoji can be literally rendered as ‘doing the practice and keeping to it’, hence, ‘ceaseless 
practice’. It can also be understood as a truncated form of shugydjikai, ‘doing one’s training and 
practice while keeping to the Precepts’. Further, as Dogen makes clear through the many stories 
of Indian and Chinese Masters that he recounts, ‘practice’ does not refer to some fixed agenda 
but differs in form with each Master, and yet is recognizable as that individual’s ceaseless 
practice. 


The Great Way of Buddhas and Ancestors invariably involves unsurpassed 
ceaseless practice. This practice rolls on in a cyclic manner without interruption. 
Not a moment’s gap has occurred in Their giving rise to the intention to realize 
Buddhahood, in Their doing the training and practice, in Their experiencing 
enlightenment, and in Their realizing nirvana, for the Great Way of ceaseless 
practice rolls on just like this. As a result, the practice is not done by forcing 
oneself to do it and it is not done by being forced to do it by someone else: it is a 
ceaseless practice that is never tainted by forcing. The merits from this ceaseless 
practice sustain us and sustain others. 

The underlying principle of this practice is that the whole universe in all ten 
directions receives the merit of our ceaseless practice. Though others may not 
recognize it, though we may not recognize it ourselves, still, it is so. As a result, 
owing to the ceaseless practice of all the Buddhas and Ancestors, our own 
ceaseless practice has clearly manifested. And, owing to our ceaseless practice, the 
ceaseless practice of all the Buddhas clearly manifests, and the Great Way of the 
Buddhas pervades everywhere. And, owing to our ceaseless practice, the Buddha’s 
Way rolls perpetually onward. Accordingly, Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor 
after Ancestor have dwelt within Buddha, have acted from the Heart of Buddha, 


374 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


375 


and have fully manifested Buddha, and They have done so without a single 
moment’s interruption. 

Due to this ceaseless practice, there is the sun, the moon, and the stars. Due 
to ceaseless practice, there is the great earth and the vast expanse of space. Due to 
ceaseless practice, there is body and mind, along with the internal effects of our 
past karma* and the external conditions of our surroundings. Due to ceaseless 
practice, there are the four great elements* and the five skandhas.* Even though 
ceaseless practice is not something that worldly folk desire, it will be what all 
human beings truly come back to. Due to the ceaseless practice of all Buddhas of 
past, present, and future, all Buddhas manifest ceaseless practice in the past, 
present, and future. And there are also times when the merit from that ceaseless 
practice no longer lies hidden, and, as a result, the intention to realize Buddhahood 
arises, along with training and practice. And there are times when that merit does 
not show itself, and, as a result, it is not encountered or perceived. You need to 
explore through your training that even though it may not show itself, it does not 
lie hidden, because it is not tainted with appearing and disappearing or with 
existing and dying away. Though it may be concealed from us at the present 
moment, the ceaseless practice that has brought us into existence is present in 
every single thought and thing, all of which arise due to coexisting conditions, and 
we just do not realize that we are actually doing ceaseless practice. 

Moreover, if we wish to grasp what ceaseless practice is, we should not 
make a special case out of every new thing that comes along. This is because, from 
the perspective of Dependent Origination, there is simply ceaseless practice, and 
ceaseless practice does not come about as a result of depending upon anything. You 
need to explore this point with diligence and in detail. The ceaseless practice that 
makes ceaseless practice manifest is nothing other than our own ceaseless practice 
in the here and now. Ceaseless practice is not present here and now because it is 
something that we innately have within ourselves; it is not something that already 
dwells within us . 1 Its presence in the here and now is beyond the comings and 
goings of a ‘self’ and beyond the departings and emergings of a ‘self’. The phrase 
‘here and now’ does not refer to something that existed prior to ceaseless practice: 
‘the here and now’ refers to ceaseless practice fully manifesting itself in the 
present. 

Accordingly, the ceaseless practice of one day is the seed of all Buddhas: it 
is the ceaseless practice of all Buddhas. By means of it, all Buddhas fully manifest 


* See Glossary. 

1. That is, it does not refer to some kind of soul or permanent self. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


376 


Themselves. So, to not do ceaseless practice is to loathe all Buddhas, and to fail to 
make alms offerings to all Buddhas is to loathe ceaseless practice, and to fail to 
live and die together with all Buddhas is to fail both to leam from Them and to 
explore the Matter* with Them. To see a flower opening or a leaf falling in the here 
and now is to fully see what ceaseless practice is. There is no polishing of the 
Mirror or smashing of the Mirror that is not ceaseless practice. Thus, if anyone 
tried to set aside ceaseless practice—ignoring it in an attempt to conceal their 
wicked intention to escape from ceaseless practice—this too would be ceaseless 
practice. Accordingly, some who are inclined towards ceaseless practice may 
merely resemble someone who has a genuine intention to do ceaseless practice, 
still, such persons would be like the perplexed son who threw away the treasures 

a 

and riches of the native land of his true father and wandered off into foreign lands. 
Even though, during the time of his wandering about aimlessly, the winds and 
waters did not cause him to lose life or limb, nevertheless he should not have 
thrown away his true father’s treasure, for that is to mistakenly lose the Dharma 
Treasure of his True Father. This is why ceaseless practice is Dharma that is not to 
be neglected even for a moment. 


Our benevolent spiritual father, Great Master Shakyamuni Buddha, had been 
observing ceaseless practice deep in the mountains from the nineteenth year of His 
life until His thirtieth year, when there arose the ceaseless practice by which He 
realized the Way simultaneously with the great earth and its sentient beings. Up 
through the eightieth year of His life, He was still doing ceaseless practice in the 
mountains, and in the forests, and in the monasteries. He did not return to His 
father’s royal palace or assume governance over the prosperity of the nation. For 
clothing, He kept to the large sanghati robe—the kind that monks still wear—and 
He did not exchange it for another type of robe for the rest of His life. He did not 
exchange His alms bowl for another one during His lifetime, and He never stayed 
alone, not even once in a day. He did not reject so much as a single worthless alms 
offering from either ordinary folk or those in lofty positions, and He bore with 
patience the insults of non-Buddhists. In sum, His whole life was ceaseless 


2. Dogen explores these allusions to the Mirror thoroughly in his Discourse 19: On the Ancient 
Mirror (Kokyd). 

3. An allusion to a parable in the Lotus Scripture, found in the fourth chapter entitled “Belief 
and Understanding”, which describes how we spend so much of our lives running away 
from the Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


377 


practice. It can never be said that the Buddha’s examples of washing His robe and 
accepting alms for His food were not ceaseless practice. 


The Eighth Indian Ancestor, the Venerable Makakasho, was the Venerable 
Shakyamuni’s Dharma heir. 4 Throughout his life he completely devoted himself to 
the ceaseless practice of the twelve zudas. 5 The twelve zudas are as follows: 

(1) Not to accept personal invitations from people, but to go on 
alms round for one’s food each day. Also, not to accept money with 
which to purchase even part of a monk’s meal. 

(2) To lodge overnight on a mountain and not to stay in the 
dwelling of ordinary folk, in a highly populated district, or in some 
town or village. 6 7 8 

(3) Not to beg people for clothing. Also, not to accept any 
clothing that is offered by people, but simply to take the clothing of 
the dead that has been discarded at gravesides. 

(4) To lodge under a tree within some field, whether cultivated 

or not. 

(5) To eat one meal per day. This is sometimes called sunka 
sunnai. 1 

(6) Not to lie down, day or night, but simply to sleep while 

sitting up or to do walking meditation when drowsy. This is 

— 8 

sometimes called sunnai sashakyo. 


4. Makakasho is considered the Eighth Indian Ancestor when we begin from the first of the 
Seven Buddhas, of whom Shakyamuni Buddha was the seventh. 

5. A zuda (Skt. dhuta) is an austere practice that, in later Mahayana Buddhism, became 
associated with the Lesser Course. Dogen’s subsequent listing of the twelve zudas is 
apparently based on a Chinese text called The Great Scripture on the Three Thousand Forms 
of Everyday Behavior for Monks. 

6. ‘On a mountain’ here most likely refers to staying in a monastery, temple, or hermitage. 

7. Sunka sunnai is the Japanese pronunciation of a corrupt Chinese transliteration of the Pali 
word ekasanika, which means ‘one meal a day’. 

8. As in the preceding footnote, sunnai sashakyo is a corruption of the Pali nesajjika , meaning 
‘not lying down day or night’. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


378 


(7) To possess only three robes and never to have an extra robe. 

Also, not to sleep wrapped in a blanket. 

(8) To reside in cemeteries and not to take up permanent 
residence in Buddhist temples or among people. To do seated 
meditation and seek the Way while looking directly at the skulls and 
bones of the dead. 

(9) To desire merely to live by oneself, without desiring to meet 
other people or to sleep amidst a group of people. 

(10) To eat the raw fruits of trees and plants first, and then to eat 
one’s cooked food. After having finished eating one’s cooked food, to 
not then eat the raw fruits of trees and plants. 

(11) To be content to sleep out in the open, without seeking 
shelter under some tree. 

(12) Not to eat meat. Also, not to eat processed milk products or 
apply hemp oil to one’s body. 

These are the twelve zudas. The Venerable Makakasho did not regress or turn away 
from these throughout his whole lifetime. Even though the Tathagata’s Treasure 
House of the Eye of the True Teaching was directly Transmitted to him, he did not 
step back from practicing these zudas. 

The Buddha once said to him, “You are already one who is old 
in years, so you should eat what the other monks eat.” 

The Venerable Makakasho replied, “If I had not met the 
Tathagata in this lifetime, I would have been a pratyekabuddha.* I 
would have resided all my life in mountains and forests. Fortunately, I 
encountered the Tathagata in this lifetime and have been blessed with 
the beneficence of the Dharma. Even so, in the end, I will not eat as 
the other monks in the community eat.” 

The Tathagata praised him for that. 

On another occasion, because Makakasho had been ceaselessly practicing 
these zudas, his body had grown emaciated. When the assembly of monks saw 
him, they belittled him. Thereupon, the Tathagata cordially summoned Makakasho 
and made room for him on half His seat. The Venerable Makakasho sat down on 
the Tathagata’s seat. You need to keep in mind that Makakasho was a senior monk 
of long standing in the Buddha’s assembly. We cannot fully enumerate the ways in 
which he ceaselessly practiced for his whole life. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


379 


djb 

CX) 

The Tenth Indian Ancestor, the Venerable Barishiba, once vowed that for the 
rest of his life he would not let his ribs touch his mat. 9 Even though he was eighty- 
six years old, he did his utmost in practicing the Way and was soon given the one- 
to-one Transmission of the Great Dharma. Because he did not let his days and 
nights idly slip by, he was given the one-to-one Transmission of the True Eye of 
Enlightenment after barely three years of effort. The Venerable One had been in his 
mother’s womb for sixty years, and when he was bom, his hair was already white. 
Because he kept to his vow not to lie down like a corpse, he was called ‘The One 
of Venerable Ribs’. In the dark, he would release a radiance from his hands by 
means of which he was able to read the Scriptures and thereby procure the Dharma. 
This was a strange and wondrous trait that he was born with. 

The One of Venerable Ribs was almost eighty years old when 
he renounced home life and dyed his robes. 

A young man who lived in the area asked him, “You foolish, 
decrepit old man, how can you be so dim-witted? Besides, those who 
leave home life to become monks have two kinds of undertakings: 
first, they learn how to meditate; second, they chant the Scriptures. 

You are now feeble and senile, so there is no way for you to progress 
by doing either. To put it simply, you will carelessly muddy up the 
waters and will fill your stomach with alms offerings to no purpose.” 

The One of Venerable Ribs, upon hearing these rebukes and 
snide remarks, then thanked the man and made a vow, saying, “I will 
not let my ribs touch my mat until I have thoroughly mastered the 
fundamental meaning of the Tripit aka* cut off all craving for 
anything within the three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form, 
obtained the six marvelous spiritual abilities, and equipped myself 
with the eight kinds of detachment from delusion.” 

From that time on, there was not even one day that he did not practice walking and 
seated meditation, as well as practicing mindful meditation while standing still. 
During the day, he investigated and learned the Scriptures and Their underlying 


9 It is unclear whether Barishiba meant what he said figuratively, as we might speak of ‘not 
lying down on the job’, or literally. Over the millennia, some monks have attempted to 
follow Barishiba’s practice literally and have even devised ways to bind themselves whilst 
in full lotus position so that they would not fall into a prone position if they should fall 
asleep. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


380 


principles; at night, he calmed his discriminatory thinking and cooled down his 
active mind. Continuing on in this way for three years, he explored and thoroughly 
mastered the Tripitaka, cut off his craving for the three worlds, and attained the 
wise discernment which arises from the three forms of clarity. 10 People at that time, 
out of deep respect, gave him the name of the One of Venerable Ribs. 

The One of Venerable Ribs left the womb after having first spent sixty years 
there. Surely he must have been doing his best even whilst in the womb. After he 
left the womb, it was almost eighty years before he sought to leave home life and 
explore the Way. This was a hundred and forty years after he was conceived! Truly, 
he was an extraordinary person, and even so, he was a decrepit old man who must 
have been more decrepit and more old than anyone else. He had already attained 
old age whilst still in the womb, and he was advanced in years since having left the 
womb. Even so, he paid no heed to the slanderous and snide remarks made by 
people of his time and single-mindedly kept to his vow, never turning away from it. 
Who could possibly think it would be an easy task to try to emulate his spiritual 
wisdom? 

Do not regret your reaching old age. It is difficult to know what this thing 
called life really is. Is a person ‘really living’ or ‘not really living’? Is a person 
‘old’ or ‘not old’? The four perspectives are completely different; all the various 
types of perspectives are different as well. 11 Just concentrate on your intention and 
make your utmost effort to pursue the Way. In your pursuit of the Way, train as if 
you were facing a life-and-death situation: it is not simply your pursuit of the Way 
within life-and-death. People today have become so foolish as to set aside their 
pursuit of the Way upon reaching the age of fifty or sixty, or upon reaching seventy 
or eighty. Although we are naturally aware of how long we have lived, this is 
simply the human mind energetically engaged in discriminating and has nothing to 
do with studying the Way. Do not concern yourself with being in the prime of life 
or having reached old age. Just be single-minded in exploring the Way thoroughly 
and diligently, for then you will stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the One of 
Venerable Ribs. 


10. The three forms of clarity are the ability to see one’s own past lives and those of others, the 
ability to see the karmic consequences that will follow from one’s own actions as well as 
those of others, and the ability to recognize the sufferings of oneself and others within their 
present life and to know how to convert the passions that give rise to those sufferings. 

11. ‘The four perspectives’ refers to a Buddhist metaphor which describes the way that different 
beings interpret what they see. In the metaphor, water is described from the perspective of 
four different beings: humans see it as ordinary water, hungry ghosts as bloody pus, fish as a 
dwelling place, and celestial beings as liquid lapis lazuli. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


381 


Do not always be lamenting the fact that you will end up as a pile of dirt in a 
graveyard. Do not spend your time worrying about it. If you do not single- 
mindedly devote yourself to reaching the Other Shore, who will rescue you? When 
people are aimlessly wandering about in the wilderness like skeletons without a 

Master, they need to cultivate right perception so that they may fashion an eye for 

12 

themselves. 

djb 


The Sixth Chinese Ancestor was a woodcutter in the district of Hsinning. He 
could hardly have been called an intellectual. While just an infant, he lost his 
father, and he grew up under the care of his aged mother. He worked as a 
woodcutter in order to support her. Whilst standing at a crossroads one day, he 
overheard one line of a Scripture being recited, and immediately parted from his 
mother in order to seek the Great Dharma. He was a great vessel for the Truth, of a 
caliber rarely met in any generation. His pursuit of the Way was unique among 
human beings. To cut off one’s arm is easy enough, but to sever himself from 
someone he loved must have been exceedingly difficult indeed. 13 He would not 
have abandoned his filial obligations lightly. 

He joined in with Daiman Konin’s assembly, where he pounded rice day and 
night, neither sleeping nor resting for eight months. 14 In the middle of one night, he 
received the direct Transmission of Bodhidharma’s kesa* and alms bowl. Even 
after he had obtained the Dharma, he still carried his stone mortar around with him, 
and for eight years he continued his rice pounding. Even when he entered the 
world in order to help ferry people to the Other Shore by giving expression to the 
Dharma, he did not set aside his stone mortar. This is ceaseless practice that is rare 
in any generation. 


12. Right perception is described in Buddhism as seeing things with the eye of compassion and 
wise discernment. 

13. The reference to cutting off one’s arm is to the Second Chinese Ancestor, Taiso Eka, who is 
said to have cut off his arm in order to find the Truth. This ‘severing’ may refer to giving up 
one’s attachments rather than to a literal, physical act. 

14. Though he was part of Konin’s assembly, he lived there as a layperson and did not become a 
monk until some ten years later. Although ‘pounding rice day and night’ is often used in Zen 
texts solely as a metaphor for doing ceaseless practice, in this sentence it also alludes to the 
actual physical work that he did for the monastic community. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


382 


djb 

CX) 

Kozei Baso did seated meditation for twenty years and received the Intimate 
Seal* from Nangaku. It has never been said that he set aside the practice of seated 
meditation after the Dharma was Transmitted to him and he began to help rescue 
others. When people first came to train under him, he always helped them to 
personally obtain the Mind seal. He was invariably the first to arrive for the monks’ 
communal work periods. 15 He did not let up even after he became old. Those today 
who follow Rinzai are in Baso’s lineage. 


Our revered Ancestor Ungan and the monk Dogo were both exploring the 
Matter under Yakusan. Having made a vow together, they did not put their sides to 
their mats for forty years, so committed were they to thorough and unadulterated 
practice. Later, when Ungan personally Transmitted the Dharma to Tozan Ryokai, 
Tozan remarked, “Desiring to realize Wholeness, I have been doing my utmost for 
twenty years to put the Way into practice by doing seated meditation.” That Way of 
his has now been Transmitted far and wide. 


During the time while Ungo Doyo was living in a hermitage on Three Peak 
Mountain, he was receiving nourishment from the Celestial Kitchen. 16 Once when 
Ungo was paying a visit to Tozan, his spiritual doubt was settled through his 
realization of the Great Matter, after which he returned to his hermitage. When a 
celestial messenger came looking for Ungo to bring him nourishment once again, 
the celestial being could not see him, despite searching for three days. Ungo no 
longer needed to rely on the Celestial Kitchen, for he had made the Great Matter 
his sustenance. Try to emulate his determination to comprehend the Truth. 


From the time when Hyakujo Ekai was serving as an attendant monk to Baso 
until that evening when he entered nirvana, there was not a single day when he did 


15. Communal work customarily included such things as sweeping the temple grounds and 
gathering firewood. 

16. It is said that before awakening to the Truth, a Buddhist trainee is served nourishment by 
celestial beings, but after the trainee has awakened to the Truth, those celestial beings can no 
longer serve the person food since the ‘person’ can no longer be seen. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


383 


not endeavor to work for the benefit of the monastic assembly and for the benefit 
of other people. Meditation Master Hyakujo was already an old monk of long 
standing when, thank goodness, he said, “A day when I do not work is a day when 
I do not eat.” He still endeavored to do communal work just the same as those in 
their prime. The community felt sorry for him, but, though they expressed their 
pity for him, the Master would not quit. Finally, one day when he came to the 
communal work, the monks had hidden his tools and would not return them to him, 
so the Master did not take any food that day. His intention was to express his regret 
at not being able to participate in the monks’ communal work. This story has 
become known as Hyakujo’s “One day without work is one day without food.” The 
traditions found in Rinzai’s lineage—whose Transmission flows throughout Great 
Sung China today—as well as the traditions found in Buddhist monasteries far and 
wide, are, for the most part, based on the ceaseless practice of Hyakujo’s profound 
principles. 17 

djb 

(X 3 


When the revered monk Kyosei Dofu was Abbot in his temple, the deities of 
the place were never able to see the Master’s face because they had no reliable 
means by which to do so. 18 

djb 

(Xj 


In former times, Meditation Master Gichu of Mount Sanpei received 
nourishment from the Celestial Kitchen. After he encountered Daiten Hotsu of 
Choshu Province, the celestial beings sought Gichu out, but were unable to find 
him. 

djb 

CX) 


The later revered monk of Mount Daii, Chokei Daian, would say of his 
sojourn with Isan on the same mountain, “I stayed with Isan for twenty years. I 
supped on Isan food. I urinated Isan urine. But I did not explore Isan’s Way. I have 
merely been able to raise one unsexed water buffalo that, all day long, is 
completely out in the open.” 


17. The principles which Hyakujo put forth in his writings are still fundamental to Zen Buddhist 
monastic practice today. 

18. It is said that when someone is truly doing ceaseless practice, the deities that inhabit the 
environs of a temple cannot see that person, because that person is not wearing the ‘face’ of 
a false self. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


384 


Keep in mind that he raised that one unsexed water buffalo by means of his 
twenty years of ceaseless practice with Isan, who had himself continually explored 
the Matter within Hyakujo’s community. Without fuss, quietly emulate his actions 
over those twenty years, and do not at any time forget them. Even though there are 
many people who explored Isan’s Way, there must have been only a few whose 
ceaseless practice was their ‘not having explored Isan’s Way’. 


The revered monk Joshu Shinsai of Kannon-in Monastery was in his sixty- 
first year before he gave rise to the intention to realize the Truth and therefore 
began to seek the Way. Carrying his bottle gourd filled with water and his monk’s 
traveling staff, he set out in search of a Master. He traveled far and wide in all 
directions, constantly saying to himself, “If even a child of seven has spiritually 
surpassed me, I shall explore the Matter with him or her accordingly. If even an old 
man of a hundred has not yet spiritually reached where I am, I shall instruct him 
accordingly.” 

It was with this attitude of mind that he did his utmost for twenty years to 
study Nansen’s Way. At the age of eighty, he was installed as Abbot of Kannon-in 
Monastery, east of Joshu City, and for forty years he spiritually guided ordinary 
people as well as those in loftier positions. Since he never sent out letters soliciting 
donations, his Monks’ Hall was not large, lacking both a hall for the temple officers 
in front and a washstand in back. One time, the leg on his meditation platform 
broke. He tied a piece of charred firewood to it with some rope and, for years, went 
on using it for his training and practice. The temple officers wished to replace the 
leg, but Joshu would not permit it. We should leam from this venerable Old 
Buddha’s customary ways of doing things. 

Joshu lived in Joshu Prefecture from his eightieth year on, after receiving the 
Transmission of the Dharma. He had received the authentic Transmission of the 
True Teaching, and people called him the Venerable Old Buddha. Those who had 
not yet received the authentic Transmission of the True Teaching must surely have 
been less imposing than Master Joshu, and those who had not yet reached the age 
of eighty must surely have been more robust than he was. So how are those of us 
who are in our prime, yet still spiritually unimpressive, to equal one who is so 
deeply revered? Simply, by striving to do our utmost in ceaselessly practicing the 
Way. During those forty years, he did not accumulate worldly goods, and there was 
no rice or other grain in storage. Sometimes, chestnuts and acoms would be 
gathered and meted out for food; sometimes, one meal would be stretched out to 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


385 


cover a couple of days. These were truly the customary ways of a dragon elephant* 
in the past, ways of training that we should aspire to. 

One day, Joshu addressed his community, saying, “If you did not depart 
from the monastery even once in your lifetime and did not speak for five or ten 
years, no one should call you a mute. 19 And after that, how could even the Buddhas 
do anything for you?” This points to ceaseless practice. 20 

Keep in mind that even though your not talking for five or ten years might 
give you the look of being dumb, and even though you might not talk due to your 
efforts not to depart from the monastery, still, you would not be a mute. The way a 
Buddha speaks is no different. Those who cannot hear the voice with which a 
Buddha speaks will fail to understand that someone who is not mute has gone 
beyond talking. Consequently, the most wondrous practice within ceaseless 
practice is ‘not departing from the monastery’. The phrase ‘not departing from the 
monastery’ completely encapsulates the expression ‘letting go of things’. The most 
foolish of people do not recognize a non-mute person, and do not help others to 
know ‘such a one’ * as a non-mute person. Even though no one prevents them from 
doing so, they do not help others to know ‘such a person’. Pitiful indeed are those 
who have not heard that to be a non-mute is to be someone who has realized the 
state of ‘being just what one is’, or who do not even recognize that there is such a 
state of ‘being just what one is’. Never abandon the ceaseless practice of not 
departing from the monastery. Do not be blown east and west by the prevailing 
winds. Even if you do not pay attention to the spring breezes and the autumn 
moons for five or ten years, there will be the Way that is free from delusions 
concerning sounds and forms. How one arrives at that Way is beyond our ability to 
know and understand. You should explore through your training just how precious 
each moment of your ceaseless practice is. Do not entertain doubts that the practice 
of not talking may be something vain and meaningless. Ceaseless practice is the 
one monastery that we enter, the one monastery that we emerge from, the one 
monastery that is the path left by flying birds, and the one monastery that is the 
whole universe. 


19. In the Zen tradition, the term ‘mute’ is often used to describe trainees who are unable to give 
a response when a Master puts a spiritual question to them. 

20. In other words, ceaseless practice is synonymous with not departing from one’s spiritual 
seat and with not just talking about the practice but actually doing it. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


386 


djb 

CX) 

Mount Daibai is located in Keigen Prefecture. Gosho-ji Monastery was 
established on this mountain, and Meditation Master Daibai Hojo was its founder. 
The Master was a man from Joyo in Hubei Province. 

While training in Baso’s community, Hojo once asked the 
Master, “Just what is Buddha?” 

Baso replied, “Your very mind is Buddha.” 

Hearing this phrase, Hojo immediately experienced the great realization. As a 
consequence, he climbed to the summit of Mount Daibai to be apart from human 
society. Living alone in a hermit’s thatched hut, he survived on pine nuts and wore 
clothing he made from lotus leaves. On this mountain was a small pond, in which 
lotuses were plentiful. For more than thirty years he pursued the Way by doing 
seated meditation. He neither met anyone nor heard about any human affairs 
whatsoever, and he forgot about the passing years, seeing only the mountains 
around him turning now green, now yellow. You can imagine how wretched the 
winds and frosts were. 

In doing seated meditation, the Master would place an eight-inch high iron 
pagoda atop his head, as if he were wearing a jeweled crown. By endeavoring to 
keep this pagoda from dropping off, he kept from falling asleep. This pagoda is 
still in his monastery today, and it is listed in the inventory of the temple’s 
storehouse. Until his death, this is how he tirelessly trained in the Way. 

He had been passing the months and years in this manner when, one day, a 
monk from Enkan’s community arrived. The monk had come to the mountain in 
search of a suitable traveling staff, but he had wandered off the mountain path and 
fortuitously came upon the Master’s hermitage. 

Unexpectedly, he encountered the Master, whereupon he asked 
him, “Venerable monk, how long have you been living on this 
mountain?” 

The Master replied, “All I have seen is the mountains about me 
now dyed green, now dyed yellow.” 

This monk then asked him, “In what direction should I go to 
find the path out of the mountains?” 

The Master said, “Go by following the stream.” 

The monk was struck by this response. So, when he returned, he 
told Enkan what had happened. Enkan said, “Some years ago when I 
was with Baso in Chiang-hsi Province, I once met a certain monk, but 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


387 


I don’t know what happened to him later. I wonder whether he could 
be that monk.” 

Later, when Enkan sent the monk to invite the Master for a visit, the Master would 
not leave the mountain. Rather, he composed a poem in reply: 

Broken down yet living still, a withered tree aslant amidst 
the chill forest, 

How many times have I met the spring, my heart 
unswerving? 

Woodcutters pass this monk by, without even a backward 
glance, 

So why does the carpenter eagerly desire to seek me 
out? 21 

The upshot was he did not pay Enkan a visit. Afterwards, he decided to move 
deeper into the recesses of the mountain, whereupon he composed the following 
poem: 

From this pond, the lotus leaves I have taken for wear 
have known no end, 

And from a few trees, the pine cones have supplied for my 
meals more than enough. 

Now people from the world have discovered my dwelling 
place, 

So I shall move my reed abode to enter a seclusion ever 
more deep. 

Finally, he moved his hermitage further into the mountains. 

One day, Baso had a monk go and expressly ask Hojo, 
“Venerable monk, in former times when you went in deepest respect 
to train under Baso, what was the underlying principle you obtained 
from him that you then came to dwell on this mountain?” 

The Master answered, “Baso turned directly to me and said, 

‘Your very mind is Buddha,’ and then I came to dwell upon this 
mountain.” 

The monk then said, “These days his Buddha Dharma is 
different.” 


21. ‘Woodcutters’ is a common metaphor in Zen Buddhism for disciples who are still working 
on cutting the roots of their past karma. ‘The carpenter’ is an allusion to Enkan as a spiritual 
master artisan. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


388 


The Master asked, “In what way is It different?” 

The monk replied, “Baso now says, ‘What is not mind is not 
Buddha.”’ 

The Master responded, “That old fellow! I swear there is no end 
to his bewildering people! Even if that ‘What is not mind is not 
Buddha’ of his is so, well. I’ll stick with ‘Your very mind is Buddha.’” 

When the monk reported to Baso what Hojo had said, Baso 
replied, “The Plum has fully ripened.” 22 

This story is known by all, commoners and gentry alike. 

Tenryu was a leading disciple of Master Hojo, and Gutei was the Master’s 
Dharma grandson. The Korean monk Kachi received the Transmission of the 
Master’s Dharma and became the First Ancestor of his own country. All the Korean 
Masters today are Hojo’s distant descendants. 

During his lifetime, a tiger and an elephant served him, and they did it 
without quarreling between themselves. After the Master’s parinirvana, the tiger 
and the elephant gathered stones and mud, and built a stupa* for their Master. That 
stupa exists in Gosho-ji Temple even now. The Master’s ceaseless practice has 
been extolled by good spiritual friends of the past and present alike. Those with 
limited wisdom do not recognize that they should praise his practice. To hold on 
tenaciously to the notion that Buddha Dharma can surely be found even amidst 
one’s greed for fame and love of gain is a narrow, foolish view. 


Meditation Master Goso Hoen of once said: 

When my Master’s Master first took up residence on Mount 
Yogi, the rafters of the old buildings were in ruins and the damage 
from wind and rain was extensive. It was midwinter at the time. The 
temple halls throughout the monastery had long been damaged. The 
Monks’ Hall was especially dilapidated. The snow kept drifting in, 
and it so filled the floors that there was nowhere for the monks to sit. 
Veteran monks, their hair white with age, were sweeping the snow off 
everything, including themselves, and shaggy eyebrowed monks of 
venerable years looked as though those brows were knitted with 
apprehension. The monks of the community were unable to do their 
seated meditation tranquilly. 


22. The name Daibai in Daibai Hojo’s name means the ‘Great Plum Tree’. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


389 


When one patch-robed monk asked in all sincerity whether 
repairs might be made, the old Master turned down the request, 
saying, “Our Buddha has said that this period of time corresponds to 
the degenerate eon, and that even high cliffs and deep valleys shift and 
change, never remaining constant. So, how can we possibly seek to 
sate ourselves by fulfilling our every wish? The saintly ones of olden 
times, for the most part, did their walking meditation on bare ground 
beneath the trees. This was the ancient and exemplary way of practice, 
a profound custom that went far beyond simply the form of walking. 

You have all left home life behind in order to pursue the Way, but you 
still have not learned how to use your hands and feet harmoniously. A 
monk’s life lasts barely some forty or fifty years. Who has time to 
waste in vain pursuits, such as making ostentatious buildings?” So, 
the upshot was that he did not go along with the request. 

The next day, in giving Teaching in the Dharma Hall, Goso gave instruction 
to his assembly, saying: 

When Yogi first came to reside here as Abbot, the roofs and 
walls of the buildings had fallen into such neglect that the floors were 
completely covered with drifts of snow. We hunched up our necks and 
grumbled in the gloom. But then, with a change of heart, we recalled 
the old ones who had resided under trees. 

Ultimately he never gave his permission for repairs, yet, even so, many itinerant 
monks from the Four Oceans and Five Lakes, clothed in their cloud-like robes and 
their mist-like sleeves, later asked to hang up their traveling staff in his 
community. 23 We should delight in the fact that there have so many who were avid 
for the Way. We would do well to engrave these words of Goso on our hearts and 
to impress them on our bodies. 

Our Venerable Master Goso Hoen once gave Teaching, saying, “Practice is 
not something that lies beyond thoughts and feelings, and thoughts and feelings are 
not things that lie beyond practice.” Give great weight to these words. Ponder upon 
them day and night; put them into practice from dawn to dusk. Do not allow 
yourself to be vainly blown about in all directions by the gusting winds. How much 
less could those who have left home life behind to pursue the Way possibly live a 
quiet, secluded life amidst luxurious accommodations! In Japan today, even the 


23. ‘The Five Lakes’ is an allusion to China, whereas ‘the Four Oceans’ refers to the rest of the 
world. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


390 


‘palatial homes’ of royalty and their ministers are hardly splendorous, but are 
merely thatched cottages which are falling to pieces. If someone has obtained a 
luxurious estate, chances are it came from a wrong livelihood; it is rarely obtained 
from a pure one. A building that is already there is a different matter, but do not 
make plans for new constructions. Thatched hermitages and cottages were where 
the saintly ones of old dwelt; they are residences esteemed by the saintly ones of 
the past. Today’s trainees should wish to be the same when exploring the Matter 
through their training, so do not make a mistake about this. 

The Yellow Emperor and other Chinese emperors such as Yao and Shun 
were secular people, yet they lived in thatched houses and were an example for 
their nation. In a book by the Chinese writer Shih-tsu it says, “If you wish to see 
the practice of the Yellow Emperor, take a look at Hekung Palace. If you wish to 
see the practice of the emperors Yao and Shun, take a look at Tsung-ts’ao Palace. 
The Yellow Emperor’s reception hall in Hekung Palace was roofed with thatch. 
Emperor Shun’s reception hall in Tsung-ts’ao Palace was also roofed with thatch.” 
Keep in mind that both Hekung and Tsung-ts’ao were thatched with straw. 

Now, when we compare the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Yao, and Emperor 
Shun with ourselves, the difference is as great as that between heaven and earth. 
Even so, they used straw thatch for their reception halls. When even secular people 
reside in thatched dwellings, how can those who have left home life behind to be 
monks possibly aim at dwelling in lofty halls or elegant mansions? How 
unbecoming that would be! People of old would dwell under a tree or live in a 
forest, for these were the residences that both laymen and monks desired. The 
Yellow Emperor was a disciple of the Taoist Kuang-cheng of Mount Kung-tung. 
Kuang-cheng himself lived in a cave within Kung-tung Mountain. Today in Great 
Sung China, many heads of state and high-ranking ministers have carried on with 
this significant custom of emperors. As a consequence, even secular folk moiling 
about in their delusions do the same. How could those who have left home life 
behind to be monks possibly be inferior to secular folk who moil about in their 
delusions, or be as muddied by defiling passions as such folk? Among the Buddhas 
and Ancestors of the past, many received offerings of alms from celestial beings. 
Even so, once They had realized the Way, the eyes of the celestial beings could not 
see Them, and demons had no way to find Them. 

We need to clarify this point. When celestial beings and demons keep to the 
daily conduct of Buddhas and Ancestors, they have a path by which they can 
approach the Buddhas and Ancestors. And, in that Buddhas and Ancestors far 
surpass celestial beings and demons, such celestial beings and demons have 
nothing by which to look up at Those who are so far off, so it is difficult for them 
to approach the vicinity of an Ancestor of the Buddha. As Nansen once said about 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


391 


himself, “The training and practice of this old monk has lacked vigor, so I have 
been spotted by demons.” Remember, to be spotted by a demon who has done no 
training is due to your lacking vigor in your own training and practice. 


Once, in the community of the Venerable Monk Wanshi Shogaku of the 
Great White Mountain, one of the guardian deities said, “I heard that the Venerable 
Monk Wanshi has been residing on this mountain for over ten years, but whenever 
I have come to the Abbot’s reception room to try to see him, I am never able to 
enter and still do not know what he looks like.” Here, truly, we can see evidence of 
an exemplary person who has realized the Way. His temple on Mount Tendo was 
originally a small one." While the Venerable Monk Wanshi was in residence there, 
he refurbished what had once been a Taoists’ shrine, a female monks’ temple, and a 
scholars’ temple, and turned them into what is now Keitoku-ji Temple. 

After the Master’s death, the court secretary Wang Pai-hsiang compiled a 
record of the practices and deeds of the Master. A person once said to him, “You 
should have recorded the fact that the Master usurped a Taoist shrine, a female 
monks’ temple, and a scholars’ temple in establishing the present-day temple on 
Mount Tendo.” Pai-hsiang replied, “No way! Such matters are not relevant to the 
merits of a monk.” Many people at that time praised Pai-hsiang for this. Keep in 
mind that questions such as the one asked above are a function of secular thinking 

9 S 

and are not relevant to the merits of a monk." 

Speaking more generally, from the very first moment that we begin to walk 
on the Buddha’s Way, we far surpass the three worlds of desire, form, and beyond 
form that ordinary people and those in lofty positions occupy. You should closely 
investigate the fact that Wanshi was not being manipulated by the three worlds, nor 


24. Mount Tendo is an alternative name for the Great White Mountain and for the temple which 
stands on it. 

25. When Wanshi arrived, his small temple was in great disrepair. He renovated it and 
appropriated the three abandoned buildings mentioned to fonn the core of his monastery, 
which, in time, came to house some twelve hundred monks. In Wanshi’s day, making use of 
abandoned non-Zen temples was a widespread practice by Zen monks, due to the 
phenomenal expansion of the Zen tradition and the rapid decline in support for other 
Buddhist traditions as well as for Taoism. Since the buildings, in effect, no longer belonged 
to anyone or to any organization, the term ‘usurped’ is inappropriate, deliberately insulting, 
and inaccurate. Wanshi simply made good spiritual use of something that had been 
abandoned or discarded—a common practice in Buddhism which can be most widely seen 
in the monks’ use of discarded cloth to make monastic robes. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


392 


was he visible to the three worlds. You should do your utmost to thoroughly 
explore through your training the arising of body, speech, and mind, along with 
your inner experiences and the outer conditions that affect you. From the start, the 
meritorious activity of the Buddhas and Ancestors has great benefit in spiritually 
helping ordinary people as well as those in lofty positions. Even so, such people do 
not recognize that the ceaseless practice of Buddhas and Ancestors is helping to 
rescue them from their suffering. In ceaselessly practicing the Great Way of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors now, do not get into discussions about great hermits and 
small hermits. 26 Do not talk about someone’s being sharp-witted or thick-headed. 
Simply discard fame and gain forever and do not get all tied up in worldly things. 
Do not let time slip away. Put out the fire that is burning atop your head. Do not 
wait for some great enlightenment experience, for the great enlightenment is 
synonymous with our everyday tea and meals. Do not aspire to ‘non- 
enlightenment’, for non-enlightenment is synonymous with the precious pearl 
concealed within the king’s topknot. 28 Simply, should you be attached to home and 
homeland, separate yourself from ‘my home and my homeland’. Should you have 
bonds of affection, separate yourself from ‘my bonds of affection’. Should you 
have a good reputation, rid yourself of ‘my reputation’. Should you have wealth, 
rid yourself of ‘my wealth’. Should you own cultivated fields and gardens, rid 
yourself of ‘my cultivated fields and gardens’. Should you have family, separate 
yourself from ‘my family’. And you need to let go of ‘my not having such things as 
fame and gain’, as well. In ridding yourself completely of ‘I have’, the principle of 
also ridding yourself of ‘I do not have’ is clear. This is nothing other than the 
matter of ceaseless practice. Your letting go of fame and gain throughout your 
whole lifetime will be your ceaselessly putting into practice the One Matter, for it 
is this ceaseless practice that is as endless as the life of Buddha. Once you have 
established this ceaseless practice here and now, your ceaseless practice will be 
done by the ceaseless practice itself. And, you should love and respect your body 
and mind which are imbued with this ceaseless practice. 


26. An allusion to a poem by the Chinese poet Haku Rakuten: 

Great hermits dwell in courts and frequent market places; 

Little hermits go off into the hills or hide behind some bamboo fence. 

27. A widely used Zen metaphor, alluding to an intense, single-minded effort to train, just as if 
your head were on fire and you were trying to put the fire out. 

28. An allusion to a passage in the Lotus Scripture, in which the Buddha’s Teaching of the 
Dharma is likened to a king giving someone a precious jewel which he has kept concealed in 
his topknot. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


393 


djb 

CX) 

Meditation Master Daiji Kanchu once said, “Explaining what one yard is 
cannot compare with putting one foot into action, and explaining what one foot is 
cannot compare with putting one inch into action.” This sounds like Kanchu was 
admonishing people of his time who were being negligent in their ceaseless 
practice and who had forgotten about mastering the Buddha’s Way. But it does not 
mean that it is incorrect to explain what one yard is: it means that putting one foot 
into practice takes more skill than explaining what one yard is. Why should we be 
limited to measurements in yards and feet? There could also be discussions about 
the comparative merits of far-off Mount Sumeru and a poppy seed. Sumeru is 
completely whole and a poppy seed is completely whole. The important point in 
ceaseless practice is just like this. The present explanation is not the way Kanchu 
put it, and it is the way Kanchu put it. 


Great Master Tozan Gohon once said, “I put into words what I am unable to 
demonstrate by action, and I demonstrate by action what I am unable to put into 
words.” This is the way a lofty Ancestor put it. His point is that his practice 
illumines the path that makes understandable what he has put in words, and his 
explanations have pathways that make understandable what he does as practice. 
Hence, what he preached in a day is what he practiced in a day. The point of this is 
that we practice that which is difficult to practice, and we explain that which is 
difficult to explain. 

djb 


Ungo Doyo, having penetrated through and through what Tozan had 
expressed, said, “At the time for explanation, there is no path for practice: at the 
time for practice, there is no path for explanation.” This way of putting it is not 
saying that there is no practice or explanation. His ‘time for explanation’ is 
synonymous with one’s ‘not leaving the monastery even once in a lifetime’. His 
‘time for practice’ is synonymous with the hermit’s washing his head and then 
coming before Seppo. Do not disregard or treat lightly his expression, “At the 
time for explanation, there is no path for practice: at the time for practice, there is 


29. The allusions to not leaving the monastery and to the hermit’s washing his head will be 
explored in detail by Dogen later in Discourse 38: On Expressing What One Has Realized 
(. Dotoku ). 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


394 


no path for explanation.” This is something that Buddhas and Ancestors of the past 
have continually asserted. It was once expressed in verse as: 

Were you to live a hundred years 

Yet fail to see what the Nature of all Buddhas is, 

It would still not equal living even one day, 

Having rightly grasped the Matter. 

This is not something that one or two Buddhas have said: it is what all Buddhas are 
continually putting into words and putting into practice. Within the recurring 
cycles of birth and death over hundreds and thousands of myriad eons, one day in 
which there is ceaseless practice is a bright pearl within the topknot of the king: it 
is the Ancient Mirror within which we are bom and die, and it is a day we should 
rejoice in. The strength of our ceaseless practice is a joy in itself. Those who have 
not yet attained the strength of ceaseless practice or received the Bones and 
Marrow of an Ancestor of the Buddha do not prize the Body and Mind of Buddhas 
and Ancestors or take delight in the Tme Face of Buddhas and Ancestors. 

The tme Face, Bones, and Marrow of Buddhas and Ancestors is not some 
thing that departs. It is a Tathagata’s having come in this way and having gone in 
that way. It is beyond some thing that comes. Even so, we invariably receive our 
allotment of spiritual nourishment through our ceaseless practice of one day. 

Thus, a single day must be of great importance. Were you to live in idleness 
for a hundred years, you would regret the days and months you had wasted, and 
you would be a shell of a person, one to be pitied. Even if you were to gorge 
yourself as a slave to sight and sound for a hundred years, yet within that time you 
performed ceaseless practice for just one single day, not only would you be putting 
your whole life of a hundred years into the practice, you would also be helping 
ferry other hundred-year-old beings to the Other Shore. Your life of this one day is 
the life you should cherish, the skeleton you should prize. Thus, if your life were to 
last but a single day, if on that day you grasped what the Nature of all the Buddhas 
is, then that life of one day would have surpassed many lifetimes spanning vast 
eons. So, if you have not yet grasped the Matter, do not squander one day idly. This 
one day of ceaseless practice is a precious jewel that you should prize. Do not 
compare it with the value of some foot-wide gem, and never exchange it, even for 
the Black Dragon’s Jewel. Sages of old prized it even more than their whole life. 

Quietly think about it. You can ask for the Black Dragon’s Jewel at any time, 
and can even get possession of a foot-wide gem along the way, but one day within 


30. The Black Dragon’s Jewel, which It holds under Its jaw, is a common Buddhist metaphor for 
the Buddha Dhanna. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


395 


a lifetime of a hundred years, once gone, cannot come again a second time. Is there 
any skillful means by which we can have returned to us even one day that has 
passed? That is something you do not find recorded in any book. Those who do not 
idly let time pass by wrap up their days and months in that skin bag* of theirs so 
that the time will not leak away. This is why the saints of old and the former sages 
prized their days and months; they prized time more than they prized their own 
eyes and prized it more than their native land. To idly let time pass by means to be 
polluted and corrupted by the transient world of fame and gain. To not idly let time 
pass by means to act for the sake of the Path whilst being on the Path. 

One who has already completely grasped the Matter will not let a day idly go 
by, but will do the practice for the sake of the Way and will explain the Way for the 
sake of the Way. Because of this, we have come to know the standards set by the 
Buddhas and Ancestors from ancient times, who did not vainly squander the efforts 
of even one day. This is something you should constantly reflect on. You should 
consider it even as you sit by a window, looking out on some slowly blossoming 
spring day, and do not forget it even as you sit in a humble abode on some desolate 
rainy night. How does time rob us of our efforts? Not only does it rob us of one 
day, it also robs us of the merits of many eons. What animosity is there between 
time and us? Sad to say, it will be our own lack of practice that robs us so. This is 
due to our not being on friendly terms with ourselves, to our thinking ill of 
ourselves. Even Buddhas and Ancestors have not been without Their loved ones, 
but They have let them go. Even Buddhas and Ancestors have not been without 
Their various involvements, but They have let them go. Even though we prize our 
relationships, such connections between ourselves and others are not things that 
can be held onto, so if we do not let go of our loved ones, chances are that our 
loved ones will let go of us, both in word and in deed. If you can have compassion 
for your loved ones, have compassion for them. To have compassion for our loved 
ones means letting go of them. 

djb 


When the Venerable Monk Nangaku Ejo was training under Daikan Eno, he 
attended on Eno for fifteen autumns. As a consequence, it was possible for him to 
be given the Transmission of the Dharma and the Precepts personally, just as if 
water from one vessel were being poured into another vessel. We should most 
dearly cherish the everyday behavior of this former Ancestor. The winds and frosts 
that plagued him during those fifteen autumns must have been many indeed. Even 
so, he persisted in practicing the Way purely and simply, and he is a paragon for us 
trainees of the present day. In winter, he slept alone in an empty hall with no coal 
for his stove. In the cool of summer nights, he would sit alone by his moon-lit 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


396 


window having no candle. Even though he did not know everything and 
understood only half of what he knew, he had nothing further to learn about non¬ 
attachment. This was surely due to his ceaseless practice. 

Speaking more generally, once we have discarded our greed for fame and 
our love of gain, it is simply a matter of striving to do the practice ceaselessly, day 
after day. Do not disregard this intention. Nangaku’s saying, “When you explain 
what something is like, you have already missed the bull’s-eye,” reflects eight 
years of his ceaseless practice. It is this ceaseless practice that people of both past 
and present treat as rare and that both the clever and the inept earnestly desire. 


While Great Master Kyogen Chikan was cultivating his practice under Isan, 
he tried several times to give expression to the Way but was unable to do so. 
Deploring this, he burned his books and became the monk who served gruel and 
rice to his fellow monks, and so he passed his years, month after month. He later 
went to Mount Buto in search of old traces of National Teacher Echu. He built a 
thatched hermit’s hut and, casting everything aside, he lived tranquilly and apart 
from human society. 

One day, when he was sweeping off his walkway, he happened to hit a 
pebble, which struck a cane of bamboo. Upon hearing the sound it made, he 
suddenly realized the Way. He then took up residence as Abbot of Kyogen-ji 
Temple, where it was his wont never to replace his one alms bowl and his one set 
of clothes. He dwelt amidst a landscape of strange rock formations and crystal 
springs, spending the rest of his life in secluded repose. Many traces of his practice 
still remain at his temple. It is said that it was his custom not to come down from 
the mountain. 

djb 

Great Master Rin z ai was a Dharma heir of Obaku. He was in Obaku’s 
community for three years, during which time he devoted himself purely to 
pursuing the Way. Upon instruction from the Venerable Bokushu Chin, he asked 
Obaku three times what the Great Intent of the Buddha Dharma is, whereupon he 
tasted the Master’s staff again and again, for sixty blows. Still, his determination 
did not flag. When he went to Daigu, under whom he had his Great Realization, it 
was at the instruction of both venerable monks, Obaku and Bokushu. When it 
comes to the great heroic figures who have inherited the Dharma seat of the First 
Chinese Ancestor, Rinzai and Tokusan are usually spoken of. Even so, how could 


31. Chin was also a Dharma heir of Obaku, and Rinzai’s senior. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


397 


Tokusan possibly be considered the equal of Rinzai? Truly, someone like Rinzai is 
not to be corralled with the herd. Those who have been considered outstanding in 
recent times cannot even compare with those who were in the herd during Rinzai’s 
time. It is said that his practices and deeds were pure and single-minded, and that 
his ceaseless practice was outstanding. Were we to try to imagine how many forms 
and how many ways his ceaseless practice had, none of us could come close to the 
mark. 

While Rinzai was residing with Obaku, he and Obaku took to 
planting pine and cedar trees together. On one occasion, Obaku asked 
him, “What is the use of planting so many trees here, deep in the 
mountains?” 

Rinzai replied, “First, to make something with a tasteful 
appearance for the benefit of the monastery, and second, to make 
signposts for the benefit of others coming later.” Thereupon, he took 
his hoe and struck the ground twice with it. 

Obaku held up his traveling staff and said, “You are like this 
now, but you have indeed already tasted thirty blows from my staff.” 

Rinzai gave out with a ho-hum sigh. 

Obaku said, “Our tradition will flourish in the world, with many 
coming to you.” 32 

So on the basis of this, we should realize that even after he had realized the Way, 
he brought along a hoe in his own hands for planting such things as cedars and 
pines. It may have been because of this that Obaku said, “Our tradition will 
flourish in the world, with many coming to you.” It must indeed be that the old 
traces of ‘the trainee who planted pines’ pointed directly to the one-to-one 
Transmission of Obaku and Rinzai. ” Obaku, likewise, planted trees alongside 
Rinzai. In the past, Obaku displayed the ceaseless practice of leaving his assembly 
behind and going off to mix in with the laborers at the Daian Training Temple 
where he cleansed the halls. He cleansed the Buddha Hall, as well as the Dharma 
Hall. He did not expect his ceaseless practice to cleanse his heart and mind and he 
did not expect his ceaseless practice to cleanse his innate brightness. It was around 
this time that he met Prime Minister P’ei. ’ 4 


32. This quotation is from the Sayings of Meditation Master Rinzai. 

33. ‘The trainee who planted pines’ is an epithet applied to the Fifth Chinese Ancestor, Daiman 
Konin. 

34. The Prime Minister subsequently became a lay disciple of Obaku. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


398 


djb 

CX) 

Emperor Hsiian-tsung of the T’ang dynasty was the second son of Emperor 
Hsien-tsung. From the time he was small, he was quick-witted and astute. He 
always loved sitting in full lotus position and was constantly doing seated 
meditation in the palace. Mu-tsung was Hsiian-tsung’s elder brother. After Mu- 
tsung had become emperor, once government business had concluded, Hsiian-tsung 
would playfully climb up on the imperial Dragon Throne and pretend that he was 
saluting various ministers. When the prime minister saw this, he thought Hsiian- 
tsung had cerebral palsy, and accordingly, reported this to Mu-tsung. When Mu- 
tsung saw his brother, he patted Hsiian-tsung on the head and said, “My little 
brother is the bright one in our family.” At the time, Hsiian-tsung had just turned 
thirteen. 

In the fourth year of the Tseng-ch’ing era (824 C.E.), Mu-tsung passed away 
peacefully. He was succeeded by his three sons. The first became Emperor Ching- 
tsung, the second became Emperor Wen-tsung, and the third became Emperor Wu- 
tsung. Ching-tsung succeeded his father to the throne and passed away three years 
later. Wen-tsung succeeded him to the throne for just one year before court 
ministers schemed to ease him out. When Wu-tsung ascended the throne, Hsiian- 
tsung, who had not yet ascended the throne, was residing in his nephew’s kingdom. 
Wu-tsung made a habit of referring to Hsiian-tsung as ‘my fool of an uncle’. Wu- 
tsung was emperor during the Hui-ch’ang era (841-846) and was the person who 
banned the Buddha Dharma. One day, Wu-tsung summoned Hsiian-tsung and 
ordered that he immediately be put to death for having climbed up onto the throne 
of Wu-tsung’s father in the past. His corpse was placed in a flower garden behind 
the palace and waste matter was poured over it, whereupon he came back to life. 

He then left his father’s land and secretly entered the community of 
Meditation Master Kyogen, where he shaved his head and became a novice. 
However, he did not take the full Precepts. 35 Making the rounds of temples along 
with Meditation Master Shikan, he arrived at Mount Rozan, whereupon Shikan 
composed a couplet on the topic of the local falls: 

Boring through cliffs, bursting through rock, never 
declining from its toil, 

By distant lands are seen the heights from which it 
falls. 


35. That is, when ordained as a novice he would have taken the Ten Great Precepts, but he had 
not yet gone so far in monastic training as to take the two hundred and fifty Vinaya Precepts 
or the Bodhisattva Precepts. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


399 


By this couplet, he was attempting to lure the novice into revealing just what kind 
of person he was spiritually. The novice continued this verse with the following: 

What can stem this valley torrent 
From surging back to the Ocean Great? 

Upon hearing this couplet, Shikan knew that the novice was no ordinary person. 36 

'in 

Sometime later, Hsiian-tsung entered the community of Enkan Saian, 
which was in the region of Hangchow, and was assigned to serve as the Abbot’s 
Chief Clerical Officer. At the time, Meditation Master Obaku was serving as 
Enkan’s Chief Priest. And, as a consequence, Hsiian-tsung sat on the platform next 
to Obaku. 

One day when Obaku had entered the Buddha Hall and was 
doing prostrations to the Buddha, Hsiian-tsung entered and asked him, 
“Since we are not to seek for anything based on an attachment to 
Buddha, or an attachment to the Dharma, or an attachment to the 
Sangha, what, pray, do you hope to accomplish, Venerable Monk, by 
doing prostrations?” 

Having been asked in this way, Obaku turned towards Hsiian- 
tsung, slapped him, and said, “I am not seeking anything due to an 
attachment to the Buddha, nor am I seeking anything due to an 
attachment to the Dharma, nor am I seeking anything due to an 
attachment to the Sangha. I am simply doing my prostrations just as I 
usually do them.” When he had finished speaking in this manner, with 
one hand he gave Hsiian-tsung another slap. 

The Clerical Officer said, “You play rough!” 

Obaku responded, “Right here is where the What resides! So 
why speak of rough or genteel?” Again, he gave Hsiian-tsung a slap 
with his hand, whereupon Hsiian-tsung silently took his leave. 


36. It was a common practice in China for a traveler, whether alone or with a companion, to 
compose a poem inspired by an encounter with a particularly beautiful scene. If one were 
accompanied, the companion was expected to supply a couplet to complete the traveler’s 
couplet. This custom was sometimes used by Zen Masters to test the spiritual attainments of 
a companion, someone who was usually a monk, but one who had not yet been declared a 
Master. 

37. In some versions of the text, Dogen comments that Enkan was later named as National 
Teacher by Hsiian-tsung when the latter become Emperor for a short while. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


400 


After the death of Emperor Wu-tsung, Hsiian-tsung returned to lay life and 
ascended the throne. He abolished Wu-tsung’s ban on the Buddha Dharma, and 
forthwith reinstated It. From the time of his ascending to the throne and throughout 
his reign, Hsiian-tsung was ever fond of doing seated meditation. Before he 
ascended to the throne, he had left the country of his father, the king, and was 
traveling the countryside, following the valley streams with Shikan, doing his 
utmost to practice the Way purely and simply. It is said that after he ascended to the 
throne, he did seated meditation day and night. Given that his father the king was 
already deceased, his elder brother the emperor had also passed away, and he 
himself been put to death by his own nephew, he truly resembled a destitute child 
worthy of our pity. Nevertheless, he did his utmost to pursue the Way with 
unswerving determination. His is an excellent example, wondrous and rare in the 
world. His ceaseless practice must have been open-hearted and spontaneous. 


After the venerable monk Seppo Gison had given rise to the intention to 
realize the Truth, he never neglected his seated meditation, day or night, regardless 
of where he was. And he did so even though the paths between the monasteries 
where he would hang up his traveling staff and the places that sheltered him upon 
his journey were far apart. From the time when he clearly manifested his True 
Nature by his founding his monastery on Mount Seppo, he did not let up on his 
practice, and he died whilst doing seated meditation. In earlier times, in order to 
put his spiritual questions to a Master, he climbed Tozan’s mountain nine times and 
visited Tosu Daido three times, which was his doing his utmost to pursue the Way. 
This is something wondrous and rare in the world. In promoting the integrity and 
rigor of ceaseless practice, many people today speak of Seppo’s lofty practice. 
Seppo’s attachments were on a par with those of other people, but his astuteness 
was not something that others could match. Ceaseless practice is like that. People 
who follow the Way today should learn from Seppo’s ceaseless practice of 
spiritually washing himself clean. When we quietly look back on Seppo’s physical 
exertion in exploring the Matter with Masters in all directions, truly, this must have 
been due to the merit that he inherited from some saintly bones in a previous life. 

When people today wish to enter the assembly of a Meditation Master who 
has realized the Way and ask their spiritual question in order to explore the Truth 
with such a one, it is extremely difficult for them to find a chance to do so. They 
are confronted not with just some twenty or thirty skin bags,* but with face after 
face of hundreds of thousands of people, all of whom are seeking the way back to 
their True Nature. The day on which a Master offers them a helping hand soon 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


401 


darkens into night, and the night that they spend pounding rice in their mortar soon 
brightens into another day. Sometimes, when the Master gives an informal talk, 
they act as though they lacked eyes and ears, and so they gain nothing from what 
they see and hear. When they are finally in possession of their eyes and ears, the 
Master has already finished what he has to say. While kind, elderly monks of great 
virtue are clapping their hands and loudly guffawing in their delight in the Dharma, 
it seems as though newly ordained novices rarely have a chance to even come in 
contact with their bowing mats. There are those who enter the Master’s private 
chambers and those who do not, and there are those who hear the Master’s promise 
of realizing enlightenment and those who do not. The days and nights pass even 
more swiftly than an arrow, and this dewdrop of a life is even more fragile than our 
body. There is the grief of having a Master yet being unable to explore the Matter 
through training with him, and there is the grief of wanting to explore the Matter 
yet being unable to find a Master. I have personally witnessed such situations as 
these. 

Although good spiritual friends may know a person well, the opportunities 
for contacting them when they themselves are diligently cultivating the Way are 
rare. It is likely that when Seppo, long ago, climbed up Mount Tozan and climbed 
up Mount Tosu, he too must surely have endured just such hardships. We should 
recognize the integrity of his ceaseless practice, which serves as an excellent 
model, for to fail to explore the Matter through your training with a Master is to be 
regretted indeed. 

djb 


It was at the behest of the Venerable Hannyatara that the First Ancestor of 
China came from the West to the Eastern lands. During the frosts and springs of his 
three years in sailing the seas, how could the winds and snows have been the only 
miseries? How the clouds and mists must have billowed up over the roiling waves! 
He was attempting to go to an unknown land. To do something like this would 
never have occurred to ordinary people who hold dearly to life and limb. This must 
have been due to his ceaseless practice that sprang from his great desire to 
earnestly Transmit the Dharma and to instruct those who are deluded by their 
passions. This was so because it was he himself who Transmitted the Dharma, and 
it was so because it is the whole universe that Transmits the Dharma, and it was so 
because the whole universe in all ten directions is the words and ways of Truth, and 
it was so because the whole universe in all ten directions is Bodhidharma himself, 
and it was so because the whole universe in all ten directions is the whole universe 
in all ten directions. What karmic conditions in any life are not like Shakyamuni’s 
royal palace, and what royal palace may not serve as a spiritual training ground? 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


402 


This is why he came from the West as he did. Because it was he himself who 
instructed those who are deluded by their passions, he had no fears or doubts, nor 
did he act from timidity or awe. Because it was the whole universe that instructed 
those who are deluded by their passions, he had no fears or doubts, nor did he act 
from timidity or awe. Leaving behind his father’s kingdom forever, he fitted out a 
large ship, crossed the southern seas, and arrived at Canton Province. Undoubtedly 
the crew was a large one and there were many monks to serve his needs, but 
chroniclers have failed to record this. Upon his reaching the shore, no one there 
knew him. It was the twenty-first day of the sixth lunar month in the eighth year of 
the Chinese P’u-t’ung era during the Liang dynasty (August 3, 527). The governor 
of Canton Province, a man named Hsiao-ang, made a show of extending to him all 
the courtesies of a host, giving him an audience and plying him with 
entertainments. Hsiao-ang then wrote an account to inform Emperor Wu about him, 
for Hsiao-ang was punctilious in his duties. When Emperor Wu saw the report, he 
was delighted and sent a messenger to invite Bodhidharma to pay him a visit. That 
was on the first day of the tenth lunar month of that year (November 9, 527). 

When the First Ancestor arrived at the city of Chinling, he had 
an audience with Emperor Wu of Liang, whereupon the emperor said 
to him, “Since the time when I ascended to the throne, I have so 
excelled in building temples, in copying the Scriptures, and in 
permitting both men and women to become monks that my deeds 
must be quite beyond anyone’s ability to keep a record of. So what 
merit have I accrued?” 

The Master replied, “There is no merit in any of these.” 

Dumbfounded, the emperor asked, “Why, pray, are they lacking 
in merit?” 

The Master replied, “Such deeds are merely the results achieved 
by ordinary people and those in lofty positions who follow the Lesser 
Course.* Such seeking after merit defiles one’s deeds. It is like a 
shadow following a form: even though it exists, it is not the real 
thing.” 

The emperor then asked, “What, pray, is true merit?” 

The Master answered, “One’s immaculately wise discernment 
being wondrous and fully realized, and one’s body being naturally 
unbounded and tranquil. Merit like this is not sought by the worldly- 
minded.” 

The emperor then asked, “What is the paramount Truth of the 
Holy Teachings?” 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


403 


The Master replied, “Since the Truth is devoid of any limits, It 
is beyond holiness.” 

The emperor then demanded, “And who, pray, is this one who 
is confronting my royal presence?” 

The Master replied, “I do not personally know that One.” 38 

The emperor had failed to awaken to what Bodhidharma was pointing to, 
and the Master realized that the occasion was not opportune. So, on the nineteenth 
day of the tenth lunar month (November 27), he snuck away to north of the 
Yangtze River and arrived at Loyang on the twenty-third day of the eleventh month 
of that year (December 31). He lodged temporarily at Shorin-ji Temple on Mount 
Suzan, where he sat all day long, silently facing a wall in meditation. The ruler of 
the Wei dynasty was spiritually confused and did not recognize who Bodhidharma 
was, and he did not even recognize that this failure was a reason for feeling shame. 

Bodhidharma was of the warrior caste of Southern India. He had lived in the 
royal palace of a large kingdom, so he was long accustomed to the ways of a royal 
palace in a large kingdom. In the manners and customs of small nations, there were 
habits and views that would prove shameful for an imperial ruler of a large nation, 
but the First Ancestor did not have a heart that was disturbed by such matters. He 
did not reject the country, nor did he reject its people. At that time, he did not 
respond to the slanders of Bodhiruchi or despise him for making them, nor did he 
find the evil-mindedness of the Vinaya Master Koto worth resenting or even 
paying heed to. 39 Even though Bodhidharma’s spiritual merits were great, the 
people of China looked upon him as if he were a conventional teacher of the 
Tripitaka and its commentaries, for they were befuddled due to their being 
followers of the Lesser Course. And there were some who thought that 
Bodhidharma was expounding a course of Dharma which they named ‘the Zen 
Sect’, and they believed that what was being taught by others—such as non- 
Buddhist scholars, for instance—and the True Teaching of the First Ancestor must 
surely be the same. These were the views of petty creatures who were helping to 
defile the Buddha Dharma. 


38. That is, my True Nature is beyond anything my intellect can directly know. 

39. During that time, there were two Indian scholars named Bodhiruchi: one was an eminent 
translator of Scriptures and the other was a scholar who was envious of Bodhidharma. It is 
the latter Bodhiruchi who is referred to here. The Chinese Vinaya Master Koto was a 
translator and writer of Scriptural commentaries. Both tried to discredit Bodhidharma’s 
focus on meditation practice, and it is said that both attempted to poison him. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


404 


The First Chinese Ancestor was the twenty-eighth in the line of Shakyamuni 
Buddha’s direct heirs. Fie left the large realm of his father the king in order to 
spiritually help sentient beings in the East. Who could stand head-and-shoulders 
with him? If the Ancestral Master had not come from the West, how could sentient 
beings in the East have possibly learned of the Buddha’s True Teaching? They 
would only have distressed themselves—and to no avail—with ‘the grit and stones’ 
from which we fashion the names and forms we give things. 40 Even those today in 
the hinterlands or in some even more distant realm, like ours, where people clothe 
themselves in fur and adorn their heads with horns, have been able to hear the True 
Teaching to Its utmost. Today, even peasants and farmers, old country folk and 
village children leam of It, and all due to having been spiritually rescued through 
the Ancestral Master’s ceaseless practice in crossing the seas. The cultures of India 
and China differ greatly as to what they are superior or inferior in, and there are 
vast differences as to what their local customs consider to be morally upright or 
depraved. China was not a place to which a great saintly person who had been 
Transmitted and who was keeping to the Teaching and the Scriptures would 
normally go, unless he was someone of great compassion and great enduring 
strength. There were no Meditation Halls in which he could reside, and those who 
recognized ‘such a person’ were few. So he hung up his traveling staff at Mount 
Suzan for a stay of nine years. People called him ‘the Brahman who looks at a 
wall’. 41 Chroniclers have included him among the ranks of those learning how to 
meditate, but this is not the way it was. He and he alone was the Ancestral Master 
who possessed the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching which had been 
Transmitted to him through Buddha after Buddha and heir after heir. 


The following quotation is from the Forest Records , compiled by Shih-men: 

Bodhidharma first went from the kingdom of Liang to the 
kingdom of Wei. He traveled to the foot of Mount Suzan and rested 
his traveling staff at Shorin-ji Temple. He simply sat in stillness, 
facing a wall: he was not engaged in learning how to meditate. For a 


40. The ‘grit and stones’ is another way of saying the ‘tiles and stones’ with which our mind 
builds its discriminative ‘walls and fences’. 

41. Dogen makes a distinction between what people literally saw when they looked at 
Bodhidharma sitting in front of a wall and what Dogen earlier described as Bodhidhanna’s 
‘facing a wall as he sat silently in meditation’, which carries the figurative connotation of 
facing the walls of his own mind. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


405 


long time no one could figure out why he was doing that and, 
consequently, interpreted it as his learning how to meditate. 

Now, meditation in its narrow sense is simply one among 
various practices, so how could it suffice to say that this was all there 
was to the Saintly One? Yet, people of his time did just that. Those 
engaged in making chronicles followed suit and reported him as being 
among the ranks of those learning how to meditate and grouped him 
with people who are as dead trees or cold ashes. 42 Even so, the Saintly 
One’s practice did not simply stop at doing meditation; he also did not 
act contrary to meditation. And even with the yin and yang described 
in the Book of Changes, he did not act contrary to yin and yang. 

When Emperor Wu of Liang first met Bodhidharma, he asked 
him, “What is the paramount Truth of the Holy Teachings?” 

The Master replied, “Since the Truth is devoid of any limits, It 
is beyond holiness.” 

The emperor went on to ask, “And who, pray, is this one who is 
confronting our royal presence?” 

And the Master replied, “I do not personally know that One.” 

If Bodhidharma had not been fluent in the local language, how 
could the discussion have gone like this at that time? 43 

It is clear from this that Bodhidharma went from the empire of Liang to that 
of Wei, that he traversed to Mount Suzan, and that he hung up his traveling staff at 
Shorin-ji. Even though he simply sat in stillness, facing a wall, it was not in order 
to Team how to meditate’. And even though he had not brought with him a single 
copy of a Scripture, he was the authentic Successor who came to Transmit the Tme 
Teaching. Be that as it may, chroniclers are not clear about the matter and, sad to 
say, list him among those learning how to meditate, which is the height of folly. 


42. ‘Dead trees and cold ashes’ is a common Zen Buddhist figure of speech for someone who 
has dropped off self. In the present context, it implies that Bodhidharma had gone just so far 
in his practice, but no further. 

43. Shih-men’s final remark may be in reference to an oft-held view that Bodhidharma sat at 
Shorin-ji Temple, silently staring at a wall, because he could not speak Chinese. 
Bodhidharma’s final remark, in particular, shows that he clearly knew the difference 
between the words pu chih (Modern Chinese: pu chih-tao) “I do not know” and pu shih 
(Modern Chinese: pu jen-shih ) “I do not know him.” This is analogous to the differences 
between the German ‘Ich weiss nicht ’ and ‘Ich kenne ihn nicht ’, or between the French ‘Je 
ne sais pas ’ and ‘Je ne le connais pas ’. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


406 


Thus it was that, while he was doing his walking meditation, there was a dog 
who would yap at the Great One. 44 Alas, that too was the height of folly. How 
could anyone with a heart possibly take lightly their indebtedness to the Master for 
his compassion? How could anyone with a heart possibly fail to repay this 
indebtedness? There are many people who do not forget their indebtedness to the 
world in which they live and who treat it responsibly: we call them human beings. 
The great indebtedness that we owe to our Ancestral Master surely surpasses that 
which we owe to our parents, so do not compare the beneficent love of the 
Ancestral Master with that of a parent for a child. 

Should people become concerned about the humbleness of their status, they 
may feel fear over not having visited China, not having been bom in China, not 
knowing any saintly person, never having met a sage, and not having anyone 
around them who has ever risen to a lofty position. Their human mind is wholly 
befuddled due to such misgivings. Since the dawn of history, there has been no one 
in our country who has changed his worldly habits, nor do we hear of a time when 
our country was cleansed of them. This is due to our not knowing what ‘clean’ 
means or what ‘muddied’ means. We are like this due to our being in the dark about 
what the causes and effects of the two princely powers and the three universal 
powers are, to say nothing of our ignorance of the waxing and waning of the five 
elements of wind, fire, earth, metal, and water. 45 This folly of ours is due to our 
being in the dark about the sounds we hear and the forms that are right before our 
eyes. And this darkness is due to our ignorance of the Scriptures and our lack of a 
teacher of Scriptures. Our lacking such a teacher means that we do not know how 
many dozens of Scriptural texts there are, or how many hundreds of poems or 
thousands of sayings there are in these texts, or, if we read just the commentaries 
on some text, how many thousands of poems or tens of thousands of sayings they 
may contain. People who know the ancient Scriptures and have read the ancient 
texts have been inclined to venerate the Ancient Ones. If we have a heart that 
venerates the Ancient Ones, then the ancient Scriptures will manifest before our 
very eyes. 

Both the founder of the Han dynasty and the founder of the Wei dynasty 
were emperors who clearly understood the poems that astrological events 


44. The larger context implies that ‘dog’ here refers not to an animal but to a person who is 
constantly breaking Precepts. 

45. The two princely powers are the authority of a ruler to bestow rewards and to mete out 
punishments. The three universal powers are associated with the heavens, the earth, and 
human beings. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


407 


expressed and who could read the lay of the land. When people clearly understand 
classic texts such as these, then they have a bit of understanding of the three 
powers: heavenly, earthly, and human. Folks of our country, never having been 
ruled by saintly lords like these, do not know how to serve a lord or even how to 
serve one’s parents. As a result, they are pitiful as subjects of a lord, and pitiful as 
members of their family clan. Whether they are ministers or children, they vainly 
pass by jewels a foot-wide in span and squander moments of time to no purpose. 
No one born into family clans like these has yet had an important national office 
conferred upon him. They even prize insignificant government positions. This is 
how it is in confused times like ours; in saner times, behavior like this was rare 
indeed. While we are cherishing lowly lives like these in a remote land such as this 
one, we may chance to hear the True Teaching of the Tathagata; how then could we 
possibly have the heart to cling to these lowly lives? Were we to persist in clinging 
to them, for what purpose, pray, would we attempt to drop them off at a later date? 
Even if you were someone weighty and wise, you should not begrudge your life for 
the sake of the Dharma, so how much less should you begrudge a life that is mean 
and lowly! Even though it may be mean and lowly, if you unbegrudgingly abandon 
your life for the sake of the Way and the Dharma, you will be more hallowed than 
those in the highest heaven, more exalted than even a universal monarch. In sum, 
you will be more exalted than any celestial being, earthly deity, or sentient being 
within the worlds of desire, form, or beyond form. 

Our First Chinese Ancestor Bodhidharma, on the other hand, was the third 
son of the king of Koshi in Southern India. Thus, He was already an imperial 
prince in the royal bloodline of India. In China and its bordering nations, which 
should have shown respect for his nobility and dignity, people did not yet know the 
forms of etiquette by which they should attend on him. There was no incense or 
flowers. They were remiss in supplying him with a cushion to sit on and the temple 
accommodations were wretched. How much worse it would have been in our 
country, a remote island with enormous crags! How could we possibly know the 
customs by which one pays respect to the ruler of a large country? Even if we tried 
to imitate them, they would be too intricate for us to comprehend, since those 
customs might well be different for noblemen and for imperial personages, and 
expressions of respect for them might have varying degrees of formality, but we 
would not know how to distinguish among them. When we do not know the value 
of a person, we do not support and take responsibility for that being, and when we 
do not support and take responsibility for a person, we need foremost to clarify the 
value of that being. 

Our First Chinese Ancestor Bodhidharma was the twenty-eighth successor to 
the Dharma of Shakyamuni. Once he had entered the Way, he became more and 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


408 


more impressive. The reason that such a great and revered saint did not spare his 
life in following his Master’s instructions was so that he might Transmit the 
Dharma and rescue living beings. In China, before the First Ancestor came from 
the West, no one had ever encountered a disciple of the Buddha who had received 
the one-to-one Transmission from Successor to Successor, no Ancestor had given 
the Face-to-Face Transmission from Successor to Successor, and no one had ever 
encountered a Buddha. And even after that time, apart from the distant descendants 
of the First Chinese Ancestor, no one could be found who had ever come from the 
West. The flowering of an udumbara blossom once every three thousand years is 
easy to predict: one need only count the months and years left before it blooms, but 
the First Ancestor’s coming from the West will not happen a second time. At the 
same time, that bunch who mistakenly call themselves distant descendants of the 
Ancestral Master are besotted, like that great fool in the Kingdom of Ch’u who was 
unable to tell the difference between a jewel and a stone. 46 And, due to their dearth 
of knowledge and shallow understanding, they have fancied that even pedantic 
teachers of Scriptures and cerebral scholars could stand shoulder-to-shoulder with 
the Master. Those who failed to plant the genuine seeds of spiritual wisdom in past 
lives do not become descendants in the Way of the Ancestors, for they have idly 
wandered off onto the false path of names and forms, and are to be pitied. 

There were people who were still going to India after the P’u-t’ung era of 
the Liang dynasty, and for what? This was foolishness in the extreme. Depending 
on how their bad karma led them, they wandered about in foreign countries. Step 
by step, they proceeded down false paths that were an insult to the Dharma; step by 
step, they were running away from their Father’s True Home. And what, pray, was 
gained by their going off to India? Nothing but suffering the hardships from 
crossing great mountains and obstructing waters. Without examining the principle 
that India had already come to the East, they did not clearly see what the eastern 
advance of the Buddha Dharma was, so that they futilely wandered about, lost in 
the labyrinths of India. Although they had a reputation for seeking the Buddha 
Dharma, they lacked an earnest desire for the Way-seeking Mind, so that they did 
not meet any genuine Masters in India, and vainly encountered only pedantic 
teachers of Scriptures and cerebral scholars. Even though genuine Masters were 
still present in India, these travelers lacked the true spirit that seeks the True 
Teaching, and, as a result, the True Teaching did not come within their grasp. Some 
claimed that they had met a genuine Master upon their arrival in India, but we have 


46. ‘The great fool’ is a reference to the king of the ancient Chinese kingdom of Ch’u who, 
when presented with a large uncut jewel, rejected it because he thought it was just a big 
stone. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


409 


yet to hear who those Masters were. Had they met genuine Masters, they would 
naturally have named names, but there have been no such names mentioned 
because there were no such encounters. 

Further, after our Ancestral Master came from the West, there were many 
monks in China who relied on a mundane understanding of the Scriptures and 
commentaries, and thus failed to encounter the True Teaching. Even though they 
may have read the Scriptures and commentaries, they were still in the dark as to 
Their meaning and purpose. These blind deeds were due not only to the force of 
their karma from the present but also to the force of bad karma from their past 
lives. During this lifetime of theirs, they have not heard what the Tathagata’s keys 
to the Truth are, nor have they encountered the Tathagata’s True Teaching, nor have 
they been illumined by the Tathagata’s face-to-face Transmission, nor do they 
employ the Tathagata’s Buddha Mind, nor have they heard of the tradition of the 
Buddhas. What a sad life theirs must be! In the Sui, T’ang, and Sung dynasties in 
China, people like that were plentiful. To put it simply, only people who have 
planted the seed of wisdom in past lives have become the distant descendants of 
the Ancestral Master. Some have entered via the gate of training without 
expectations, and others by letting go of their preoccupation with counting grains 
of sand. All of them are bright-minded trainees, trainees most capable of 
understanding, and genuine seeds of a ‘real person’. For ever so long, befuddled 
and ignorant folks have merely taken up lodging in the thatched hut of the 
Scriptures and commentaries. At the same time, the Master did not quit in the face 
of dangerous frontiers, nor did he avoid them. If we today who still revere the 
profound principle of our First Ancestor’s coming from the West should, 
nevertheless, be sparing of these stinking skin bags we call ourselves, what, 
ultimately, would be the purpose of that? 


Zen Master Kyogen once said in verse: 

A hundred plans, a thousand schemes 
All made just for this self of ours alone, 
As though this body could yet evade 
Its future in some dusty grave. 

Say not that white-haired corpses mute 
Take all their secrets to their tombs. 
For they are the ones who fully know 
What death s domain is all about. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


410 


Accordingly, even though we make a hundred plans and a thousand schemes to 
hold onto our self, as he said, yet ultimately we are reduced to dust within some 
burial mound. How much worse to have countless bodies and minds uselessly 
endure untold thousands of hardships and myriad miseries whilst galloping off east 
and west in the service of the ruler or citizenry of some small nation! Following 
custom, some of our people hold their own existence lightly, being unable to 
forego committing ritual suicide upon the death of their lord. The journey ahead for 
those who are driven by such a sense of obligation will be filled with obscuring 
mists and clouds. 

Since ancient times, there have been many who have thrown away life and 
limb as ordinary citizens in the employ of some minor official. These were human 
bodies that should have been treasured because they could have been vessels for 
the Way. Now that you have encountered the True Teaching, you should explore 
the True Teaching through your training, even though you forsake lives as 
numerous as the hundreds of thousands of grains of sand in the Ganges. For which 
is it worthwhile to forsake life and limb: for some small-minded person or for the 
broad, vast, deep, and far-reaching Buddha Dharma? Neither the nimble nor the 
maladroit should be concerned with whether they are going forward or backward. 
Calmly reflect upon the fact that before the True Teaching had spread throughout 
the world, people could not encounter It, even if they had been willing to give up 
their own life for the sake of the True Teaching. They might well envy those of us 
today who have encountered the True Teaching. We should be ashamed to 
encounter the True Teaching and yet fail to give up life and limb for It. If we 
should be ashamed of anything, we should be ashamed of this failing. 

So, the only way to repay our great indebtedness to the Ancestral Master is 
by our ceaseless practice all day long. Pay no heed to your own existence. Do not 
cling to love and affection, which is more foolish than the behavior of birds and 
beasts. Even if you are attached to feelings of love, they will not remain with you 
over the long years. Do not remain dependent on your family’s standing within a 
clan, which is like so much rubbish. Should you remain like this, ultimately you 
will not have a tranquil and peaceful existence. The Buddhas and Ancestors of the 
past, being wise, all tossed aside the seven worldly treasures* and the thousand 
things they spawn, and They quickly abandoned Their jeweled palaces and scarlet- 
lacquered mansions as well. They viewed such things as if they were sweat and 
spittle; They looked upon them as though excrement and dirt. This is the model for 
recognizing and repaying one’s indebtedness by which all the Buddhas and 
Ancestors have habitually repaid the Buddhas and Ancestors of the past. Even the 
sick sparrow did not lose sight of his indebtedness and was able to repay it by 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


411 


47 

means of the three spheres of public office. Even the trapped turtle, not losing 
sight of his indebtedness, was able to repay it by means of Yofu’s seal. 48 What a 
pity it would be for someone to be even more foolish and dull-witted than beasts 
while having the face of a human being. 

In that we have encountered Buddha and heard the Dharma today, we are 
indebted for the loving-kindness evinced by the ceaseless practice of each and 
every Buddha and Ancestor. Had the Buddhas and Ancestors not directly 
Transmitted the Dharma to us, how could It possibly have reached us in the 
present? We should repay our indebtedness for even a single line of verse, and we 
should repay our indebtedness for even a single Teaching. How much more should 
we repay our immeasurable indebtedness for the unsurpassed great Dharma of the 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching! All day long, we should desire to 
give up our own lives, which have been as innumerable as the sands of the Ganges. 
In generation after generation, we should bow in deepest respect and make alms 
offerings to the bodies that we have abandoned for the sake of the Dharma. 
Together with all the celestial beings, dragons, and divine spirits, we should 
venerate and esteem these bodies, for they are something to protect and praise, 
because the principle of gratitude underlying this veneration is indispensable. 


The practice of the Brahmans who buy and sell skulls has long been reported 
in India. They have deeply revered the numerous, meritorious virtues of the skulls 
and bones of those who have hearkened to the Dharma. Now, if we do not give up 
our own lives for the sake of the Way, we will not attain the meritorious virtue of 
having heard the Teaching. If we hearken to the Dharma without giving a thought 
for life and limb, that hearing of the Dharma will fully ripen, and this skull of ours 
will be revered. The skull that we have not yet given up for the sake of the Way 
will one day be tossed in some vacant field and left to bleach in the sun. Who then 


47. A reference to a classic Chinese story concerning a boy who helped a sick sparrow recover 
and to whom the sparrow gave four silver rings as recompense, which ultimately led to the 
boy’s being appointed to three high government positions. 

48. A reference to a classic Chinese story in which a man rescued a trapped turtle. As the turtle 
swam off, it looked back over its shoulder to its benefactor, as if to acknowledge its 
indebtedness. Later, the man rose to a high official position, and, when the seal of his office 
was cast, it miraculously appeared in the form of a turtle looking over its back. No matter 
how many times the seal was recast to remove the form, it would nevertheless reappear on 
the seal. Finally, the man realized that somehow the turtle had played a part in his having 
received his appointment, so he kept the strange seal out of gratitude. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


412 


will bow out of respect for it? Who would buy or sell it as a relic? We surely would 
look back upon our attitude and spirit of today with regret. 

There was once a demon who angrily reduced his former bones to dust, and 
there was a celestial being who bowed in respect to his former bones. 49 When we 
think ahead to a time when, no matter what, we will be transformed into dust, those 
of us who had no attachments to craving in our present life will feel sympathy for 
others in the future. And this feeling of sympathy that is aroused may well be akin 
to the tears of an onlooker. Fortunately, by using our present skull—which will 
ultimately turn to dust and which people may well look upon with disgust—we can 
ceaselessly practice the True Teaching of the Buddha. For this reason, do not fear 
suffering from the cold, for suffering from the cold has yet to destroy anyone, nor 
has it ever destroyed the Way. Do not fear training, for not training is what destroys 
a person and what destroys the Way. Do not fear the heat of summer, for the heat of 
summer has yet to destroy anyone, nor has it ever destroyed the Way. Not training 
can well destroy both a person and the Way. The accepting of barley and the 
choosing of bracken, which involved both monks and laity, are excellent examples 
of this. 50 We should not copy hellish creatures and beasts by seeking for blood or 
seeking for milk. Simply, ceaseless practice all day long is precisely what the 
everyday practice of Buddhas is. 

djb 


Our great Ancestor Eka, the Second Chinese Ancestor, was of lofty virtue. 
He was a magnanimous and cultured person, adored by deities and daemons, both 
of whom were drawn to him. He was esteemed alike by followers of the Way and 
by the worldly. He resided for a long time between the rivers Ii and Lo, where he 
read extensively on a wide variety of subjects. He was considered to be a person 
rare in any country, one who is seldom encountered. Because of the loftiness of his 


49. The demon was angry with his fonner body because, due to the karmic consequences of that 
being’s breaking the Precepts, he was born into the suffering of the hells. On the other hand, 
the celestial being was grateful to his fonner body because, due to that being’s keeping the 
Precepts, he was born into the bliss of a heavenly state. 

50. ‘The accepting of barley’ refers to an incident in which the Buddha, along with many of his 
assembly, was invited to a feast. The host, however, got distracted and forgot to prepare the 
meal, so that all he could offer his guests was the barley that he kept stored for feeding his 
horses. Since the barley was offered with a pure heart, the Buddha and His monks accepted 
it without judgment. 

‘The choosing of bracken’ refers to a story of two noblemen who fled to the mountains 
after their country had been seized by a tyrannical warrior-king, since they preferred eating 
bracken as free men to eating the warrior-king’s millet as his slaves. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


413 


Dharma and the dignity of his virtuous ways, a strange and wondrous being 
suddenly appeared and said to him, “If you really desire to receive the fruits of 
your endeavors, why do you tarry here? The Great Way is not far off. Just go to the 
south.” 

The following day, the Ancestor suddenly had a stabbing headache. His 
teacher at the time, a teacher of meditation named Kozan Hojo of Dragon Gate 
Mountain in Loyang, was about to treat his condition when a voice from out of the 
blue said, “This is due to an altering of the skull and is not an ordinary headache.” 
Our Ancestor then told his teacher about his encounter with the strange and 
wondrous being. When the teacher looked at the top of Eka’s head, it was as if five 
peaks had blossomed forth, whereupon he said, “This feature of yours is an 
auspicious sign, and you will surely have an awakening to the Truth. This 
wondrous being’s telling you to go south is because Great Master Bodhidharma of 
Shorin-ji Temple is undoubtedly to be your Master.” Heeding these instructions, 
our Ancestor Eka then left in order to train with Bodhidharma, who was residing 
atop a remote mountain peak. As for the wondrous being, he was a guardian deity 
who, for a long time, had been doing his own training in the Way. 

The mid-winter weather was cold, for it is said to have been the night of the 
ninth day of the twelfth lunar month. Even if there had not been any great snowfall, 
a winter’s night deep in the mountains atop a high peak is not the time or place to 
be standing outside someone’s window, as you can well imagine, for it was that 
time of year which is so dreadfully cold that the joints of bamboo would split open. 
Notwithstanding that, a deep snow did indeed cover the earth, burying the 
mountains and concealing the peaks, as Eka sought his way, plowing through the 
drifts. How dangerous it must have been! He ultimately reached the Ancestor’s 
quarters, but the Ancestor did not give him permission to enter. Indeed, he did not 
even bother to turn around and look at him. That night, Eka never dozed off, or sat 
down, or took a respite. He stood firm, without moving, waiting for the dawn to 
break, as the night snow continued mercilessly on, piling up layer upon layer until 
it buried his waist. His tears froze upon his cheeks as they fell, drop by drop. 
Catching sight of his tears only led him to shed more tears, and reflecting upon 
himself only led him to reflect more deeply upon himself. He thought to himself, 
“In the past, some of those who sought the Way would break their bones to get at 
the Marrow, or prick open their Blood that they might succor those who hungered 
for It, or spread out their Hair to cover the mud, or throw themselves off cliffs to 
feed the Tiger. 51 Those of old were just like this. So what kind of person am I?” 


51. These allusions refer to various legends and past life stories. While they have often been 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


414 


Thinking in this way encouraged him to be more and more resolute. We 
trainees of today must not disregard his remark, “Those of old were just like this. 
So what kind of person am I?” The moment we lose sight of this, we sink into eon 
upon eon of delusion. By thinking in this way, his resolve to search for the Dharma 
and to seek the Way only intensified. In that he did not treat the purity that resulted 
from his cleansing himself in this way as ‘my being pure’, it was possible for him 
to be pure. 52 To surmise what that night of slow dawning was like is enough to 
break one’s innermost heart. The hairs on one’s body simply bristle with cold fear. 

Just as the dawn was breaking, the First Ancestor, taking pity on 
him, asked, “What do you seek that you have stood such a long time 
in the snow?” 

When Eka heard this, his sorrowful tears fell in greater 
profusion as he replied, “I simply ask that you, Venerable Monk, out 
of your great benevolence and compassion, open the Gate to the 
Sweet Dew so that I may ferry all manner of beings far and wide to 
the Other Shore.” 

Having been asked in this way, the First Ancestor said, “The 
wondrous, unsurpassed Way of all the Buddhas is to be most diligent 
over vast eons of time in ceaselessly practicing what is hard to 
practice and in ceaselessly enduring what seems beyond endurance. If 
you desire the True Course whilst relying upon little virtue and less 
wisdom, or on a frivolous heart, or on a prideful and conceited mind, 
surely you will toil in vain.” 

When Eka heard this, he became more and more encouraged by 
this instruction. Hidden from sight, he took the Keen-edged Sword 
and cut off his left forearm. 

When he placed this before the Master, the First Ancestor then 
knew that Eka was indeed a vessel for the Dharma. 53 So he said, “In 


interpreted only on a literal level, the present translation attempts to point the reader to 
deeper, non-literal meanings based on figures of speech found in Zen Buddhist writings. 

52. That is, Eka had been cleansing himself of any self-serving motives or hidden agendas. 

53. While the account of Eka’s cutting off his arm has often been taken literally, and so depicted 
in paintings, there is a deeper, non-literal interpretation of what took place, one that does not 
support the notion that self-mutilation is somehow proof of one’s willingness to do ceaseless 
practice. This interpretation states that Eka used Manjushri’s Keen-edged Sword of Wise 
Discernment to cut himself free of dualistic thinking, and, though this act was not visible to 
the naked eye, Bodhidharma was able to discern what was going on within Eka’s heart and 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


415 


Their seeking the Way, all the Buddhas, from the first, have laid down 
Their own bodies for the sake of the Dharma. Now you have cut 
yourself free of your arm right before me, which is proof that there is 
also good in what you are seeking.” 

From this time on, Eka had entry into the Master’s innermost private 
quarters. For eight years he served as attendant to the Master through thousands of 
myriad endeavors. Truly, he was a great, reliable spiritual friend for both ordinary 
people as well as for those in loftier positions, and he was a great teacher of the 
Way for them. Deeds such as his were unheard of even in India and came to exist 
for the first time in the Eastern lands. We hear of Makakasho’s face long ago 
breaking into a smile: we leam of Eka’s getting to the Marrow. 

What we need to reflect on is that, even if a thousand myriad First Ancestors 
came from the West, if the Second Ancestor had not been doing his ceaseless 
practice, we today would be unable to leam how to put the Great Matter to rest. 
Today, now that we have been able to encounter and hear the Tme Dharma, we 
should, beyond doubt, gratefully repay our indebtedness to the Ancestors. Any 
attempt to repay our gratitude with external objects cannot begin to tmly repay our 
gratitude. Even one’s own bodily existence will be insufficient repayment. And 
even one’s nation or hometown is of no real value. Nations and cities are plundered 
by others or passed on to kith and kin. Our physical lives are entmsted to what is 
impermanent, put into the hands of mlers and their ministers, and abandoned to 
false ways. Thus it is that any attempt to repay our indebtedness by offering such 
as these will not be the practice of the Way. 

Simply, our day by day ceaseless practice will be the tme way to repay that 
indebtedness. The principle of which I speak is to do one’s ceaseless practice in 
such a way that we do not neglect our daily life or waste it in selfish pursuits. And 
why so? This life is due to the merit from our ceaseless practice in times past and 
we are indebted to that ceaseless practice for it, a debt that we should be quick to 
repay. How sad, how shameful it would be to turn these physical shells of ours, 
which have come alive due to the merit of the ceaseless practice of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors, into useless toys for our spouse and children, letting ourselves be 


mind. For instance, Eka did not ask Bodhidhanna to open the Gate to the Sweet Dew for his 
own sake but for the sake of all sentient beings, and by this Bodhidhanna knew that Eka was 
a True Vessel for the Dharma. The original text does not state what Eka actually placed 
before Bodhidhanna. It may well not have been a physical ann that he offered to the Master, 
but rather his willingness to commit himself to the ceaseless practice that Bodhidhanna had 
just been instructing him in. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


416 


playthings for our spouse and children, and to do so without any regret for 
breaking Precepts and debasing ourselves. It is out of wrong-mindedness and folly 
that we turn our lives over to the demons of fame and gain, for fame and gain are 
the great thieves. If we give importance to fame and gain, then we will sympathize 
with fame and gain. To sympathize with fame and gain is to commit ourselves to 
fame and gain, and to thereby bring about the destruction of a life in which we 
might otherwise have become an Ancestor of the Buddha. Commitment to spouse 
and children, family and clan, are also just like this. Do not study fame and gain as 
if they were dreams and illusions, or were flowers in the sky; study their effects 
upon human beings. Do not sympathize with fame and gain, letting the retributions 
from your misdeeds pile up. When you use your true Eye to explore all the myriad 
thoughts and things in the ten directions through your training, you should go 
about it in this way. 

Even an ordinary, worldly person with normal human emotions, upon being 
given gold, silver, or rare jewels will repay the favor with thanks. All those who 
have a warm heart will strive to repay the friendliness of kind words and a gentle 
voice with expressions of gratitude. How could anyone with a human face be 
oblivious to their great indebtedness to the Tathagata from encountering and 
heeding His unsurpassed True Dharma? Not to lose sight of this indebtedness is 
itself a precious treasure for a lifetime. The skull and bones of a being who has 
never retreated or turned aside from this ceaseless practice, either in life or in death 
alike, has such spiritual merit that it deserves to be enshrined in a stupa adorned 
with the seven treasures and to be given offerings of alms by all celestial and 
human beings. If any people are aware of this great indebtedness, they will not 
vainly let their lives, which are as transient as the dew on the grass, go to ruin, but 
will wholeheartedly repay the Second Ancestor for his monumental virtue. This is 
what ceaseless practice is. And those of us who do the ceaseless practice as the 
Buddhas and Ancestors have done it will receive the merit of this ceaseless 
practice. In sum, neither the First Ancestor nor the Second Ancestor ever founded a 
temple, nor did they have the arduous task of mowing down wild grasses. 54 And 
the Third and Fourth Ancestors were like this too. And the Fifth and Sixth 
Ancestors also did not establish their own temples, and both Seigen and Nangaku 
were no different. 55 


54. ‘Mowing down wild grasses’ literally refers to clearing an uncultivated area for the purpose 
of erecting a temple. 

55. Seigen and Nangaku were coequal Dhanna heirs of the Sixth Ancestor. The Soto branch of 
the Zen tradition traces its lineage back to Seigen, whereas the Rinzai branch traces its 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


417 


djb 

CX) 

Great Master Sekito fastened a grass hut to a boulder and then sat in 
meditation atop this rock. He did not doze off day or night, for there was not a time 
when he did not remain seated in meditation. Without neglecting his obligations to 
the monastic community, he habitually endeavored to do seated meditation 
throughout all the hours of a day. It is due to the great strength of Sekito’s steadfast 
ceaseless practice that Seigen’s tradition has flowed out and permeated the world to 
the profit of both ordinary people and those in lofty positions. All those in the 
lineage of Ummon and Hogen who have clarified the Matter are also Dharma 
descendants of Great Master Sekito. 

djb 

CX) 


At age fourteen, our Thirty-first Ancestor, Meditation Master Daii Doshin, 
met the Great Master who was our Third Chinese Ancestor. For the next nine years 
he undertook the responsibility of serving him. From the time when he inherited 
the Ancestral practices of the Buddhas and Ancestors, he kept his mind 
meditatively alert without dozing off and without letting his ribs touch his mat for 
sixty years. He bestowed his Teaching on those who were hostile and those who 
were friendly, and his virtue pervaded the realms of both ordinary people and those 
in lofty positions. He was our Fourth Chinese Ancestor. 

In the seventeenth year of the Chen-kuan era (643 C.E.), 
Emperor T’ai-tsung, leaning favorably towards Master Daii’s 
particular taste for the Way, desired to see the monk’s imposing 
presence and so invited him to the capital. Three times altogether, the 
Master sent humble letters of apology, ultimately declining each 
invitation on the grounds of ill health. The fourth time, the emperor 
commanded an emissary to go and fetch him, saying, “If he really will 
not come to visit our royal presence, then take his head and bring me 
that.” 

When the emissary reached Daii’s mountain, he warned him of 
the emperor’s command, whereupon the Master stretched out his neck 
in the direction of the emissary’s sword with a demeanor of majestic 
dignity. The emissary, thinking this strange indeed, returned and 
informed the emperor of the event. The emperor’s admiration for Daii 


lineage back to Nangaku. Dogen’s lineage includes both branches, the Rinzai through his 
Ordination Master and the Soto through his Transmission Master. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


418 


only increased. Accordingly, he bestowed upon him a gift of fine 
quality silks and let him have his way. 

Thus, the Meditation Master who is our Fourth Ancestor did not turn life and 
limb into Ins life and limb. His ceaseless practice of not becoming intimate with 
kings and ministers is an example seen perhaps once in a thousand years. Emperor 
T’ai-tsung was a ruler with integrity, so their meeting would probably not have 
been a frivolous one, yet even so, you need to explore through your training that 
this was the ceaseless practice by such a senior monk and spiritual guide as this. As 
a ruler of men, T’ai-tsung did not begrudge his life and limb, and he all the more 
admired someone else who did not begrudge their life and limb but instead stuck 
out his neck in the direction of a sword. And this was not simply idle behavior on 
the Master’s part for, prizing time, he considered his ceaseless practice to be of 
primary importance. His proffering letters of refusal three times is an example rare 
in any generation. It is a sign of our degenerate times that there are now monks 
who hope and pray for an audience with someone of royal blood. 

On the fourth day of the intercalary ninth lunar month 56 in the 
second year of the Yung-hui era (651 C.E.) during the reign of 
Emperor Kao-tsung, Master Daii, in expounding the Dharma for those 
who were with him at the time, said, “All thoughts and things are 
completely free of suffering and delusion. Let each and every one of 
you preserve and keep this in mind. In the future, spread it abroad.” 

When he had finished speaking, he passed away whilst sitting 
peacefully in meditation. He had lived for seventy-two years. They 
placed his body in a stupa within the temple grounds. On the eighth 
day of the fourth lunar month of the following year (652 C.E.), the 
door of the stupa inexplicably opened of its own accord, and his 
bodily form looked as if it were still alive. After this, those who were 
at the temple did not dare to close the door again. 

Keep in mind what he said: all thoughts and things are completely free of 
suffering and delusion. This does not mean that thoughts and things are as empty 


56. There are twelve months of either twenty-eight or thirty days in the Chinese and Japanese 
lunar calendar. Since this creates a discrepancy with the 365-day solar calendar, every two 
or three years a thirteenth lunar month is inserted (intercalated) in the calendar at some 
point. In the present instance, it was inserted between the ninth and tenth lunar months. This 
is technically known as an intercalary lunar month. An analogy can be found with our 
inserting the day of February 29 every four years to even out the annual solar calendar, and 
that day is technically called an intercalary day. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


419 


space, nor does it mean that thoughts and things are something other than thoughts 
and things. It means that thoughts and things are all, each and every one of them, 
completely free of suffering and delusion. Now, there was our Fourth Ancestor’s 
ceaseless practice before he entered the stupa and there was his ceaseless practice 
after he had been placed in the stupa. To observe that those who are alive will 
ultimately perish is but a small-minded view. And to hold the opinion that those 
who have perished are beyond thinking or perceiving anything is also a narrow 
view. When it comes to studying the Way, do not copy such small-minded and 
narrow views. There may well be those among the living who do not perish, and 
there may well be those among the dead who have thoughts and perceptions. 


Great Master Gensha Soitsu of Fukien Province, whose Dharma name was 
Shibi, was a person from the Minhsien district. His family belonged to the Sha 
clan, and from an early age he was fond of fishing. He sailed a small boat upon the 
Nanf ai River and was friendly with the various fisherfolk thereabouts. At the 
beginning of the Hsien-f ung era (ca. 860 C.E.) during the T’ang dynasty, when he 
was just thirty, he suddenly desired to leave the dust of lay life behind. So, he 
abandoned his fishing boat and, joining the assembly of Meditation Master 
Fuyozan Reikun, he shaved his head. He received the full Precepts from Vinaya 
Master Dogen of Kaigen-ji Temple in Yiichang. 

Dressed in a hempen robe and straw sandals, and with barely enough food 
to sustain life, he would customarily sit in stillness throughout the day. All the 
members of the assembly took this to be strange. From the first, he was a brother in 
the Dharma with Seppo Gison, and the closeness of their relationship was like that 
of Master and disciple. Because of Shibi’s stringent practice, Seppo, when 
addressing him, would refer to him as being austere. 

One day, Seppo asked him, “Is this Shibi the Austere Monk?” 

Shibi responded, “I have never dared to deceive anyone about 

that!” 

On another occasion, Seppo called out to him, “O Shibi, my 
austere monk, why haven’t you gone out on a pilgrimage to seek a 
Master to train with?” 

Shibi responded, “Bodhidharma did not come east to China for 
that, nor did the Second Ancestor go west to India for that!” 

Seppo highly praised what he had said. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


420 


Eventually, Shibi climbed Mount Zokotsu and joined Master Seppo in his efforts to 

cn 

build a temple there. A large number of serious followers gathered to train in this 
temple. They would enter the Master’s private quarters to raise questions and 
resolve issues, never wearying of this practice from mom till dusk. Among those 
serious trainees who had come from all directions, if there was someone who had a 
particular, personal problem that was still not resolved, that person would 
invariably go and ask the Master about it, whereupon the venerable monk Seppo 
would say, “You should go ask that of Shibi the Austere Monk.” Master Shibi, out 
of his benevolence, would forthwith endeavor to address the matter. If he had not 
had his preeminent ceaseless practice, he could not have engaged in such daily 
conduct. The ceaseless practice of sitting in stillness throughout the day is a 
ceaseless practice that is rare indeed. Even though there are many who vainly 
gallop off after sounds and forms, rare are those who endeavor to sit in stillness 
throughout the day. Those who have entered into training late in life should fear 
that the time remaining to them is short indeed, and so they should endeavor to sit 
in stillness through their remaining days. 


The venerable monk Chokei Eryo was a revered senior monk training under 
Seppo. 58 For twenty-nine years he went back and forth between Seppo and Shibi, 
exploring the Matter through his training with both of them. During those months 
and years he wore out twenty sitting mats. There are people today who love doing 
seated meditation and, citing Chokei, they take this beloved ancient one as their 
model. Those who idolize him are many; those who equal him are few. 

At the same time, his efforts for thirty years were not in vain. There was a 
time when he was rolling up a bamboo blind in the doorway of the Meditation Hall 
and suddenly had a great awakening. During those thirty years, he never returned 
to his home country, or visited his relatives, or chatted with those sitting on either 
side of him; he just put his efforts into the Principle Matter. The ceaseless practice 
of this Master went on for thirty years. For thirty years he treated his doubts and 
misgivings as doubts and misgivings: we should speak of him as someone of keen 
wit who did not ignore anything, as someone with great potential for realizing the 
Truth. Reports of such firmness in resolve are sometimes met with when studying 
the Scriptures. When we desire what we should desire and feel shame about what 


57. Mount Zokotsu is the earlier name for Mount Seppo, where Meditation Master Seppo was 
attempting to establish his new monastery. 

58. Chokei later succeeded Seppo as the Abbot of Seppo’s monastery. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


421 


we should feel shame about, then we may encounter Chokei. To speak the truth, it 
is only due to a lack of heart for the Way and a lack of skill in handling their daily 
conduct that people become vainly tied to fame and gain. 


After Meditation Master Isan of Mount Daii received affirmation of his 
awakening from Hyakujo, he straightaway climbed up the steep and remote slopes 
of Mount Isan where he made friends with the birds and beasts, thatched himself a 
hut, and continued on with his training. He never strove to retire from the winds 
and snows, and he supplied himself with various kinds of wild chestnuts for food, 
as he had no temple buildings or monastery gardens. Even so, for forty years he 
manifested ceaseless practice. Later, he became famous throughout China because 
of all the dragon elephants* who beat a path to his door. Even if you should wish to 
establish a temple as your own pure place, do not concern yourself with the 
quagmire of public opinion, just hold steadfast to doing the ceaseless practice of 
the Buddha Dharma. Doing one’s training without having a temple compound was 
the training ground for ancient Buddhas. We have heard from afar Their custom of 
training in open fields and under trees. These places have for ever so long become 
‘enclosed realms’. 59 Wherever there is ceaseless practice by one person, such a 
place will be handed down as a training ground of the Buddhas. Do not become 
obsessed with constructing buildings, like foolish people in the degenerate days of 
the Dharma do. The Buddhas and Ancestors never craved buildings. Those whose 
Eye has not yet become clear and who therefore arbitrarily construct temple 
buildings and monastery halls are not making alms offerings of Buddhist buildings 
for the Buddhas, but are doing it for the sake of their own lairs of fame and gain. 

Calmly imagine the ceaseless practice that was happening on Mount Isan 
long ago. What I mean by ‘imagine’ means thinking about how it would be for us 
today if we were residing on Mount Isan. The sound of the rain deep in the night 
was probably not just of water washing over the moss, for the rain would certainly 
have had the strength to bore through boulders. On the snowy nights in the dead of 
winter, the birds and beasts must have been scarce indeed, and how much less 
would there have been smoke from man-made fires to acknowledge human 
existence! It was a way of living that could not have been tolerated, were it not for 
the Master’s ceaseless practice in which he made light of his life whilst stressing 


59. ‘Enclosed realms’ is a technical term referring to areas that were set apart and preserved for 
use by Buddhist communities in India. Later, it was used in China and Japan to refer to 
monastery grounds. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


422 


the Dharma. He was in no hurry to cut down the undergrowth, nor did he engage in 
cutting down trees to clear the land for building. He just continued his ceaseless 
practice and simply did his utmost to practice the Way. What a pity that an 
authentic Ancestor who had Transmitted, and kept to, the True Dharma came to 
undergo such hardships in such precipitous mountains! It is said that Mount Isan 
had many ponds and running water, so there must have been thick ice and dense 
banks of fog. Most people could not have tolerated such a secluded life, 
nevertheless Isan transformed it into the Buddha’s Way and explored Its innermost 
purpose. Today, we are able to learn of his expressions of the Way and Its purpose 
because of the ceaseless practice that he did. Even though we may not be listening 
with a casual attitude, we still need to recognize our indebtedness to his strenuous 
efforts in ceaseless practice. When we hear about what he did and imagine the 
hardships he faced, how can those of us today who are heartfelt trainees possibly 
fail to feel pity for him? Due to the transformative power derived from Isan’s 
ceaseless practice of the Way, the winds cease their howling, the world remains 
intact, the palaces and dwelling places of the celestial community are tranquil, and 
the homelands of human beings are preserved. Though we may not be direct 
descendants of Isan, he will be our Ancestor in spirit. 

Later, Kyozan Ejaku came and served as Isan’s attendant. Kyozan had 
previously trained with his late Master Hyakujo. Though he was a veritable 
Shariputra with a hundred responses for every ten questions, 60 for three years he 
trained under and attended on Isan while doing his utmost to oversee his own 
buffalo. 61 His was a ceaseless practice that has become extinct in recent times and 
is no longer seen or even heard of. In tending to his buffalo for three years, there 
was no need for him to seek for a well-put expression of the Matter from someone 
else. 

djb 


Our Ancestor Dokai of Mount Fuyo manifested a pure wellspring of 
ceaseless practice. When the ruler of the nation tried to bestow upon him the title 
of Meditation Master Josho along with a purple kesa, our Ancestor would not 
accept them and wrote a letter to the emperor politely declining his offer. Although 
the ruler of the nation censured him for this, the Master, to the end, did not accept 
them. His rice broth has passed down to us the taste of the Dharma. When he built 
his hermitage on Mount Fuyo, the monks and laity streamed to his refuge by the 

60. Shariputra was the chiefmost of the Buddha’s ten great disciples, being the monk whom his 
fellow monks viewed as ‘having all the answers’. 

61. That is, he worked at training himself in accord with his own karmic propensities. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


423 


hundreds. Because he served them only one bowl of gruel as a day’s rations, many 
of them left. The Master, upon a vow, did not partake of any meals offered by 
donors. One day he pointed out the Matter to his assembly, saying the following: 

To begin with, those who have left home behind to become 
monks have a distaste for the dust and troubles stirred up by defiling 
passions and seek to rise above birth and death. And they do so in order 
to give their hearts and minds a rest, to abandon discriminatory 
thinking, and to eradicate entanglements, which is why it is called 
‘leaving home’. So, how can it possibly be all right for monks to 
indulge in conventional ways of living by being neglectful and greedy? 
Straight off, you should discard all dualistic notions and let neutral ones 
drop off as well. Then, whenever you encounter any sights or sounds, it 
will be as if you were trying to plant a flower atop a stone, and 
whenever you encounter gain or fame, it will resemble getting dirt in 
your eyes. Moreover, it is not that, since beginningless time, no one has 
ever done this, or that no one has ever known how. Simply, we just stop 
reversing our head and making a tail out of it. 62 If we stop our training 
at this point, we will suffer from our cravings and greeds, but why do 
we need to do so? If we do not bring them to a halt right now, when will 
we deal with them? Therefore, the saintly ones of the past, who were 
ordinary human beings, invariably and thoroughly exhausted these 
cravings in each moment of the present. If we can exhaust them in each 
moment of the present, what more is there to do? If we are able to be 
calm in heart and mind, it will be as if even ‘the Buddhas and 
Ancestors’ become our enemy. When everything in the world has 
become naturally cooled down and impermanent for us, then, for the 
first time, we will be in accord with the Other Shore. 

Have you not heard of Inzan, who, to his dying day, did not wish 
to meet with anyone? Or of Joshu, who, to his dying day, did not wish 
to speak with anyone? And there is Hentan, who gathered various kinds 
of chestnuts for his food. Daibai made his clothing out of lotus leaves, 
and the lay practitioner Shie only wore clothes made from paper, 
whereas the veteran monk Gentai wore only cotton cloth. Sekiso built a 
Hall for Withered Trees where he and his community did their sitting 
and lying down, only requiring of his monks that their hearts and minds 


62. That is, getting things upside down by taking the false self to be our True Nature. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


424 


completely quiet down. 63 Tosu had others prepare the rice, which they 
cooked for everyone so that all could dine together. Tosu himself used 
the meal preparation time to examine the Matter on his own. Now, the 
saintly ones listed above had characteristics like these. If they did not 
have such strong points, how could anyone have entrusted themselves 
to them? O my virtuous ones, if you too master yourself in this way, 
you will truly be an unfaltering one. If, on the other hand, you do not 
dare to take charge of yourself, you will, I fear, simply waste your 
strength in the future. 

Though there has been nothing in this mountain monk’s own 
practice to be particularly commended, I have been privileged to be 
head of this mountain monastery. So how could it possibly be all right 
for me to sit here, squandering our communal provisions and forgetting 
about our connection with the former saintly ones? Now what 1 desire is 
to try to give you, right off, a concrete example of how the temple heads 
of old behaved. I have consulted with various senior monks about this. 
We will not go down from our mountain, nor betake ourselves to meals 
offered by lay donors, nor have a monk in charge of fund raising. 64 
Simply, we will divide into three hundred and sixty equal parts 
whatever crops we harvest in one year from our own fields and then use 
one part of this each day, regardless of whether our numbers increase or 
decrease. If our supply of rice is sufficient, we will make steamed rice. 
If there is not enough rice for that, we will make rice gruel. And if there 
is not enough to make rice gruel, we will make rice broth. For the 
interview with new arrivals, we will simply serve tea, foregoing the 
customary tea ceremony with cakes. 65 We will simply arrange a 
tearoom that we can go to and make use of on our own. We need to 
strive to sever our connections with the secular world and just 
concentrate on doing our utmost to practice the Way. 


63. A Hall for Withered Trees is an epithet for a Monks’ Meditation Hall. 

64. In addition to its literal meaning of not staying in one’s place of training, ‘going down from 
the mountain’ has non-literal implications, such as leaving the monastery in order to visit the 
lay world, as well as leaving one’s training behind in order to participate in worldly affairs. 

65. This tea ceremony is not the same as that often associated with Japanese Zen. Rather, it is 
part of the face-to-face encounter with newly arriving trainees, during which the Abbot will 
endeavor to assess the quality and depth of the guest’s spiritual intention and actual training. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


425 


And what is more, our life is already complete and our landscape 
lacks for nothing. The flowers teach us how to smile: the birds teach us 
how to sing. The Wooden Horse neighs loud and long: the Stone Cow 
gallops apace. Beyond the blue horizon, the form of the green 
mountains fades away: when distant from our ears, the voice of the 
babbling brook does not exist. Atop the mountain peaks, the monkeys 
chatter: in the sky, the moon is steeped in mist. Within the forest, the 
cranes cry out: at break of day, the wind swirls through the pines. When 
the breezes of spring rise up, the withered trees sound forth the 
Dragon’s song: when the leaves of autumn wither, the chill woods 
scatter their flowers abroad. The jewel-like stepping-stones make 
patterns in the moss: the faces of people take on the hue of haze and 
mist. Distracting sounds have become hushed: conditions are just what 
they are. The Underlying One stands alone: nothing needs to be 
contrived . 66 

I, a mountain monk, facing all of you here today, am setting forth 
what the gateway to our monastic family is: it is not getting all wrapped 
up in what have simply been expedient means. Why should it be 
necessary for any Master today, upon entering the Dharma Hall to give 
Teaching or upon letting trainees enter his private chambers for 
instruction, to imitate some Master of old by picking up the drum stick, 
or holding his ceremonial hossu* upright, or shouting towards the east, 
or pointing his traveling staff* to the west, or raising his eyebrows, or 
looking with glaring eyes—and all this done in the manner of one who 
is sick with rage? Not only does such behavior belittle those training in 
the Meditation Hall, even worse, it treats with contempt one’s 
indebtedness to the saintly ones who have gone before. 

Have you not realized that Bodhidharma came from the West 
and, having arrived at the foot of a remote mountain, sat facing a wall 
for nine years? And the Second Ancestor’s standing in the snow and 


66. This pastoral portrait is composed of various Buddhist and Zen expressions descriptive of 
experiences encountered through one’s spiritual training and practice, and is a way of 
demonstrating that all things in nature are giving voice to the Dhanna. For instance, the 
flower that teaches one to smile is an allusion to Shakyamuni’s holding aloft the udumbara 
blossom and Makakasho breaking out into a smile of recognition of the Truth underlying the 
Buddha’s gesture. Also, the Wooden Horse neighing and the Stone Cow galloping are Zen- 
derived metaphors referring to the natural functioning of one’s Buddha Mind and one’s 
immediate, spontaneous response to that functioning. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


426 


severing his forearm can only be described as his suffering hardships. 

Even so, Bodhidharma never gave forth a single word of Scripture and 
the Second Ancestor never asked him for a single phrase of Scripture. 
Further, in speaking of Bodhidharma, do we think he was unable to 
teach anything for the sake of human beings? In speaking of the Second 
Ancestor, do we think that he was not seeking a Master? 

Whenever this mountain monk gets to the point of expounding 
what the saintly ones of old did, I immediately feel as if there were no 
place on earth where I can hide, for I am overwhelmed with shame at 
the weakness of us people of these later times. And what is more, 
having already been supplied with the four necessities—nourishment, 
clothing, bedding, and medicine—we treat ourselves to delicacies 
served in a hundred different ways and then have the cheek to say that 
one should, by all means, give rise to the Buddha Mind. I simply fear 
that our physical behavior is so compulsive that we will continue on, 
passing through myriad lives in the six worlds* as a result. Our days fly 
by like arrows, and we should deeply regret wasting them. 

Even though we are like this, there may still be people who have 
reached the Other Shore by relying on their strengths. And this 
mountain monk cannot compel you to learn. And, my virtuous ones, 
have you encountered the following poem by one of old? 

From our mountain fields, millet harvested for our meal, 

From our garden, plain yellow leeks; 

Whether you eat from what there is to eat is up to you, 

And if you choose not to eat thereof, feel free to go 
where you will. 

I pray that, on reflection, each of you, my companions on the 
Path, will practice diligently. Take good care of yourselves! 

This is the very Bones and Marrow of the direct, Face-to-Face Transmission 
of our Ancestral lineage. Even though the ways of ceaseless practice by our 
founding Ancestors are many, I have given you this one for the present. We trainees 
today should want to do the ceaseless practice that was cultivated on Mount Fuyo, 
and we should explore that practice in our training, for it is the correct standard 
established at Jetavana Monastery . 67 


67. Jetavana was a grove purchased from Prince Jeta by the lay patron Sudatta, who gave it to 
the Buddha for Him and His community to use in their training and practice. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


427 


djb 

CX) 

Baso Doitsu of Kagen-ji Temple in the Hungchou District of Kiangsi 
Province was a native of Shihfang Prefecture in the district of Hanchou. He trained 
and served under Nangaku for over ten years. One day, with the intent of revisiting 
his home, Baso reached the halfway point on his journey. From this halfway point, 
he came back to the temple, making an incense offering and bowing in respect to 
Nangaku, whereupon Nangaku composed the following poem for Baso: 

I recommend that you do not return to your former home; 

Should you return to that home, your practice of the Way 
will wane, 

And the old women of your neighborhood 

Will call you by your former name. 

When he gave Baso these words of Dharma, Baso reverently accepted them and 
made a vow, saying, “I will never return again to Hanchou, not even in future 
lives.” Having made this vow, he never again took even one step towards Hanchou. 
He lived in Hungchou for the rest of his life, leaving others to come and go from 
all directions. Apart from expressing the Way simply as “Your very mind is 
Buddha,” he had not a single word of Teaching for the sake of others. Be that as it 
may, he was Nangaku’s Dharma heir and a lifeline for both ordinary people and 
those in lofty positions. 

Just what is this “Do not return to your former home?” What are we to make 
of it? Traveling to and from the east, west, south, or north is simply the continual 
arising of our false self. Truly, this is to return to our home and have our practice 
wane. Is one doing a ceaseless practice which recognizes that ‘returning home’ is 
the same as not practicing the Way, or is one doing a ceaseless practice that is 
beyond ‘returning home’? Why is returning home not practicing the Way? Is one 
hindered by not practicing or is one hindered by self? It is Nangaku’s assertion that 
the old women in the neighborhood will call Baso by his former name. Why did 
Nangaku put this expression in his poem, and why did Baso accept these words of 
Dharma? Because when we go towards the south, the whole world likewise goes 
towards the south. It will also be the same with the rest of the directions. To doubt 
that this is so by using Mount Sumeru and the Great Ocean surrounding it as one’s 
measure, or to gauge it by using the sun, moon, and stars as one’s standard is, in 
either case, a small-minded view. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


428 


djb 

CX) 

The Thirty-second Ancestor, Meditation Master Daiman, was a native of 
Obai. Because he was born illegitimately, just like Lao-tzu was, he received his 
mother’s surname of Shu. From the time that the Dharma was Transmitted to him 
at the age of seven until he was seventy-four years old, he preserved and kept to 
the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. He secretly bestowed 
Bodhidharma’s kesa and Dharma on the monastery laborer Eno, which was an 
example of his extraordinary ceaseless practice. He did not let his chief disciple 
Jinshu know about the kesa and the Dharma, but bestowed them instead upon Eno, 
and, because of this, the life of the True Teaching has continued on without 
interruption. 

djb 

CX) 


My former Master, the Reverend Monk Tendo, was a person from Yiieh or 
thereabouts. At nineteen, he gave up academic religious study to explore the Matter 
through training with his Master. He did not regress from that training even upon 
reaching his seventies. During the Chinese Chia-ting era, the emperor offered him 
a purple robe and the title of Meditation Master, but ultimately he turned them 
down, writing letters to the throne in which he declined the honors with thanks. 
Monks far and wide all greatly revered him, and the wise from near and far alike 
all treasured him. The emperor also took delight in him, sending him a gift of 
ceremonial tea. Those who found out about this spoke highly of it, as being 
something rare in any age. Indeed, this was due to true ceaseless practice on my 
Master’s part, since craving fame is even worse than acting contrary to some 
Precept. Acting contrary to a Precept is a onetime wrong, whereas craving fame is 
a whole lifetime of trouble. Do not foolishly fail to forsake fame and do not blindly 
welcome it. Not welcoming it is ceaseless practice and forsaking it is ceaseless 
practice. Each of the first six generations of our Ancestral Masters had the title of 
Meditation Master bestowed upon them posthumously by an emperor, and this was 
because they did not crave fame while they were in the world. Thus, we too should 
quickly forsake any craving for fame within life and death, and aspire instead to 
the ceaseless practice of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Do not be the equal of birds and beasts through indulging your greeds. To 
greedily look after the trivial self is what birds have in their thoughts, what animals 
have in their hearts. The forsaking of fame and gain is considered rare among both 
ordinary people and those in lofty positions, and no Ancestor of the Buddha has 
ever yet failed to forsake them. There are some people who say that it is for the 
benefit of sentient beings that they desire fame and crave gain, but this is a 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


429 


monstrously false assertion. These people are non-Buddhists who have connected 
themselves with the Buddha Dharma; they are a bunch of demons who malign the 
True Teaching. If you were to claim something like this, would it mean that the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, who do not crave fame and gain, are therefore unable to 
benefit sentient beings? How laughable, how truly laughable that would be! And 
truly, there are others as well who are of benefit to living beings without being 
greedy. Further, those who have not yet learned that, although there are many ways 
to benefit beings, one should not label as benefiting beings that which is not of 
benefit to them, must surely be some species of demon. Living beings who would 
try to gain spiritual benefit from the likes of such demons will fall into all manner 
of hellish states. How pitiful to spend one’s whole life like this! Do not call such 
silliness ‘spiritually benefiting sentient beings’. So, even though the emperor’s gift 
of the title of Meditation Master was graciously offered, letters were written to 
decline it with thanks, which is an excellent example from the past, and today’s 
trainees would do well to explore this example with their Master. 

To meet my former Master face-to-face was to encounter an ordinary human 
being. From the time my former Master left his hometown at the age of nineteen to 
seek out a spiritual teacher, he did his utmost to practice the Way, and when he had 
reached the age of sixty-five, he still had not regressed or turned aside from this 
practice. He was not on intimate terms with any emperor nor was he ever the guest 
of any emperor, and he was not on close terms with any minister of state or 
government official. Not only did he decline the purple kesa and the title of 
Meditation Master, but throughout his life he also did not wear a varicolored kesa, 
but customarily used a black kesa with a black formal robe, whether he was giving 
a talk in the Dharma Hall or letting trainees enter his private chambers for spiritual 
counseling . 68 

Once when he was giving spiritual instruction to his monks, he said the 
following: 

In practicing your meditation and studying what the Way is, 
having a heart for the Way is foremost, for this is the beginning of 
learning the Way. For about two hundred years now, the Way of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors has been dying out, sad to say. What is more, 
skin bags who have been able to give expression to even a single line 
of Scripture have been few indeed. Formerly, when I had hung up my 
traveling staff at Mount Kinzan, Bussho Tokko was the head of the 
temple at the time. Once while we were in the Meditation Hall for our 


68. Black is the color that is customarily worn by novice mo nk s. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


430 


meal, he gave Teaching, saying, “In meditating on the Way of the 
Buddha Dharma, there is no need to seek out how others have put it 
into words: simply let each of you come to your own understanding of 
the Principle!” After having spoken like this, he made no effort at all 
to supervise what went on in the Monks’ Hall. Both the junior and 
senior monks similarly did not supervise themselves and just busied 
themselves in meeting with official guests. Bussho did not particularly 
understand what the Buddha Dharma is getting at, and so he simply 
chased fame and craved gain. If each person is to come to his own 
understanding of what the Buddha Dharma is about, why, pray, did 
those in the past who probed into the Matter seek out a Master so that 
they might ask the way to go? The truth is that Bussho Tokko never 
practiced meditation. Today, there are senior monks all over the place 
have no heart for the Way, for they are simply the offspring of those 
like Bussho Tokko. How can the Buddha Dharma possibly flourish in 
their care? What a pity, what a pity! 

When my Master talked in this way, even though many among those who were 
listening were direct descendants of Bussho, they did not resent what he said. 

My Master also said once, “Practicing meditation is to let body and mind 
drop off. Without engaging in burning incense, making bows, reciting the name of 
Buddha, doing repentance, or doing walking meditation, we can realize It from the 
start just by sitting.” 

Truly, throughout Great Sung China today, there are not merely one or two 
hundred skin bags who call themselves both meditators and descendants of our 
tradition, these folks are as prevalent as rice and flax, bamboo and reeds. But I 
never got wind of anyone else who encouraged sitting simply for the sake of 
sitting. Between the four oceans of the world and the five lakes in China, only my 
late Master Tendo did this. Monks far and wide were alike in praising Tendo, yet 
Tendo did not praise all monks far and wide. Also, there were heads of large 
temples who did not know of Tendo at all. Even though they had been born in 
Great Sung China, perhaps they were some species of bird or beast. They did not 
explore what they should have explored, and, because of that, they were wasting 
their time to no avail. How sad that those folks who did not know Tendo have 
vociferously given forth barbarous teaching and confused talk, mistaking this for 
the family tradition of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

In giving informal talks, my former Master would customarily say, in effect: 

From the age of nineteen, I began to visit monasteries all over 
the place, yet I did not find anyone who taught for the sake of 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


431 


ordinary people. And from that time on, there has been no time—not 
even one day or one night—when I did not flatten my meditation 
cushion. Before I became head of a temple, I did not engage in 
chitchat with the locals, for time was dear to me. Even though there 
were places where I hung up my traveling staff, I never entered, or 
even saw, the interior of a hermit’s hut or a private dormitory . 69 How 
much the less could I squander my efforts on wandering off to the 
mountains or playing about in lakes and streams? Apart from sitting in 
meditation in the Cloud Hall and in the public monastic areas, I would 
go alone, seeking out an upper floor in a tall building or a screened-off 
area where I could sit in meditation in a secluded place. I always 
carried a meditation mat rolled up in my sleeve, and sometimes I 
would sit in meditation even at the foot of a crag. I always felt that I 
would like to sit upon the Diamond Seat until it split, for this was 
the outcome I was seeking. There were times when the flesh on my 
buttocks would blister and split open. At such times I all the more 
took delight in sitting in meditation. This year I am sixty-five, old in 
my bones and weak in the head. Though I no longer do my seated 
meditation along with the community, I have sympathy for my fellow 
monks, senior and junior, wherever they are. Accordingly, I am Abbot 
of this mountain monastery so that I may counsel those who come 
here and Transmit the Way to them for the sake of all beings. 
Otherwise, my old friends, where could the Buddha Dharma be found 
and what would It be like? 

And this is how he would speak, both formally in the Dharma Hall as well as in his 
informal talks. Further, he would not accept any personal gifts that were offered to 
him by any of the monks who came from all directions to hear him speak. 

Government Minister Chao was a descendant of the saintly sovereign of the 
Chia-ting era. As a senior official in the Mingchou district, he was in charge of 
both military and agricultural affairs. One day, he invited my late Master to come 
to his district office and give a Dharma talk, donating ten thousand silver pieces as 
an alms offering. 


69. That is, he slept, ate, and meditated in the Meditation Hall. 

70. The Diamond Seat is the name given to the flat rock upon which Prince Siddhartha sat until 
he realized Buddhahood. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


432 


After my Master had given the Dharma talk, he turned to the 
minister and said the following by way of thanks, “In accordance with 
established tradition, I have left my mountain monastery in order to 
ascend the Dharma Seat and give voice to the Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching, which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana. I 
am respectfully doing this in memory of your relative, the late 
emperor, who is now in the realm of the departed. However, 1 dare not 
accept this silver. Monks in our family have no need of such things. 
So, with a thousand myriad thanks, I am humbly returning it to you 
exactly as I received it today, which is what we customarily do.” 

The minister said, “Venerable Monk, because this lowly official 
has been favored by being a relative of His Imperial Highness, 
wherever I go people honor me, and thus my treasures have grown in 
abundance. Today is the day for commemorating my former parent’s 
happiness in the realm of the departed, so I wish to contribute 
something for his sake. Venerable Monk, why will you not accept it? 
Today has been one of great joy for me, so out of your great kindness 
and compassion, please retain this small alms offering.” 

My Master replied, “My dear minister, yours is a very sincere 
request, which I would usually not dare decline. But, simply, there is a 
reason why I am doing so. When I ascended the Dharma Seat and 
gave voice to the Teaching, were you able to hear It clearly?” 

The minister said, “Just hearing it has filled me with 
immeasurable joy.” 

My Master then said, “My dear minister, you are very astute 
and have seen clearly what this monk’s words were about. My awe is 
unceasing. Further, as to what you have hoped for, your late relative 
has been blessed ten thousandfold. Now, when this mountain monk 
ascended the Dharma Seat, what Dharma did he give expression to? 
Try and see if you can express It. If you can, I shall respectfully accept 
your ten thousand pieces of silver. If you are unable to express It, then 
let one of your emissaries retain the silver.” 

The minister arose and, facing my Master, said, “With due 
respect and careful consideration, I found your Dharma talk and your 
deportment, Venerable Monk, to be a ten thousandfold blessing.” 

My Master replied, “That is just the way I talk. What did you 
leam from listening to it?” 

The minister was left speechless at this. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


433 


After a while, my Master said, “The blessings for your departed 
one have been fully done. Let’s wait a bit on the matter of deciding on 
an alms offering on his behalf.” 

Having spoken thus, my Master was taking his leave when the 
minister said, “I bear no resentment that you have still not accepted 
the offering, and my delight is to have had the pleasure of meeting 
you.” Having said this, he saw my Master off. 

Many monks and laity, who had come from both east and west of the River 
Che, spoke highly of the event, and an attendant monk named Hei recorded of it in 
his diary, “This venerable old monk is a person not easily encountered. Where else 
could one possibly meet with such a person?” 

Is there anyone who would not have accepted the ten thousand pieces of 
silver? A person of long ago said, “Look upon gold, silver, jewels, and jade as if 
they were dirt.” Even if they do look like gold or silver to us, it is the custom for 
tatter-robed monks not to accept them. This was the way my Master would have it: 
it is not this way with others. 

And my Master used to say, “For three hundred years, people have not had a 
spiritual friend like me, so you must all strive to do your utmost in pursuing the 
Way.” 

In my Master’s assembly, there was a man from the Mienchou district in the 
western province of Szechwan, Dosho by name, who was of the Taoist tradition. 
Together with five companions, he made a vow, saying, “In this lifetime, we shall 
master the Great Tao of the Buddhas and Ancestors or else we shall not return to 
our homeland.” My Master was especially delighted by this and let them do 
walking meditation and train in the Way alongside his trainee monks. When 
arranging them by seniority, he placed them in a position behind his female monks; 
this was an excellent example that is rare in any generation. Also, there was a monk 
from the Fuchou district by the name of Zennyo, who made a vow, saying, “In this 
lifetime, I shall not take one step towards the South from whence I came, but shall 
train in the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors.” There were so many within 
my Master’s community who were like this; it is something that I saw with my 
very own eyes. Although behavior like this was not to be found in the communities 
of other Masters, it is, nevertheless, the ceaseless practice of monks in our tradition 
in Great Sung China. It is sad that this kind of constancy of heart has been absent 
among us Japanese. It is still absent, even at this time when we can encounter the 
Buddha Dharma; in former times when we could not have encountered It, the state 
of our bodies and minds would have been worse than disgraceful. 



Shobogenzo: On Ceaseless Practice 


434 


Calmly consider: a lifetime is not all that long. Even when the sayings of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors consisted of merely three words, or even just two words, 
what They gave expression to would have expressed what all the Buddhas and 
Ancestors truly are. And why so? Because the Bodies and Minds of Buddhas and 
Ancestors are one and the same, so Their one or two phrases all express the genial 
Body and Heart of a Buddha and Ancestor. This Body and Heart of Their’s also 
comes to us, and It expresses our body and heart. At the very moment when They 
express It, Their expression comes to us and expresses our own body and heart. 
And this life of ours also expresses the embodiment of past lives. As a result, when 
we awaken and become a Buddha, and when we become an Ancestor by having a 
Dharma heir, we go beyond ‘Buddha’ and we go beyond ‘Ancestor’. The ability of 
two or three words to embody our ceaseless practice is in no way different. Do not 
vainly chase after the sounds and forms of fame and gain. When you do not chase 
after them, then this is the very ceaseless practice that the Buddhas and Ancestors 
Transmit directly, one-to-one. Whether you seclude yourself within the world or 
seclude yourself apart from the world, whether you are wholly enlightened or half 
enlightened, what I recommend is that you cast aside the myriad things of the 
world and your myriad entanglements with them, for this is the ceaseless practice 
that Buddhas and Ancestors practice ceaselessly. 

Written at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple on the fifth day of the fourth lunar month in the 
third year of theNinji era (May 6, 1242). 

Copied by me on the eighteenth day of the first lunar month in the fourth year of the same era 
(February 8, 1243). Proofreading was completed on the eighth day of the third month of 
the same year (March 29, 1243). 

Ejo 



30 


On ‘The Meditative State 
That Bears the Seal of the Ocean’ 

(Kami Zammai) 

Translator’s Introduction: This is one of the most subtle discourses in the Shobogenzo, due in 
part to the influence of the Avatamsaka Scripture on Dogen’s way of expressing his points. It is 
primarily devoted to a line-by-line analysis of a poem attributed to Shakyamuni Buddha, which 
ends with the phrase kaiin zammai, ‘the meditative state that bears the seal of the Ocean’. This 
tenn is traditionally applied to the meditative state that Shakyamuni Buddha is said to have 
entered in order to expound the Avatamsaka Scripture and, by extension, to the meditative state 
that all Buddhas and Ancestors enter when They give expression to the Dharma. 

The term ‘seal’ is an allusion to a carved seal bearing its owner’s name. It is used to 
authenticate a person’s signature. For instance, when someone is Transmitted in the Zen 
tradition, the Transmission documents which the disciple writes on silk at that time are then 
‘signed and sealed’ by the Master as proof of the authenticity of the Transmission. By extension, 
the meditative state referred to in this discourse is one that bears the seal of the Ocean, which 
means that what the meditator is giving expression to is genuine Dharma. In the context of this 
chapter, ‘to seal’ carries a meaning of ‘to authenticate as genuine’. 


All of the Buddhas and Ancestors invariably enter the meditative state that 
bears the seal of the Ocean. As They swim about in this meditative state, there are 
times when They give expression to the Tmth, and times when They experience the 
Truth directly, and times when They put It into Their daily practice. The merit of 
Their doing Their practice upon the surface of the Ocean includes Their having 
penetrated to the very bottom of the Ocean. They make Their practice upon the 
surface of the Ocean Their practice that plumbs the depths of the Ocean. They are 
not concerned with wistfully seeking out ways to make Their wandering about 
through birth and death return Them to the Source. Instead, They have broken 
through former obstructions, as if They were passing through barrier gates or 
piercing through the joints in a cane of bamboo. This liberation is characteristic of 
each and every Buddha and Ancestor, for They are the various streams that have 
flowed into the meditative state that bears the seal of the Ocean. 


435 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Meditative State that Bears the Seal of the Ocean ’ 


436 


The Buddha once said in verse: 

Merely of various elements is this body of Mine 
composed. 

The time of its arising is merely an arising of elements; 

The time of its vanishing is merely a vanishing of 
elements. 

As these elements arise, I do not speak of the arising of 
an 1, 

And as these elements vanish, I do not speak of the 
vanishing of an 7 ’. 

Previous instants and succeeding instants are not a series 
of instants that depend on each other; 

Previous elements and succeeding elements are not a 
series of elements that stand against each other. 

To give all of this a name, I call it ‘the meditative state 
that bears the seal of the Ocean ’. 

We need to make a diligent effort to fully explore these words of the 
Buddha. Arriving at the Way and entering into the realization of the Truth do not 
necessarily depend on listening to someone else or on speaking with someone else. 
And we have heard of those whose knowledge is broad who have realized the Way 
upon hearing four lines of Scripture, and those who have knowledge as extensive 
as the sands of the Ganges have been known to realize the Truth through hearing a 
single line of a Scriptural verse. And what is more, the Buddha’s present words are 
not about seeking one’s inherent enlightenment in what lies ahead, nor are they 
about grasping after one’s first awareness of enlightenment within some 
experience. In general, even though making one’s inherent enlightenment manifest 
is the meritorious behavior of a Buddha or an Ancestor, the various kinds of 
enlightenment—such as the first inkling of enlightenment or the full experience of 
one’s inherent enlightenment—are not the only things that make a Buddha or an 
Ancestor what They are. 

Just as the Buddha said: 

Merely of various elements is this body of Mine 
composed. 

At this time, the Buddha was speaking from within the meditative state that bears 
the seal of the Ocean. From within this state, the various elements simply exist as 
they are, which He expressed as there ‘merely being various elements’. He called 
this moment ‘the composing of this body of Mine’. The integrated form which is 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Meditative State that Bears the Seal of the Ocean ’ 


437 


composed of the various elements He accordingly calls ‘this body of Mine’. He did 
not consider this body of His as a single unified form, for it was composed of 
various elements. Thus, He spoke of this bodily composition as ‘this body of 
Mine’. 

The time of its arising is merely an arising of elements. 

This arising of elements never leaves ‘arising’ behind. 1 For this reason, 
‘arising’ is beyond what we can know through direct perception and beyond what 
we can know through intellectual discrimination. It is what He spoke of as, “I do 
not speak of the arising of an ‘I.’” By His not speaking of an ‘I’ that arises, other 
people have learned not to engage in perceiving or differentiating about any arising 
of self within such elements, nor do they think about or discriminate between 
individual arisings. What is more, when there is transcendent ‘mutual seeing’, there 
will be a going beyond the realm of ‘mutual seeing’. 2 3 

‘Arising’ invariably refers to the arrival of a specific moment, for time is 
what arises. Just what is this ‘arising’? It must surely be arising in and of itself. 
This arising is already a moment in time. Never did He say that it fails to expose 
what Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow really are. Because this is the arising of 
‘being composed of’, it is this body of His that arises, it is an ‘I’ that arises, and it 
is ‘merely being various elements’ that arises. It is not only hearing sounds and 
seeing forms and colors; it is also the arising of an ‘I’. It is this arising of an ‘I’ that 
one does not speak about. ‘Not speaking about something’ does not mean ‘not 
expressing something’, for being able to express something is not the same as 
being able to put it in words. The time of arising is synonymous with the 
appearance of ‘these elements’; it does not refer to the twenty-four hours of a day. 
These elements are what the time of arising is, and they do not compete with each 
other within the three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form. As an Old Buddha 
once put it, “Suddenly, fire arises.” Through this expression, He was saying that 
there is no waiting about for this arising. 

Another Old Buddha once said, “What is this ceaseless time of arising and 
vanishing?” Thus, in that this arising and vanishing is our experience of the 


1. That is, the arising of elements is not a single event but something that keeps on occurring at 
each instant of now. 

2. Transcendent mutual seeing refers to an understanding that goes beyond Master and disciple 
mutually recognizing each other as being ‘such a one’. 

3. Although, on a conventional level, this remark is a question, in the context of Chinese Zen 
Buddhism it would be understood as the assertion, “The What is this ceaseless time of 
arising and vanishing,” the ‘What’ being used as an epithet for That Which goes beyond any 
name we can assign to It. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Meditative State that Bears the Seal of the Ocean ’ 


438 


arising of an ‘I’ and our experience of the vanishing of an ‘I’, the process is 
unceasing. In entrusting the Matter* to Him, we need to discern the real meaning 
of His stating the ceaselessness of this process. We continually chop up this 
unceasing time of arising and vanishing, which is the very lifeblood of an Ancestor 
of the Buddha. In the unceasing time of arising and vanishing, who is it that arises 
and vanishes? As to the ‘who’ that arises and vanishes, it is the ‘who’ that is on the 
verge of being able to realize enlightenment within this body. That is, it is the 
‘who’ that manifests this body, the ‘who’ for whom the Dharma is expressed, the 
very ‘who’ in the past who was unable to grasp what Mind is. It is “You have 
gotten what my Marrow is,” and it is “You have gotten what my Bones are,” 
because the ‘you’ is the who that arises and vanishes. 

And as these elements vanish, I do not speak of the vanishing of 

an 1. 

The very moment when He does not speak of the vanishing of an ‘I’ will be 
the moment when those elements vanish. The vanishing is the vanishing of the 
elements. Though we speak of our own vanishing, it will actually be that of the 
elements. Because they are elements, they are beyond defilement, and because they 
are beyond defilement, they are untainted. To put it simply, untainted is what the 
Buddhas and the Ancestors are. And They say that you are just the same, for who is 
not a ‘you’? All those for whom there existed a previous moment and for whom 
there exists a following moment will be a ‘you’. And They say that ‘I’ is just the 
same and, since previous moments and following moments all constitute what an 
‘I’ is, who is not an ‘I’? 

In that vanishing of the Buddha’s, He was adorned with all manner of hands 
and eyes. 4 This was His great, unsurpassed nirvana, which is spoken of by some as 
His ‘death’, and which is described by others as His ‘entering into extinction’, and 
by others still as His‘entering a place of abiding’. While the ever so many hands 
and eyes are spoken of in these ways, they are nothing other than the meritorious 
function of the Buddha’s vanishing. He said that on the occasion of His ‘I’ 
vanishing, He did not speak about it, and on the occasion of His ‘I’ arising, again 
He did not speak about it. Yet even though these were simultaneous when He was 
alive, they may not have been simultaneous once He was dead. 5 


* See Glossary. 

4. ‘Hands and eyes’ is an allusion to the myriad ways in which Avalokiteshvara, who is the 
embodiment of the innate compassion of one’s Buddha Nature, sees and offers aid to those 
who cry out for help. 

5. In this context, ‘alive’ refers to the time when we believed in the delusion of a separate self, 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Meditative State that Bears the Seal of the Ocean ’ 


439 


This vanishing refers to the previous elements having already vanished, and 
it refers to the vanishing of future elements. It refers to the previous moments of 
the elements and it refers to the future moments of the elements. It refers to the 
previous and future elements, which are our thoughts and things in operation, and 
it refers to the previous and future moments, which are also our thoughts and 
things in operation. 6 Their ‘not depending on each other’ refers to our thoughts and 
things in operation and their ‘not standing against each other’ refers to the 
operating of our thoughts and things. Our letting them not stand against each other 
and our letting them not depend on each other is our realizing eighty or ninety 
percent of the Truth. When this vanishing turns the four elements* and the five 
skandhas* of our being into hands and eyes, there is our taking them up and there 

H 

is our dedicating them. When vanishing turns the four elements and the five 
skandhas into our course of action, then we step forward and both Master and 
disciple mutually recognize each other as being ‘such a one’.* At just such a 
moment as this, even the statement “Our whole body is hands and eyes” is 
insufficient. Even “Our whole being, through and through, is hands and eyes” is 
insufficient. In sum, ‘vanishing’ is the meritorious activity of an Ancestor of the 
Buddha. 

Now, as to the expressions ‘not standing against each other’ and ‘not 
depending on each other’, you need to realize that ‘arising’ encompasses ‘arising in 
the beginning, middle, and end’. “Officially, there is not space enough for a needle, 
but privately, a horse and cart can pass through.” 8 ‘Arising in the beginning, 
middle, and end’ is not something that depends on vanishing, nor is it something 
that stands against vanishing. It makes thoughts and things suddenly arise in places 


and ‘dead’ refers to the time when we have relinquished that self because we have realized 
our True Nature. 

6. The phrase ‘our thoughts and things’ refers to whatever arises, persists for a while, 
disintegrates, and vanishes, be it the thoughts that we perceive as being within our mind or 
the things that we consider to occur in the physical world. 

7. This sentence has a double meaning: First, by recognizing the impermanence of all thoughts 
and things, we dedicate our temporal being to expressing compassion. Second, by dropping 
off body and mind (the vanishing of a concern with self), all that remains is the dedication of 
oneself to expressing compassion for all beings. This double meaning of ‘vanishing’ as 
‘recognizing impermanence’ and ‘dropping off a concern with self’ carries through the rest 
of this paragraph. 

8. This saying by Meditation Master Sozan Honjaku can be paraphrased as, “Officially, the 
Teaching is above any personal considerations, but on an individual level, It permits of 
broad provisional applications.” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Meditative State that Bears the Seal of the Ocean ’ 


440 


where they had previously vanished, but it is not the arising of what has vanished; 
it is simply the arising of thoughts and things. Because it is the arising of thoughts 
and things, it does not stand against anything or depend on anything. Further, one 
moment of vanishing and another moment of vanishing are not something mutually 
dependent, nor are they something mutually opposing. Even vanishing in 
beginning, middle, and end is simply vanishing. As a Master once remarked, 
“While we are encountering something, it does not stand out, but when our 
attention is drawn to it, then we recognize its existence.” Vanishings occur 
suddenly in the place of previous arisings, but they are not vanishings of arising, 
they are vanishings of thoughts and things. Since they are vanishings of thoughts 
and things, they do not stand against each other, nor are they mutually dependent. 

Whether vanishings are what constitutes ‘all of this’ or whether arisings are 
what constitutes ‘all of this’, the Buddha chose the phrase ‘the meditative state that 
bears the seal of the Ocean’ to give all these various things a name. It is not that 
training and enlightenment are not ‘all of this’, it is simply that He called this 
untainted state ‘the meditative state that bears the seal of the Ocean’. 

Meditative states are what manifest right before our eyes. They are our 
realization of the Way. They are the middle of the night when we grope behind us 
for our pillow. They are our groping behind us for our pillow on such a night. 9 And 
our groping about for our pillow is not something we do just for billions and 
billions of myriad eons: it is our being within the Ocean, constantly doing nothing 
other than giving expression to the Teaching on the Flowering of the Wondrous 
Dharma. 10 Because we do not speak of the arising of an ‘I’, we are within the 
Ocean. Its former surface, which is myriad ripples that follow from the slightest 
movement of a single wave, refers to our constantly giving expression to the 
Dharma. And Its later surface, which is a single wave that follows from the 
slightest movement of those myriad ripples, is the Teaching we give on the 
Flowering of the Wondrous Dharma. Even were we to reel up and cast out a 
thousand foot or ten thousand foot fishing line, such a line would, alas, just hang 
straight down. 11 ‘The former surface’ and ‘the later surface’ refer to that surface of 
the Ocean which we are on. It is as if we were to speak of the front of our head and 
the back of our head. What we call the front part of our head and the back part of 


9. The meaning of this metaphor is explained in detail in Discourse 32: On Kannon, the 
Bodhisattva of Compassion (Kannon). 

10. ‘The Teaching on the Flowering of the Wondrous Dharma’ refers to our way of expressing 
the Dharma that the Buddha voiced in the Lotus Scripture. 

11. In other words, the wondrous Dharma is like an ocean that is bottomless in its depth. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Meditative State that Bears the Seal of the Ocean ’ 


441 


our head is adding a head upon a head. 12 It is not that there is a person inside, for 
the Ocean of one’s being is not some abode of a worldly person nor is it some 
place beloved by a saintly person; it is one’s Self alone within the Ocean of one’s 
being. It is simply our constantly and openly giving expression to the Dharma. This 
‘within the Ocean’ does not pertain to Its center, nor does it pertain to Its inside or 
outside; it is our constantly and endlessly dwelling within It as we give expression 
to the Teachings that are the Flowering of the Dharma. Though we do not take up 
residence in the east, west, south, or north, we do return, our boat empty yet fully 
illumined by the Moon’s Light. This genuine refuge is our returning to our Original 
Nature. Who could say that this is our day-by-day conduct of ‘staying in the 
water’? It is simply the Way of the Buddha manifesting in the Ultimate. We treat 
this as the seal that seals water. Put another way, it is the seal that seals limitless 
space. And put another way still, it is the seal that seals the mud. The seal that seals 
the water is not necessarily the seal that seals the Ocean, for above and beyond this 
there can be a seal that seals the Ocean. We call these the seal of the Ocean, and the 
seal of the water, and the seal of the mud, and the seal of the Mind. Having been 
directly Transmitted the seal of the Mind, we seal the water, and seal the mud, and 
seal the boundless space. 

djb 

CX) 


Sozan Honjaku was once asked by a monk, “I have heard that it 
says in the Scriptures that the great ocean does not give lodging to 
corpses. Just what kind of an ocean is this?” 

The Master responded, “One that contains all that exists.” 

The monk then asked, “Then why doesn’t it give lodging to 
corpses?” 

The Master replied, “What has ceased to breathe is not 
connected with It.” 

The monk asked, “Given that it contains all that exists, why is 
something that has ceased to breathe not connected with it?” 

The Master said, “The functioning of all that exists is 
something other than ceasing to breathe.” 


12. That is, just as one cannot separate the surface of the ocean from the rest of the ocean, so 
one cannot separate the front of the head from the back of the head, as if they were separable 
objects. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Meditative State that Bears the Seal of the Ocean ’ 


442 


This Sozan was a monastic brother to Ungo Doyo. The fundamental thrust of 
Tozan Ryokai’s teaching has found its true mark in this account. 13 Now the phrase, 
‘I have heard that it says in the Scriptures,’ refers to the genuine Teaching of 
Buddhas and Ancestors. It is beyond the teachings of ordinary worldly people and 
of saintly ones. And it is beyond the teachings of the Lesser Course,* which are 
connected with the Buddha Dharma. 

The Great Ocean does not give lodging to corpses. 

‘The Great Ocean’ does not refer to the Innermost Sea or to the Outermost 
Sea, for instance, nor does It refer to the Eight Seas or any other similar ones. 14 
This is not something for those of us who are studying the Way to have doubts 
about. And not only do we recognize as an Ocean that which is not an ocean, but 
we also recognize as an ocean that which is an ocean. 15 Even if you were to insist 
that the ocean in either case is what is being referred to, it still would not be the 
Great Ocean. The Great Ocean does not necessarily refer to the deep pools whose 
waters contain the eight virtues, nor does the Great Ocean necessarily refer to such 
things as the nine abysses of salt water. 16 Since Its various elements will enter into 
the composition of all of these, why must the Great Ocean always refer only to 
deep waters? This is what prompted the monk to ask, “Just what kind of an ocean 
is this?” And, since the Great Ocean was still unknown to ordinary people as well 
as to those in lofty positions, he spoke of It as ‘the Great Ocean’. Someone who 
would ask such a question is one who would attempt to put into words his 

1 7 

attachment to the word ‘ocean’. 

As to Its not giving lodging to corpses, the phrase ‘does not give lodging to’ 
can mean “If you come with a clear head, you act with a clear head; if you come 
with a dull head, you act with a dull head.” A corpse is dead ashes: its mind does 


13. Sozan and Ungo were both Transmitted disciples of Tozan. Sozan’s line died out shortly 
after his death, whereas Ungo’s has continued up to the present day and is known as Soto 
Zen, the name referring to the teachings of Sozan and Tozan. 

14. The Eight Seas, which include the Innermost Sea and the Outennost Sea, are associated with 
Mount Sumeru. 

15. An Ocean that is not an ocean refers to a metaphoric ocean, whereas an ocean that is an 
ocean refers to ocean in an everyday, worldly sense. 

16. The eight virtues of water are its being sweet, cold, soft, light, pure, odorless, not harmful to 
the throat, and not harmful to the stomach. ‘The nine abysses’ refers to nine vast 
underground rivers in China. 

17. That is, the disciple is asking his question because he is not sure that he understands what 
Sozan is talking about, but not because he doubts the validity of what Sozan is saying. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Meditative State that Bears the Seal of the Ocean ’ 


443 


not change no matter how many times it encounters the springtime. What he called 
‘a corpse’ is something that no one has ever experienced, and that is why they do 
not comprehend what it is. 

The Master’s saying, “One that contains all that exists,” expresses what the 
Ocean is. The point he is making is not that there is some single thing that contains 
all that exists, but rather that It is all contained things. And he is not saying that the 
Great Ocean is what contains all existing things, but rather that what is expressing 
‘all contained things’ is simply the Great Ocean. Though we do not know what It 
is, It is everything that exists for the moment. Even coming face-to-face with a 
Buddha or an Ancestor is a mistaken perception of ‘everything that exists for the 
moment’. At the moment of ‘being contained’, although it may involve a mountain, 
it is not just our ‘standing atop a soaring mountain peak’, and although it may 
involve water, it is not just our ‘plunging down to the floor of the Ocean’s abyss’. 18 
Our acts of acceptance will be like this, as will our acts of letting go. What we call 
the Ocean of our Buddha Nature and what we call the Ocean of Vairochana* are 
simply synonymous with ‘all that exists’. 

Even though the surface of the Ocean may not be visible to us, we never 
doubt its existence in our daily conduct of ‘swimming about’. For example, the 
monk Tafuku—one of Joshu’s Dharma heirs—once described a grove of bamboo 
as, “One or two canes are crooked, and three or four canes are aslant.” Although 
his daily monastic conduct led him to see all that exists as a bunch of errors, why 
did he not say, “A thousand crooked canes! Nay, ten thousand crooked canes!” 
Why did he not say, “A thousand groves! Nay, ten thousand groves!” Do not lose 
sight of the underlying principle that is present like this in a grove of bamboo. 
Sozan’s expression, “One that contains all that exists,” is synonymous with ‘all that 
exists’. 19 

Although the monk’s question, “Why is something that has ceased to breathe 
not connected with it?” might be viewed, albeit mistakenly, as arising from doubt, 
it could have been just what his mind was concerned with. When Master Rinzai 
said about Fuke, his elder brother in the Sangha, “I have long had my doubts about 
that fellow,” he was simply recognizing who ‘the person’ was about whom he had 


18. Dogen borrows these two lines from a poem by Meditation Master Yakusan, which Dogen 
had previously quoted at the beginning of Discourse 11: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just 
for a While, For the Whole of Time Is the Whole of Existence’ ( (Jji). Here, he is expanding 
on what he said in that discourse. 

19. That is, the It is not something separate from what It contains since both the contents and the 
container are identical with It. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Meditative State that Bears the Seal of the Ocean ’ 


444 


long held doubts. 20 In what exists, why is something that has ceased to breathe not 
connected with It and how can It not give lodging to corpses? Herein, why 
something that has ceased to breathe is not connected with It is that It already 
contains all that exists. Keep in mind that ‘containing’ does not mean ‘keeping’ and 
that ‘containing’ is synonymous with ‘not giving lodging to’. Even if all that exists 
were a corpse, it might well be that not giving lodging to it would forthwith span 
ten thousand years, and it might well be that ‘not belonging to It’ is this old monk 
Dogen playing one stone in a game of Go. 

What Sozan said is, “The functioning of all that exists is something other 
than ceasing to breathe.” In other words, whether all that exists ceases to breathe or 
does not stop breathing, a corpse would still be unconnected with It. Even though a 
corpse is a corpse, if it had behavior that was in harmony with all that exists, it 
would contain all—it would be containment. The journey before us and the journey 
behind us, which is part and parcel of all that exists, each have their own functions, 
and ceasing to breathe is not one of them. In other words, it is like the blind leading 
the blind. The fundamental principle of the blind leading the blind includes ‘one 
blind person leading one blind person’ and ‘a mass of blind people leading a mass 
of blind people’. When a mass of blind people are leading a mass of blind people, 
all contained things contain all contained things. Further, no matter how many 
Great Ways there are, They are beyond ‘all that exists’, for we have still not fully 
manifested our meditative practice, which is the meditative state that bears the seal 
of the Ocean. 

Written at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple on the twentieth day of summer in the third year 
of the Ninji era (May 21, 1242). 

Copied by me during the first year of the Kangen era (1243). 

Ejo 


20. Rinzai’s remark was not derogatory, but was a common way among Zen monks of 
acknowledging that someone—in this case, Fuke—was ‘such a person’. 



31 

On Predicting Buddhahood 

(Juki) 


Translator’s Introduction: This discourse is based on the prediction by Shakyamuni Buddha 
that all sentient beings will ultimately realize Buddhahood. In Japanese, this prediction is called 
juki, a technical tenn that needs to be translated in slightly different ways depending on context. 
These can include the principle of predicting Buddhahood, the conferring of a prediction of 
Buddhahood, and affirming someone’s realization of Buddhahood, among others. Towards the 
end of the discourse, Dogen writes the word juki using a different character for ju, which 
conveys the meaning of receiving, accepting, or acknowledging the prediction. 

The Great Teaching which Ancestors of the Buddha have Transmitted one- 
to-one is the prediction of Buddhahood. Those who have not trained with an 
Ancestor of the Buddha have never encountered this Teaching even in their 
dreams. The timing of this prediction varies. It is predicted even for persons who 
have not yet given rise to the Mind of Wisdom, and it is predicted for those who 
are not yet aware of their Buddha Nature, and it is predicted for those who are 
aware of their Buddha Nature, and it is predicted for those who have a sense of a 
personal self, and it is predicted for those who are beyond a sense of a personal 
self, and it is predicted for all Buddhas. All Buddhas preserve and rely on the 
predictions of Buddhas. In your training, you should not think that after you have 
had the prediction conferred on you, you will become a Buddha, nor should you 
think that after you have become a Buddha, you will receive some affirmation of it. 
At the time when the prediction is conferred there is one’s becoming Buddha, and, 
at that same time, there is also one’s continued training and practice. There is the 
affirmation of Buddhahood that resides within all Buddhas, and there is the 
affirmation that is above and beyond Buddhahood. This affirmation is given to 
oneself, and it is given to one’s body and mind. If one then gives up on continuing 
to leam about ‘the Great Matter* of the affirmation of Buddhahood’, then one is 
giving up on learning through practice, and thereby sets aside ‘the Great Matter of 
the Way of the Buddha’. The prediction of Buddhahood is present before one has a 
body, and the prediction of Buddhahood is present after one has a body. There is 
the prediction of Buddhahood that we can recognize, and there is the prediction of 


* See Glossary. 


445 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


446 


Buddhahood that we do not recognize. There is the prediction of Buddhahood that 
others become aware of, and there is the prediction of Buddhahood that others do 
not become aware of. 

By all means, you need to realize that when you affirm your prediction of 
Buddhahood, your true Self will manifest before your very eyes, for affirming the 
prediction of Buddhahood is synonymous with the manifesting of your true Self. 
Therefore, what Buddha after Buddha, Ancestor after Ancestor, and Successor after 
Successor have inherited is just this prediction of Buddhahood. And further, there 
is not a single thought or thing that is excluded from this prediction. So how could 
the great earth with its mountains and rivers, along with Mount Sumeru and its vast 
oceans, possibly be exceptions? There is not the least person, be it Mr. Chang’s 
third son or Mr. Li’s fourth son, who is beyond it. 1 The prediction of Buddhahood 
that we thoroughly explore in this way is something that we can express in one 
phrase, that we can hear in one phrase, that we may misunderstand in one phrase, 
and that we may comprehend in one phrase. It is our doing our practice in all 
earnestness and our giving expression to the Dharma in all sincerity. It is what 
instructs us to step back and what instructs us to step forward. 2 Our being able to 
sit here today whilst wearing the kesa* could not have come about had we not been 
able to receive the prediction that has come to us from the distant past. Because we 
have put our hands in gassho* and placed the kesa upon our heads, what has 
manifested before us is the prediction of our Buddhahood. 


djb 

The Buddha once said: 

Although there are many forms for affirming Buddhahood, to 
summarize them briefly, there are eight: 

First, you recognize it yourself, but others do not 
recognize it, 

Second, everyone else recognizes it, but you do not, 

Third, both you and everyone else recognize it, 


1. Chang and Li are common Chinese family names and, much like the western names Smith 
and Jones, are used to refer to anybody in general. Third and fourth sons also represent 
individuals who are not apt to hold a position of importance within a family. Hence, the 
allusion is to ‘anybody and everybody’. 

2. In Zen parlance, ‘stepping back’ is associated with sitting in meditation and reflecting on 
one’s True Nature, whereas ‘stepping forward’ is associated with going forth and doing one’s 
daily deeds from the mind of meditation. 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


447 


Fourth, neither you nor anyone else recognize it, 

Fifth, those close to you perceive it, but those distant 
from you do not, 

Sixth, those distant from you perceive it, but those close 
to you do not, 

Seventh, both those close to you and distant from you 
perceive it, 

Eighth, neither those close to you nor distant from you 
perceive it. 

The affirmation of one’s Buddhahood is just like this. So, do not occupy yourself 
with thoughts that your Buddhahood cannot be affirmed because it has not been 
recognized or appreciated by the living spirit within that smelly skin bag* of yours. 
And do not say that the prediction of Buddhahood cannot be readily given even to 
those humans who have not yet awakened. In ordinary, worldly ways of thinking, 
people have customarily been taught that they will receive this prediction when 
they have completely fulfilled their training and practice, for that is what is critical 
to their becoming a Buddha, but in the Way of the Buddha this is not what is 
taught. When someone gives heed to a single phrase whilst following a good 
spiritual friend or gives heed to a single phrase whilst following some Scriptural 
work, this will be the cause for their receiving a prediction of Buddhahood, 
because this is the fundamental practice of all the Buddhas, and it is the practice 
that puts down good roots amidst all the hundreds of things that sprout up in one’s 
life. If I were to express in words what the prediction of Buddhahood is, I would 
say that all who receive the prediction are persons who will indeed realize the 
Ultimate. 

Keep in mind that even a single mote of dust is unsurpassed, that even a 
single mote of dust is transcendent. Why would the prediction of Buddhahood not 
include a single mote of dust? Why would the prediction of Buddhahood not 
include each thought and thing? Why would the prediction of Buddhahood not 
include all the myriad thoughts and things that arise? Why would the prediction of 
Buddhahood not include training and enlightenment? Why would the prediction of 
Buddhahood not include the Buddhas and the Ancestors? Why would the 
prediction of Buddhahood not include one’s doing one’s utmost in practicing the 
Way? Why would the prediction of Buddhahood not include great realization and 
great delusion? It is just as Meditation Master Obaku said to his disciple Rinzai, 
“When my tradition comes down to you, it will greatly flourish in the world.” And 
it is just as Meditation Master Eno said to his disciple Nangaku, “You too are like 
this, and I too am like this.” The prediction of Buddhahood is a mark of the 
Dharma. The prediction of Buddhahood is “How could it be otherwise?” The 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


448 


prediction of Buddhahood is a face breaking out in a smile. The prediction of 
Buddhahood is birth and death: it is coming and going. The prediction of 
Buddhahood is the whole universe in all its ten quarters. The prediction of 
Buddhahood is the whole universe’s never having been hidden from us. 


Gensha Shibi was once walking in attendance with his Master 
Seppo, when Seppo pointed to the ground right before them and said, 

“This plot of land would be a fine place to erect a seamless stupa for 
me.” 

Shibi asked him, “And how high would it be?” 

Thereupon, Seppo looked up and down as though measuring it. 

Shibi then said, “There will certainly be great good fortune for all 
ordinary humans, as well as for those in lofty positions, from such a 
stupa. And yet, my venerable monk, it is as if you have not encountered 
the prediction of Buddhahood on Vulture Peak even in your dreams.” 

Seppo responded, “Well, how would you put it?” 

Shibi replied, “Seven feet or eight feet.” 3 

Now, in Shibi’s saying, “And, my venerable monk, it would seem that you have 
not yet encountered the prediction of Buddhahood on Vulture Peak even in your 
dreams,” he was not saying that the prediction of Buddhahood on Vulture Peak did 
not exist for Seppo, nor was he saying that Seppo had received the prediction of 
Buddhahood on Vulture Peak. He was saying that it seemed as if the venerable 
monk had never encountered the prediction of Buddhahood on Vulture Peak even 
in his dreams. 4 

We need to use our Eye to see the prediction of Buddhahood on Vulture 
Peak from a higher perspective. Shakyamuni Buddha put it in words as, “I have the 
Wondrous Heart of Nirvana, which is the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching, and I am entrusting It to Makakasho.” Keep in mind that, in harmony 
with the time, when Seigen gave the prediction of Buddhahood to his disciple 
Sekito, Makakasho was likewise receiving Seigen’s prediction of Buddhahood, and 
Seigen was also conferring Shakyamuni’s prediction of Buddhahood. Thus, it is 


3. A seamless stupa is a funeral monument carved out of solid rock that serves as a repository 
for someone’s remains. When it contains the remains of a Master, it is considered to be the 
body of a seated Buddha six feet tall. Shibi’s saying “Seven feet or eight feet” was a 
statement that expressed deep love and respect for his Master. 

4. By this statement, Shibi was affirming the ‘no self’ of his Master. 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


449 


clear that Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor have had entrusted to 
Them the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. Accordingly, Daikan 
Eno, the Sixth Chinese Ancestor of Mount Sokei, had already conferred the 
prediction on Seigen. Once he had received the prediction from the Sixth Ancestor, 
Seigen became the real Seigen who preserved and relied upon the prediction of his 
Buddhahood. At this time, what all the Ancestors up to the Sixth Ancestor had 
learned by exploring the Matter through their training was being put into practice 
through affirming the prediction of Seigen’s Buddhahood. This has been described 
as: 

Clear and bright are the tips of all the things 
that sprout up; 

Clear and bright are the true intentions of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Since this is so, how can the Buddhas and the Ancestors not include ‘all the things 
that sprout up’? How can all the things that sprout up not include ‘me’ and ‘you’? 
Do not be foolish and think that you can see or recognize all the thoughts and 
things with which you are personally endowed. This is not the way things are. The 
thoughts and things that we recognize are not necessarily our own possessions. 
What we possess is not necessarily something that we ourselves see or are aware 
of. So, do not be skeptical, thinking that since the prediction is beyond anything we 
now know, or see, or think about, we are not in possession of it. What is more, 
what we call the prediction of Buddhahood on Vulture Peak is Shakyamuni 
Buddha’s predicting of Buddhahood: it was given from Shakyamuni Buddha to 
Shakyamuni Buddha. While it would be reasonable not to give the prediction to 
someone whom you are not yet sure of, the underlying meaning is that there is no 
obstacle to affirming the prediction of Buddhahood for someone who has already 
received that prediction. Even where there has not been an affirmation of 
Buddhahood, it is not superfluous to predict someone’s Buddhahood. There is 
nothing lacking nor is there anything superfluous: this is the principle of predicting 
Buddhahood that all Ancestors of the Buddha have given to all Ancestors of the 
Buddha. This is why the Old Buddha Uncho Tokufu said: 

From past to present, Masters have raised their hossu* to 
point the Matter out, 

Great their wish, deep and subtle, and not, I dare say, 
easy to explore. 

Were it not for this Truth which Masters have given 
through their Teaching, 

From what perspective, pray, could we talk about It? 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


450 


djb 

Now, to thoroughly explore Shibi’s point, in his reckoning how high a stupa made 
from solid rock is, he used the expression “How high?” Thus, it is not that Shibi is 
dissatisfied with Seppo’s looking up and down. It is simply that—thanks to 
Seppo—even though there will certainly be great good fortune for all ordinary 
humans, as well as those in lofty positions, nevertheless, Seppo’s way of looking at 
the stupa is not what Shakyamuni Buddha’s prediction of Buddhahood is about. 
That which gains Shakyamuni Buddha’s prediction of Buddhahood exists in the 
expression ‘seven feet or eight feet’. In our looking closely at Shakyamuni’s real 
prediction of Buddhahood, we need to examine it by means of the expression 
‘seven feet or eight feet’. So, setting aside for the moment whether the expression 
‘seven feet or eight feet’ is on target or not, the prediction of Buddhahood must 
unquestionably encompass the prediction of Seppo’s Buddhahood as well as the 
prediction of Shibi’s Buddhahood. Further, one should express the height of a stupa 
by proffering the prediction of Buddhahood. Should anyone proffer something 
other than the prediction of Buddhahood, it will not be an expression that conveys 
the Buddha Dharma. 

Whenever we recognize, hear, or state that the Self is truly our self, then, 
beyond doubt, the prediction of Buddhahood will fully manifest our spiritual 
question. When we are face-to-face with the prediction of our Buddhahood, we 
will immediately do our utmost in practice, for this is in harmony with the 
prediction of Buddhahood. In order to ultimately realize the prediction of 
Buddhahood, just as ever so many Ancestors of the Buddha have done, one trains 
in order to manifest one’s genuine enlightenment. And utilizing one’s strength in 
the effort to affirm one’s Buddhahood brings forth the Buddhas en masse. This is 
why Shakyamuni Buddha said in the Lotus Scripture, “Only because of Their 
relationship to the One Great Matter do Buddhas appear in the world.” This means 
that, on a higher level, it is the transcendent Self, which goes beyond one’s 
personal self, that receives the prediction of the transcendent Self’s Buddhahood. 
This is why Buddhas receive the affirmation of Buddhas. 

Generally speaking, when it comes to giving the prediction, there are those 
who predict it by raising one hand, and those who predict it by raising two hands, 
and those who predict it by raising a thousand hands and eyes, and those who are 
given the prediction. On one occasion it was predicted by the raising of an 
udumbara blossom, and on another occasion Shakyamuni predicted it for 
Makakasho by holding aloft a gold brocade kesa, but neither of these ways is a 
required way of doing it. There are various ways of conferring the prediction. 
There can be a prediction of one’s Buddhahood from within, and there can be a 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


451 


prediction of one’s Buddhahood from without. The principle of thoroughly 
exploring ‘within and without’ will be found by exploring the affirmation of 
Buddhahood through your training with your Master. To learn the Way as an 
affirmation of Buddhahood is equivalent to a single iron rod extending for ten 
thousand miles. To sit with the stillness of a mountain as an affirmation of 
Buddhahood is a single instant being equivalent to ten thousand years. 


Our Old Buddha Shakyamuni once said in verse: 

One after another, They were able to realize Buddhahood 
And, turning to the next, They were able to confer the 
prediction of Buddhahood . 5 

The realization of Buddhahood spoken of here undoubtedly implies ‘one after 
another’, and ‘one after another’ refers to realizing Buddhahood bit by bit. There is 
a ‘turning to the next’ in the predicting of Buddhahood. ‘Turning to the next’ is a 
turning that begets a turning, and ‘turning to the next’ is a next that begets a next. It 
is, for instance, creating a next, and creating a next involves performing an action. 
That action is beyond the deliberate, calculated creation of a self, beyond the 
deliberate, calculated creation of circumstances, beyond any measured concoction, 
and beyond any deliberately created state of mind. By relying on the principle of 
‘turning to the next’, you should, by all means, thoroughly investigate both your 
creating circumstances and your not creating circumstances. And by relying on the 
principle of ‘turning to the next’, you should thoroughly investigate both what you 
are concocting and what you are not concocting. 

Now, the emerging of Buddhas and Ancestors is due to Each having been 
turned to through performing some action. The coming from the West of the five 
Buddhas and the six Ancestors was due to Each having been turned to through 
performing some action . 6 And what is more, the toting of water and the carrying of 


5. A verse based on a passage in the Lotus Scripture, which speaks of a Transmission line that 
will pass through five hundred monks. ‘The next’ refers to one’s disciple, that is, someone 
who is next in the line of succession. 

6. The five Buddhas are the Five Dhyani Buddhas of esoteric Buddhism, each of whom 
represents a particular aspect of the Cosmic Buddha. These Buddhas are: Vairochana, the 
Eternal Buddha; Akshobya, the Immovable Buddha; Ratnasambhava, the Jewel-Born 
Buddha; Amitabha, the Buddha of Immeasurable Light; and Amoghasiddhi, the Fearless 
Buddha. The six Ancestors is an allusion to Bodhidhanna as the First Chinese Ancestor 
through Daikan Eno who was the Sixth. 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


452 


firewood has continued on by a turning to the next. To live your life as “One’s very 
mind is Buddha” is a turning towards the next. When you enter nirvana as “One’s 
very mind is Buddha”—and entering once or twice is nothing extraordinary—you 
will pass through ever so many nirvanas, and will realize ever so many realizations 

n 

of the Truth, and will manifest as signs and marks ever so many signs and marks. 
This is nothing other than realizing Buddhahood by one after another, and entering 
nirvana by one after another, and predicting Buddhahood for one after another, and 
one after another realizing what ‘turning to the next’ is. Turning to the next is not 
something that is inherent, but is simply something that is all-pervasive, 
penetrating all. Now, Buddhas and Ancestors mutually recognize each other, face- 
to-face, and this face-to-face mutual recognition is what is meant by ‘one after 
another’. There is no room in which to turn away from or evade turning to the next 
in the giving of the prediction by a Buddha or in the giving of the prediction by an 
Ancestor. 


It was an Old Buddha who said : 7 8 

Now that I have heard from the Buddha 
That we have received His glorious prediction of our 
Buddhahood 

And that through His turning to the next, we have had 
His assurance conferred upon us, 

My body and mind are filled with joy. 

This is saying that the glorious matter of Shakyamuni Buddha’s prediction is, 
beyond question, what Kaundinya heard from the Buddha. What has filled his body 
and mind with joy is that he has also received an assurance, which he has just now 
heard from the Buddha through His turning to the next. The next that is turned to 
will be the ‘I now’ who hears and the assurance will not be limited to some ‘self’ 
or ‘other’ of past, present, or future. It will be heard of from the Buddha and not 
from someone else. This lies beyond delusion and enlightenment, beyond sentient 
beings, and beyond earthly realms with their grasses and trees, for it will be what 
one hears from the Buddha. It is the glorious matter of His predicting our 


7. ‘Signs and marks’ is an allusion to the thirty-three signs and eighty distinguishing marks of a 
Buddha. 

8. The Old Buddha is Ajnyata Kaundinya, one of the five ascetics who associated with 
Shakyamuni before His enlightenment. As recorded in the Lotus Sutra, Kaundinya was the 
first of five hundred to receive this prediction after the Buddhas enlightenment. 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


453 


Buddhahood, and it is our receiving His assurance through His turning to us as ‘the 
next’. The principle of ‘turning to the next’ never gets stuck in some cranny even 
for a moment but, bit by bit, fills the body and mind with joy. The joyous assertion 
that is extended through this turning to the next is undoubtedly in harmony with 
the body, which is seeking far and wide for the Master, and it is also in harmony 
with the mind, which is seeking far and wide for the Master. Further, because the 
body, beyond question, thoroughly permeates the mind, and the mind, beyond 
question, thoroughly permeates the body, Kaundinya spoke of his body and mind 
being filled. In other words, it is what permeates all worlds and all directions; it 
permeates the body and permeates the mind. This, then, is a particularly great joy. 
This joy clearly gladdens us, whether we are asleep or awake, deluded or 
enlightened. Even so, although the states of being asleep, awake, deluded, or 
enlightened are intimately connected with each other, they do not stain or defile 
each other. This is the glorious matter of predicting our Buddhahood, which is our 
being turned to and receiving the affirmation. 


Shakyamuni Buddha, through speaking to Bhaisajyaguru, the 
Bodhisattva* Lord of Healing, addressed eighty-thousand other 
bodhisattvas, saying, “O Lord of Healing, within this great assembly 
of countless heavenly beings, dragon kings, yakshas, gandharvas, 
asuras, garudas, kinnaras, and mahoragas 9 —both human and 
nonhuman—as well as male and female monastics, and male and 
female laity, you can see those who are seeking to be shravakas,* 
those who are seeking to be pratyekabuddhas,* and those who are 
seeking the Bodhisattva Way to Buddhahood. If such as these, who 
are all standing before the Buddha now, should hear but a single verse 
or line from My Teaching, which is the flowering of the Wondrous 
Dharma, and take joy in It for even a moment, I will give them all a 
prediction of their Buddhahood. Beyond question, all will realize 
supreme, fully perfected enlightenment.” 


9. ‘Dragon kings...mahoragas’ comprise a list of quasi-mythical beings who were originally 
given to violent or seductive acts but who, upon conversion to Buddhism, became spiritual 
guardians, each type having governance over some protective function. Hence, they may 
manifest as some human or non-human being fulfilling that function. Together with the 
heavenly beings, they are known as the eight categories of non-human beings. 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


454 


So, within this assembly of countless beings, even though the wishes and 
levels of understanding of these countless heavenly beings and dragon kings, of 
those in the four categories of Buddhists, and of those in the eight categories of 
nonhumans may differ, who would have them hear one line or verse which would 
not be the Wondrous Dharma? How could any of you take joy in non-Buddhist 
teachings even for a moment? His phrase ‘such as these’ means those who are the 
flowers of the Dharma. His phrase ‘who are all standing before the Buddha’ means 
all who are within Buddha. Even though humans and nonhumans may hold mixed 
beliefs concerning the myriad thoughts and things that arise, and even though there 
are those who have sown karmic* seeds for hundreds of later sproutings, they will 
still be included in ‘such as these’. ‘Such as these’ means ‘all those to whom I have 
given a prediction of Buddhahood’. ‘All those to whom I have given a prediction 
of Buddhahood’ is correct from head to tail. Accordingly, it is the proper 
functioning of supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. 

Shakyamuni Buddha, in addressing the Lord of Healing, also 
said, “Further, after the Tathagata’s extinction, if there is someone 
who hears a single verse or line of My Teaching, which is the 
flowering of the Wondrous Dharma, and that one were to rejoice in It 
even for a moment, I would predict supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment for such a one as well.” 

What would be the time span implied by the phrase ‘after the Tathagata’s 
extinction’ that was just spoken of? Would it be within the forty-nine years after 
His enlightenment or would it be within the eighty years of His whole life span? 
Let’s say for the moment that it is the eighty-year span. When the Buddha said, “If 
there is someone who hears a single verse or line of My Teaching, which is the 
flowering of the Wondrous Dharma, and that one were to rejoice in It even for a 
moment,” was he referring only to what is heard by those who are keen-witted and 
not to what is heard by those who are dull-witted? And does it matter if they hear it 
correctly or not? If we express this Teaching for the sake of others, it should be 
expressed as, “If there are any people by whom It is heard,” and so on. And do not 
treat them as being either keen-witted or dull-witted. What you should say is, 
“Although that which hears His Teaching, which is the flowering of the Dharma, is 
the profound and immeasurable wisdom of Buddhas, when some hear It, It is 
invariably experienced as one phrase, and when others hear It, It is invariably 
experienced as one verse, and when still others hear It, It is invariably experienced 
as one moment of joyousness.” Such a moment will be Shakyamuni Buddha’s once 
again giving His prediction of their realizing supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment. There is His giving His prediction one more time and there is His 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


455 


giving His prediction to all. Do not entrust some stumble-footed, worldly, third son 
of Chang with the task of spiritual prediction. Experience it through painstaking 
effort that is in harmony with your training. Then you will be ‘someone who 
hearkens with joy to a single line or verse’. There is no time to waste by treating 
Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow as if one were sticking a head upon one’s own 
head. His witnessing someone’s being given the prediction of supreme, fully 
perfected enlightenment is the Buddha’s wish being fulfilled. And it will be the 
same for all us skin bags. Through this prediction, the hopes of the multitudes are 
fulfilled. And it would be like this if anyone hears it. 

Buddhahood has been affirmed by holding aloft a pine branch, by holding 
aloft an udumbara blossom, by holding aloft twinkling eyes, and by a face breaking 
into a smile. And there is the example from the past of its having been affirmed by 
passing on a pair of sandals. These are some examples of this Dharma’s being 
something that speculative and discriminatory thinking are unable to fathom. There 
is the affirmation of “I myself am also like this,” and there is the affirmation of, 
“You yourself are also like this.” This principle can be stated as, “One can give the 
prediction of Buddhahood in the past, present, and future.” Because past, present, 
and future are encompassed within the prediction of Buddhahood, Buddhahood is 
realized in the prediction of one’s own Buddhahood and it is realized in the 
prediction of the Buddhahood of others. 


V i trial akirti,* in talking with Mai trey a,* said, “O Maitreya, it is 
said that the World-honored One has given you the prediction that in 
some lifetime you would realize supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment. In which lifetime are you able to receive His 
prediction? Is it in the past, or in the present, or in the future? If you 
say it was in a past lifetime, such a past life has already gone. If you 
say it will be in some future life, such a future life has yet to come. If 
you say that it is in your present lifetime, there is no present lifetime 
that abides. If it is as the Buddha teaches, then you, dear monk, at this 
very moment, are living and aging and perishing. If you are able to 
receive His prediction on account of your no longer being alive, then 
no longer being alive would be the right state to be in . 10 But, then 
again, within such a ‘right state’, one cannot receive a prediction and 
one cannot realize supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. So how, 


10. This refers to the intermediate stage between death and rebirth. 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


456 


Maitreya, will you receive the prediction in any lifetime? Will you do 
it by being able to receive the prediction in life just as it is? Or will 
you do it by being able to receive the prediction in death just as it is? 

If you say you can get the prediction by means of life just as it is, 
there is no such thing as ‘life just as it is’. If you say you can get the 
prediction by means of death just as it is, there is no such thing as 
‘death just as it is’. All sentient beings are like this, and all thoughts 
and things are also like this. The wise and holy among the multitudes 
are also like this. And you, Maitreya, are also just like this. If you, 
Maitreya, are able to receive the prediction, then all sentient beings 
should also be able to receive the prediction. And why is that? Well, 
because ‘That Which Is as It Is’ is free of duality and free of any 
differentiations. If you, Maitreya, can realize supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment, all sentient beings can likewise realize it. And why is 
that? Because all sentient beings are already manifestations of 
enlightenment.” 

What Vimalakirti is saying here is not something that the Tathagata has said 
is not so. While this is true, Maitreya’s being able to receive the prediction was 
already a settled matter. Therefore, the ability of all sentient beings to receive the 
prediction must likewise be a settled matter. If there is no affirmation for sentient 
beings, there cannot be any affirmation for Maitreya, because all sentient beings 
are manifestations of enlightenment. It is enlightenment that receives the prediction 
of enlightenment. Receiving the prediction is our life this very day. Thus, because 
all sentient beings have given rise to the same intention to realize Buddhahood, 
their receiving the prediction will be the same and their realizing the Way will be 
the same. 

Even so, Vimalakirti, by your assertion, “Within this ‘right state’, one cannot 
receive a prediction,” you seem not to know that the ‘right state’ is simply one’s 
receiving the prediction, and you do not seem to be saying, “The ‘right state’ is 
precisely what enlightenment is.” Further, you said, for example, that one’s life in 
the past has already gone, one’s life in the future has not yet come, and one’s life in 
the present does not abide. But the past is not necessarily something that has gone, 
the future is not necessarily something that has not yet come, and the present is not 
necessarily something that is not abiding. Although you may say that you are 
studying such notions as ‘already gone’, ‘not yet come’, and ‘not abiding,’ in terms 
of past, future, and present, by all means you need to state the principle that what 
has not yet come is past, present, and future. When we recognize this, then we will 
understand the principle that our arising and our perishing both realize the 
prediction, and we will understand the principle that our arising and our perishing 



Shobogenzo: On Predicting Buddhahood 


457 


both realize enlightenment. When all sentient beings realize the prediction of their 
Buddhahood, Maitreya, too, realizes his prediction. 

Now, O Vimalakirti, I would like to ask you, “Is Maitreya the same as any 
sentient being or is he different?” Try to say, and we’ll see! You have already said 
that if Maitreya obtains the prediction, all sentient beings will also obtain the 
prediction. If you are saying that Maitreya is other than a sentient being, then 
sentient beings cannot be sentient beings and Maitreya, likewise, cannot be 
Maitreya. But that won’t do, for at this very moment, you too could not be 
Vimalakirti! If you were not Vimalakirti, then this expression of yours would be 
useless. So, we can say that when the prediction of Buddhahood causes the lives of 
all sentient beings to exist, there are the lives of all sentient beings and there is 
Maitreya. The prediction of Buddhahood can cause everything to exist. 

Written in the summer of the third year of the Ninji era, on the twenty-fifth day of the fourth lunar 
month (May 26, 1242) at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple. 

Copied by me on the twentieth day of the first lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era 
(February 29, 1244) while I was residing in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant at 
Kippo-ji Temple in Etchu Province. 



32 

On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 

(Kannon) 


Translator’s Introduction: The name Kannon is a shortened version of Kanzeon (Skt. 
Avalokiteshvara), ‘The One Who Heeds the Cries of the World’. This Bodhisattva goes under 
many names and has taken many forms in India, as well as in other East Asian Buddhist cultures. 
Originally, Avalokiteshvara was iconographically represented as being male, but after the figure 
came into China, it was often pictured as being female, although not exclusively so. From the 
standpoint of Buddhist iconography, the male aspect represents the personification of 
compassion, whereas the female aspect represents compassion in action. However, Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas are said to have the ability to shift between these two functions, depending on 
which seems to be the more spiritually helpful in a given situation. For a translator writing in 
English, this presents a problem of how to refer to Kannon: as He or as She. Since a choice has 
to be made, I have chosen to use masculine grammatical fonns simply because, historically, this 
Bodhisattva is Indian in origin, where the figure is traditionally considered to be male and the 
name is grammatically masculine in gender. 

The compassion that is represented by Kannon has no limitations in its functioning, as the 
dialogue between the two brother-monks, Ungan and Dogo, expresses. It is like eyes that see 
everything and hands that offer help everywhere, even in the darkest of times. Some readers may 
find it difficult, on occasion, to follow what Dogen is driving at in this discourse. To put it 
simply, when it comes to conveying what the innate compassion of one’s Buddha Nature is, it is 
difficult to express what is essentially beyond words to convey, and conventional ways of talking 
about the innate compassion of one’s Buddha Nature do not meet the mark. Therefore, even 
though Ungan and Dogo successfully found a way of expressing what the compassion of Buddha 
Nature is like, the way that they put the matter goes beyond conventional ways of understanding 
what is said. At times Dogen explains what they mean by using the via positiva (saying what 
something is like) and at other times he does this by using the via negativa (saying what 
something is not like). 


Ungan Donjo once asked Dogo Enchi , 1 “What use does the 
Bodhisattva* of Great Compassion make of His ever so many hands 
and eyes?” 


1. Ungan and Dogo were both Dharma heirs of Yakusan Igen. 
* See Glossary. 


458 



Shobogenzo: On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 


459 


Dogo replied, “He is like someone in the night who reaches 
behind himself, his hand groping for his pillow.” 

Ungan remarked, “I get it, I get it!” 

Dogo asked, “What did you get?” 

Ungan said, “That His whole body is hands and eyes.” 

Dogo replied, “What you have said is very well put. Still, it 
only expresses eighty or ninety percent of the Matter.”* 

Ungan responded, “Well, so much for the likes of me. How 
about you, my elder brother in the Dharma, what do you make of it?” 

Dogo replied, “That His whole being, through and through, is 
hands and eyes.” 

In expressing what Kannon is, many voices have been heard before and after 
this incident, but none of them equal the words of Ungan and Dogo. If you wish to 
explore through your training what Kannon is, you should thoroughly investigate 
what Ungan and Dogo are saying here. The Bodhisattva of Great Compassion 
spoken of here is Kanzeon Bosatsu, ‘The Bodhisattva Who Heeds the Cries of the 
World’, who is also known as Kanjizai Bosatsu, ‘The Bodhisattva Who Observes 
All Things Free of Attachments’. Through our training, we study Him, or Her, as 
the father and mother of all Buddhas. So do not consider Him to be inferior to the 
Buddhas, thinking that He has not yet realized the Truth, for in the past He was the 
Tathagata known as ‘The Clarifier of the True Dharma’. 

So, let us now take up, and thoroughly explore, the words spoken by Ungan, 
namely, “What use does the Bodhisattva of Great Compassion make of His ever so 
many hands and eyes?” There are Buddhist traditions that make a point of 
honoring Kannon, and there are Buddhist traditions that have not yet seen Kannon 
even in their dreams. The Kannon that existed for Ungan was in complete harmony 
with Dogo’s Kannon. And this was not so just for one or two Kannons, but Ungan 
was likewise in harmony with hundreds of thousands of myriad Kannons. Only 
Ungan’s assembly allowed Kannon to truly be Kannon. And why is that? The 
difference between the Kannon of which Ungan spoke and the Kannon of which 
other Buddhas spoke is like the difference between being able to put It in words 
and not being able to put It in words. The Kannon of some Buddhas merely had 
twelve faces; this was not so for Ungan. The Kannon of some other Buddhas 
merely had a thousand hands and eyes; this was not so for Ungan. The Kannon of 
still other Buddhas had eighty-four thousand hands and eyes; this was not so for 
Ungan. How do I know this to be true? Because when Ungan speaks of the 
Bodhisattva of Great Compassion using His ever so many hands and eyes, his 
phrase ‘ever so many’ does not mean merely eighty-four thousand hands and eyes. 



Shobogenzo: On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 


460 


How much less did he limit it to some particular number, like twelve or thirty-two 
or thirty-three! ‘Ever so many’ is synonymous with ‘beyond count’. The phrase 
‘ever so many’ is not limited as to what sort or how many. Since it is not limited to 
any sort or amount, you should not limit it, not even by calculating it to be an 
unbounded, limitless amount. You need to explore through your training that the 
underlying meaning of the phrase ‘ever so many’ is just like this, for it has already 
gone beyond the bounds of the immeasurable and the unbounded. 

Now, in taking up Ungan’s phrase ‘His ever so many hands and eyes’, Dogo 
did not say that it did not reveal the Matter, so it must have contained the 
underlying principle. Ungan and Dogo were in complete harmony with each other 
and stood shoulder-to-shoulder, having already trained together under Yakusan for 
forty years. During that time, they had discussed accounts from both the past and 
the present, rooting out what was not correct and verifying what was correct. 
Because they had trained together in this manner, when on this day they stated ‘His 
ever so many hands and eyes’, Ungan was making a statement and Dogo was 
verifying it. Keep in mind that ‘His ever so many hands and eyes’ was being 
discussed by both of these Old Buddhas alike. Both Ungan and Dogo are clearly in 
accord concerning ‘His ever so many hands and eyes’, so Ungan now asks Dogo 
what use Kannon makes of them. Do not consider his question to be the same as 
the types of questions raised by academic teachers of Scriptures and scholarly 
writers of commentaries, or by the ‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’.* This 
question has elicited a spiritual affirmation: it has elicited ‘hands and eyes’. Now, 
there may well be Old Buddhas, as well as more recent Buddhas, who have 
realized Buddhahood through the force of Ungan’s having said, “What use does He 
make of His ever so many hands and eyes?” Ungan could also have said, “What 
does He accomplish by making use of His ever so many hands and eyes?” And he 
could also have expressed the Matter as “What is it that He does?” or “What does 
He put into motion?” or “What is He expressing?” 

Dogo replied, “He is like someone in the night who reaches 
behind himself, his hand groping for his pillow.” 

To express the underlying principle, Dogo gives as an example someone who is 
groping behind himself for a pillow in the middle of the night. ‘Groping for’ means 
‘searching for’. ‘In the night’ is a way of saying ‘being in the dark’, just as we 
might speak of ‘seeing a mountain in the light of day’. That is, ‘using one’s hands 
and eyes’ is like someone in the night reaching behind himself, his hand groping 
for a pillow. We need to investigate ‘using one’s hands and eyes’ on this basis. And 
we need to examine ‘in the night’ from the perspective of ‘in the light of day’, as 



Shobogenzo: On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 


461 


well as from the perspective of when it is nighttime, and we need to examine it 
from the perspective of a time that is neither day nor night. When people grope for 
a pillow, even though they do not understand it as something resembling Kannon’s 
using His hands and eyes, we do not and cannot escape from the principle that it is 
just like that. 

Can it be that the ‘someone’ who is ‘like someone who’ is just a word in a 
simile? And further, is this ‘someone’ an ordinary, everyday person or might it be 
someone who is no ordinary, everyday person? If we study it as being an ordinary, 
everyday Buddhist, then there is something we need to investigate in ‘groping for a 
pillow’. Even a pillow has some shape or design that needs our inquiry. And ‘the 
night’ might not simply be ‘the night’ which ordinary people and those in lofty 
positions mean by ‘day and night’. You need to realize that what is being said is 
not about getting hold of the pillow, or about finding the pillow, or about pushing 
the pillow away. If we investigate what underlies Dogo’s saying, “in the night, 
reaching behind himself, his hand groping for a pillow,” we need to see, and not 
disregard, the eyes that show you the night. A hand that is groping for a pillow has 
not yet touched its edge. If reaching behind with the hand is essential, then is there 
something essential that needs to be reached with the eyes? We need to clarify 
what ‘the night’ means. Would it refer to the realm of hands and eyes? Is it in 
possession of human hands and eyes? Or is it just hands and eyes alone, flashing 
like bolts of lightning? Is it one or two instances of hands and eyes being right 
from head to tail? If we examine the matter in this way, then the use of ever so 
many hands is present. But who is the Bodhisattva of Great Compassion? It is as if 
all that is heard is ‘the Bodhisattva of Hands and Eyes’. If that is so, then we 
should ask, “What does the Bodhisattva of Hands and Eyes use ever so many 
Bodhisattvas of Great Compassion for?” 

You need to realize that even though hands and eyes do not stand against 
each other, they are making use of That Which Is, and That Which Is is making use 
of them. When That Which Is expresses Itself in this way, even though the whole 
of Its ‘hands and eyes’ are never hidden from us, we must not look for a time when 
It expresses Itself as ‘the whole of Its hands and eyes’. Even though there are Its 
hands and eyes that are never hidden from us, and even though these hands and 
eyes do exist, they are not our self, nor are they mountains and oceans, nor are they 
the countenance of the sun or the countenance of the moon, nor are they “Your 
very mind is Buddha.” 


2. That is, ‘being in the dark’ and ‘seeing something in the light of day’ are metaphors, and do 
not refer to a temporal night and day. 



Shobogenzo: On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 


462 


Ungan’s words, “I get it, I get it!” are not saying, “I understand Dogo’s 
words.” It is an “I get It, I get It!” in relation to his having made a statement about 
the hands and eyes that That Which Is makes use of, which will be Its making free 
use of the here and now, and Its having free entry into this present day. 

Although Dogo’s expression, “What did you get?” is another way of Ins 
saying, “I’ve gotten It,” it is one which does not stand against Ungan’s “I get It.” 
Even so, Dogo had his own way of putting “What did you get,” a way that means 
“I’ve got It and you’ve got It.” Would this not be equivalent to “Our eyes get It and 
our hands get It?” Is it referring to an understanding that has emerged or to an 
understanding that has not yet emerged? While the understanding implied by “I get 
it” is synonymous with the ‘I’, you need to consider that there is a ‘you’ in “What 
did you get?” 

What has come forth as a result of Ungan’s statement, “His whole body is 
hands and eyes,” is a plethora of Kannons who, in speaking of ‘someone in the 
night reaching behind himself, his hand groping for his pillow’, are exploring it by 
stating that one’s whole body is nothing but hands and eyes. These Kannons indeed 
are Kannons, even though They have not yet been able to put it into Their own 
words. When Ungan said, “His whole body is hands and eyes,” he was not saying 
that hands and eyes are the Dharma Body which exists everywhere. Even though 
everywhere is the whole universe, the hands and eyes of our body at this instant 
will not be the Everywhere that is everywhere. Even though the hands and eyes of 
our body can perform the meritorious actions of the Everywhere, they cannot be 
the hands and eyes that leave the marketplace with stolen goods. The meritorious 
activities of hands and eyes will be beyond the sort of seeing, behaving, and 
expressing that judges rightness. These hands and eyes are already described as 
being ‘ever so many’, so they are beyond a thousand, beyond ten thousand, beyond 
eighty-four thousand, and beyond the immeasurable and the unbounded. Not only 
is it like the whole body being hands and eyes, it is also like giving voice to the 
Dharma in order to rescue sentient beings, and like letting loose the Light 
throughout the nations. Therefore, you should explore through your training that it 
must be, as Ungan put it, that your whole body is hands and eyes. So, even though 
he says to use your whole body as hands and eyes, and even though he says to 
change your demeanor, now being active, now resting, do not let yourself be 
disturbed by this. 

Dogo replied, “What you have said is very well put. Still, it 

only expresses eighty or ninety percent of the Matter.” 



Shobogenzo: On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 


463 


The main point of what Dogo said here is that Ungan’s expression is very well put. 
‘Putting it very well’ means that what one says hits the mark and that it clarifies the 
Matter, with nothing left unexpressed. When what has not been expressed before is 
now finally expressed so that nothing remains that has not been expressed, it will 
still only be expressing eighty or ninety percent of the Matter. 

Even if your exploration of the intent behind what Ungan said were one 
hundred percent, if you are still unable to put It in words, then your have not 
thoroughly explored the Matter. And even if Ungan’s way of putting It was eighty 
or ninety percent of the Matter, it was still his expression of It, which might be 
eighty or ninety percent on the mark or one hundred percent on the mark. At that 
very moment in time, Ungan might have stated the Matter through hundreds of 
thousands of myriad expressions, but his abilities were so wondrous that he offered 
only a bit of his abilities and expressed a bare eighty or ninety percent of the 
Matter. For instance, even if he had had hundreds of thousands of myriad abilities 
to bring forth the whole universe, what he actually said would surpass his leaving 
the Matter unsaid. At the same time, were he to take up just one of his abilities, it 
would not be an ordinary, worldly-wise ability. The meaning of this eighty or 
ninety percent is like this. Even so, when people hear the statement by an Ancestor 
of the Buddha that someone has expressed eighty or ninety percent of the Matter, 
they understand it to mean that it is only eighty or ninety percent because it does 
not come up to an expression that would be a hundred percent of the Matter. If the 
Buddha Dharma were like this, It would not have reached us today. You need to 
explore through your training that the so-called ‘eighty or ninety percent’ is an 
eighty or ninety percent of ‘hundreds of thousands’, as if we were speaking of 
‘ever so many’. Dogo had already stated ‘eighty or ninety percent of It’ and he 
certainly knew that It must not be confined to a literal eighty or ninety percent. We 
need to explore through our training that this is the way that the Ancestors of the 
Buddha speak. 

When Ungan said, “So much for the likes of me. How about you, my elder 
brother in the Dharma, what do you make of it?” he said “so much for the likes of 
me” because he wanted Dogo to put into words what he called ‘only expressing 
eighty or ninety percent of the Matter. ’ Although this is his ‘not leaving any traces 
behind’, it is also ‘his arms being long and his sleeves being short ’. 3 “While I have 


3. Another way of expressing this is that, although his words leave no karmic wake (not 
leaving any traces behind), his intention in asking the question is obvious (his arms sticking 
out from his sleeves). 



Shobogenzo: On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 


464 


not yet exhausted the ways of saying what I have just said, I leave the matter as it 
is” is not what his expression “So much for the likes of me” means. 

Dogo said, “His whole being, through and through, is hands and 

eyes.” 

These words of his are not saying that hands and eyes, as independent entities, are 
what one’s whole being is through and through. What he is saying is that one’s 
whole being, through and through, is hands and eyes. As a consequence, he is not 
saying that one’s body is what hands and eyes are. Since ‘with His ever so many 
hands and eyes’ means ‘using His hands and using His eyes ’, 4 His hands and eyes 
are, of necessity, the whole of Him being hands and eyes, through and through. In 
asking, “What does He do with His ever so many bodies and minds?” there will be 
the response, “His whole being, through and through, is whatever He is doing.” 
What is more, it is not the case that Ungan’s expression, ‘whole body,’ is not quite 
complete whereas Dogo’s expression, ‘whole being, through and through,’ is 
thoroughly complete. Ungan’s ‘whole body’ and Dogo’s ‘whole being, through and 
through’ are not open to any discussion of their comparative value, and the ‘ever so 
many hands and eyes’ that was stated by each of them is an expression of That 
Which Is. 

Thus, the Kannon of whom our old Master Shakyamuni spoke only had a 
thousand hands and eyes, or twelve faces, or thirty-three bodies or eighty-four 
thousand bodies. The Kannon of Ungan and Dogo had ever so many hands and 
eyes and is beyond any talk about quantities. When you explore through your 
training the Kannon of Ungan and Dogo, which has ever so many hands and eyes, 
then you, together with all Buddhas, will realize eighty or ninety percent of 
Kannon’s meditative state. 

Given on the twenty-sixth day of the fourth lunar month in the third year of the Ninji era (May 

27, 1242). 


4. The Chinese character, read as yo in Japanese, when functioning as a preposition means 
‘with’, and when functioning as a verb, means ‘to use’. 



Shobogenzo: On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 


465 


Now, since the Buddha Dharma has come from the West, many Ancestors of 
the Buddha have spoken about Kannon, but they have not equaled Ungan and 
Dogo, and for that reason, I spoke only about this Kannon of theirs. As Yoka 
Genkaku said in his poem, “The Song That Attests to the Way”: 

Not stuck on seeing just one single thing: this we call 
being a Tathagata; 

Such a one can be called a Kanjizai, one who regards all 
things just as they are. 

This is evidence that even though the Tathagata and Kannon manifest in Their 
particular bodily forms, They are not separate beings. 

And there was also an exchange between Mayoku and Rinzai concerning the 
true Hands and Eyes . 5 These are just a couple of cases among ever so many. There 
is Ummon’s statement, “There are the Kannons who, upon seeing the forms of 
things, clarify Their minds, or who, upon hearing the sounds of things, awaken to 
the Way.” What sights and sounds are not encompassed within Kanzeon 
Bodhisattva’s seeing and hearing? And in Hyakujo’s words, “There is His gateway 
for entering into the Truth.” Among the assembly in the Shurangama Scripture, 
there are the Kannons who have fully realized the Way. And among the assembly 
in the Lotus Scripture, there is the Kannon who manifests everywhere. All these 
Kannons are identical with the Buddhas and They are identical with the great earth 
with its mountains and rivers. Yet, at the same time, They are but one or two of the 
ever so many hands and eyes. 

Copied by me on the tenth day of midsummer in the third year of the Ninji era (June 9, 1242). 

Ejo 


5. This exchange is recounted in the Translator’s Addendum immediately following this 
discourse. 



Shobogenzo: On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion 


466 


c2p c2p dfe 

(X) 

Translator’s Addendum from 
Book 3, Koan 44 of Dogen’s Chinese Shinji Shobogenzo 

Once while Mayoku Hotetsu was training in Rinzai’s community, he asked 
Rinzai, “Which is the true Eye of the Compassionate One with a Thousand Hands 
and Eyes?” 

Rinzai replied, “Which is the true Eye of the Compassionate One with a 
Thousand Hands and Eyes? Well, quick, you tell me! Speak right up!” 

Thereupon, Mayoku pulled Rinzai down off his chief monk’s seat in the 
Meditation Hall and sat himself down in Rinzai’s place. 

Rinzai got up off the floor and said, “Well, how do you do!” Mayoku was 
about to respond, when Rinzai suddenly gave out a Zen shout, pulled Mayoku off 
the chief monk’s seat, and sat back down on it. 

Mayoku got up off the floor and [since he had been bested] left the hall. 



33 

On Arhats 

(Arakan) 


Translator’s Introduction: The Sanskrit word ‘arhat’ means ‘one who is venerable’ or ‘one 
worthy of respect’. It is used in Buddhism to designate someone who has arrived at an advanced 
spiritual stage that is marked by being completely free of defiling passions. The term, however, 
has somewhat different meanings within the various traditions of Buddhism, ranging from the 
highest level of spiritual attainment (one who is a living Buddha) to one who is just on the brink 
of entering Buddhahood. While the concept of the arhat has occupied a central position in 
Southern Buddhist traditions, it tends to be given a secondary position in Mahayana traditions, 
with the bodhisattva ideal being primary. Dogen’s discourse, however, covers much broader and 
varied applications of the term, thereby embracing a more universal perspective. 


“With all their desires already completely spent and having 
gone beyond all defiling passions, they have succeeded in reaching 
what truly benefits them, and, having brought to an end the bonds to 
existence, their minds have been set free .” 1 

This describes what the great arhats are, for arhathood is the ultimate fruit of those 
who study the Buddha Dharma. These are the Buddha arhats who are called ‘Those 
of the Fourth Stage ’. 2 

‘All their desires’ is equivalent to a wooden ladle with its handle broken off. 
Though, up to now, the ladle has been used many times, an arhat’s complete 
wearing out of self is the whole body of the Wooden Ladle springing forth. ‘Their 
having succeeded in reaching what truly benefits them’ is synonymous with Its 
whole Body emerging from the crown of their head. 

‘Their having brought the bonds of existence to an end’ is the same as their 
never concealing anything anywhere in the universe. And we need to investigate 
thoroughly that the way in which their minds perceive the forms and characteristics 
of things, once their minds have been set free, is synonymous with ‘high places 


1. This is Shakyamuni Buddha’s definition of arhats found in the opening passages of the 
Lotus Scripture. 

2. See the ‘Four Stages of Arhathood’ in the Glossary. 


467 



Shobogenzo: On Arhats 


468 


being naturally in balance up high, and low places being naturally in balance down 
low’. Because of this, they have their own tiles and stones for their walls and 
fences . 3 

‘Being set free’ is synonymous with their mind’s manifesting all functions. 
Their not returning to their defiling passions is synonymous with defiling passions 
not yet arising, which is spoken of as ‘defiling passions being obstructed by 
defiling passions ’. 4 

Further, an arhat’s marvelous spiritual abilities, wise discernment, 
meditative states, giving voice to the Dharma, leading others, and letting the Light 
of Truth shine forth are not to be likened to abilities discussed by non-Buddhists, 
quarrelsome bedeviling people, and the like. Teachings about an arhat’s ability to 
see such things as hundreds of Buddha realms are never to be associated with the 
views and opinions of ordinary, worldly people. The principle of this is: “Although 
we have just said that a barbarian’s beard is red, there is also the fact that a person 
with a red beard is a barbarian .” 5 ‘Entering nirvana’ is an arhat’s practice of 
getting inside his, or her, own Fist . 6 7 Thus, the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana is a 
place which an arhat does not turn away from or shun. Arhats who have entered 
their own Nostrils are those we call true arhats: those who have not entered their 

n 

own Nostrils are not arhats. 


It was said in olden times in the Lotus Scripture , “We today are also true 
arhats, and, by our voicing of the Buddha’s Way, we can help all to hear It.” The 
main point of ‘we can help all to hear If is that we can help all things to be voices 
of Buddha. Why would anyone stop at just listening to Buddhas and Their 
disciples? When all those who are conscious of It and have knowledge of It, who 


3. That is, they have their own way of thinking about things. 

4. ‘Defiling passions being obstructed by defiling passions’ means that when an arhat sees 
defiling passions arise in others, he or she keeps defiling passions from arising in response, 
because the arhat sees the suffering that will arise from giving in to such passions. 

5. A saying by Meditation Master Hyakujo, referring to two ways of saying the same thing. In 
other words, a person who has such properties is an arhat, and an arhat is a person who has 
such properties. 

6. That is, operating from the place of enlightenment within. 

7. ‘Someone entering his, or her, Nostrils’ is a common Zen Buddhist metaphor for someone 
who has awakened to the Truth: such a one has gotten ‘a whiff of It’. 



Shobogenzo: On Arhats 


469 


have Its Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow, proceed to help others hear It, that is 
what I would call ‘helping all’. Our ‘being conscious of It and having knowledge 
of It’ is synonymous with the grasses and trees of our native land and with the tiles 
and stones of our walls and fences.* What we hear is the rising and falling away of 
all these things, their flourishing and fading out, their births and deaths, their 
comings and goings. But the basis of helping all to hear the Buddha’s Way by 
means of our voicing It is not simply exploring through our training that the whole 
world is an ear. 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said the following, “If any among My disciples 
would call themselves arhats or pratyekabuddhas,* but have not heard or realized 
the fact that the Buddha Tathagatas only instruct bodhisattvas,* they are not the 
Buddha’s disciples, nor are they arhats, nor are they pratyekabuddhas.” The 
Buddha’s saying that He only instructed bodhisattvas means “I, along with the 
Buddhas in the ten quarters, know this well, for each Buddha on His own, together 
with all Buddhas, has been able to exhaustively explore the True Form of all 
things, which is what supreme, fully perfected enlightenment is.” Thus, to consider 
oneself to be a bodhisattva or a Buddha must accord with considering oneself to be 
an arhat or a pratyekabuddha. And why is this? Because to think of oneself in this 
way means that one has heard and recognized the fact that all the Buddha 
Tathagatas only instruct bodhisattvas. 


Long ago it was said, “In the Scriptures of the shravakas,* arhat is the name 
given to those who have realized Buddhahood.” What is said here is confirmation 
of what the Buddha said. It is not simply the preaching of some faint-hearted 
scholastic commentator, but expresses a universal principle in the Way of the 
Buddha. You need to explore through your training the principle of calling an arhat 
someone who has realized Buddhahood, and you need to explore through your 
training the principle of calling someone who has realized Buddhahood an arhat. 
Apart from the effects of arhathood, nothing else remains, not even a single mote 
of dust or a single thought or thing—still less does fully perfected enlightenment 
remain as something separate from arhathood! Apart from supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment, again, nothing else remains, not even a single mote of dust or a 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On Arhats 


470 


single thought or thing—still less do the four stages and four results of arhathood 

o 

remain as something separate from supreme, fully perfected enlightenment! At 
the very moment when an arhat is carrying all thoughts and things upon his 
shoulders, all these thoughts and things are truly beyond being ‘eight ounces or 
half a pound ’. 8 9 And they are beyond mind, beyond Buddha, and beyond material 
things. Even the Eye of a Buddha cannot see them, look as It will. So, we need not 
get into discussions about eighty thousand eons before and eighty thousand eons 
after. All that remains to such a one is just the complete Dharma. 

djb 

CX) 

Shakyamuni once said the following: 

If any of these male and female monks should tell themselves, 

“I have already realized arhathood and am in my final embodiment, 
which is ultimate nirvana,” and therefore give up their intention to 
seek supreme, fully perfected enlightenment, you should, by all 
means, know that such as these are all braggarts. And why? Because if 
there were monks who had truly realized arhathood, they would not 
have arrived at such a state unless they trusted this Dharma of Mine. 

What is said here confirms that those who are able to trust in supreme, fully 
perfected enlightenment are arhats. To have trust in this Dharma, of necessity, is to 
depend on It. One who has truly realized arhathood is beyond such statements as “I 
have already realized arhathood and am in my final embodiment, which is ultimate 
nirvana,” because such a one is intent on seeking supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment. To aspire to seek supreme, fully perfected enlightenment is to take 
delight in one’s Eye, to sit there facing a wall, and, in facing the wall, to open 
one’s Eye. Though we may say that fully perfected enlightenment encompasses the 
whole world, it is ‘gods appearing and demons vanishing’, and though we may say 
that it extends over all of time, it is ‘the mutual throwing of self and other into the 
moment at hand ’. 10 We call one who is like this someone who is intent on seeking 


8. The four results of arhathood refer to the results that arise from attaining each of the four 
stages. 

9. That is, they are beyond our ability to measure. 

10. The two quotes are from a poem by Meditation Master Engo, which Dogen quotes on page 
293 of Discourse 22: On the Everyday Behavior of a Buddha Doing His Practice (Gyobutsu 



Shobogenzo: On Arhats 


471 


supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. Thus, such a one is intent on seeking 
arhathood. Aspiring to seek arhathood is being satisfied with gruel and being 
satisfied with rice. 


Meditation Master Engo of Mount Kassan once said the following: 

After those of old had caught the drift, they would go off into 
remote mountain areas, living in huts fashioned of mallows or thatch, 
or in rock caves. For ten or twenty years they would dine on rice 
boiled in a broken-footed pot. For the most part, they would forget 
human society, having taken their leave of its defiling domains 
forever. In our present age, I dare not aspire to live like that, so I 
simply conceal my former name, cover my tracks, and keep to what I 
ought to do, which is to become an old monk, ah skin and bones, 
living in accord with what I have realized, and making use of what I 
have received as it accords with my abilities. Wearing away my old 
karma,* I would adapt myself to the age-old ways. Had I any strength 
to spare, I suppose I would extend it to others, creating conditions for 
the development of wise discernment, and training myself to stand on 
my own two feet and to ripen naturally. It would be as if in some 
wilderness covered deep in tall grasses, I set about to hack out one 
whole real person, or at least half a one. Then, knowing that I too have 
It, together with all others, I would rid myself of birth-and-death, ever 
benefiting more and more those who are to come in the future, that I 
might repay my deep indebtedness to the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

However much I may restrain myself, I suppose I cannot 
prevent the frosts and dews of my years from ripening the fruits of my 
karma. And so, I will need to reenter the world and adapt myself to 
accord with circumstances, opening up and entrusting myself to 
ordinary people and those in lofty positions, but without letting my 
mind manipulate me into seeking for gain. And how much less could I 
possibly enslave myself to the influence of the nobility only to 
become a mediocre, fawning teacher who acts to deceive the common 
folk, who scorns the saintly, who courts gain, who contrives to win a 


Iigi). The first describes the arbitrary way that thoughts and things arise and disappear, and 
the second describes how arhats function. 



Shobogenzo: On Arhats 


472 


name for himself, and thereby creates for himself the karmic 
consequence of living in an Avichi hell of unremitting suffering! If 
only I could go through the world in such a manner as to produce no 
karmic wake—though I may not have the chance—would I not then 
be an arhat who has left behind the defiling world? 

Accordingly, a genuine monk here and now is an arhat, one who has left behind the 
defiling world. If you would know what an arhat is, know that it is like this. Do not 
let yourself be led astray by the words of Indian scholastics. Meditation Master 
Engo of China was an Ancestor of the Buddha who had inherited the True 
Transmission. 


Hyakujo Ekai in Hungchou Province once said, “When our eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, body, and mind, each and every one of them, no longer covet and are no 
longer tainted by thoughts and things, either material or immaterial, we call this 
‘accepting and keeping to a four-line verse’, as well as ‘the fourth stage .”’ 11 It is 
impossible for any of us to change our eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind 
into something different from what they are, for they are completely, from top to 
toe, beyond our fathoming. As a consequence, such a one’s whole being is 
naturally beyond covetousness or stain, and the whole of all thoughts and things, 
material and immaterial, is beyond covetousness or stain. It means that one’s 
accepting and keeping to a four-line verse is naturally beyond coveting or staining 
anything , and we call this ‘the fourth stage’. And the fourth stage is that of an 
arhat. Thus, the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind that fully manifest before 
us here and now are what an arhat is. From beginning to end, such a one will be 
naturally free from delusion. ‘Arriving immediately at the barrier gate’ is 
synonymous with accepting and keeping to a four-line verse . 12 Accordingly, it is 
the fourth stage. Right from the crown of his head to the bottoms of his feet, his, or 
her, whole body fully manifests It and there is not the slightest thread or hair that 
has been omitted. 

In short, were I to express the Matter,* how would I word it? I might put it 
this way: When an arhat is in a worldly state of mind, all thoughts and things serve 


11. ‘A four-line verse’ is a common reference to Scriptural Teachings given in verse by 
Shakyamuni Buddha. 

12. ‘The barrier gate’ is a common Zen Buddhist metaphor for the unobstructed gateway into 
realizing enlightenment. 



Shobogenzo: On Arhats 


473 


to obstruct him. When an arhat is in a saintly state of mind, all thoughts and things 
serve to liberate him. By all means, you must realize that an arhat and all thoughts 
and things are fellow trainees. When an arhat has already awakened, he is 
restricted by ‘being an arhat’. This is why, since before the time of the Lord of 
Emptiness, arhats have been Old Fists . 13 

Given to the assembly on the fifteenth day of the fifth lunar month in the third year of the Ninji 
era (June 14, 1242), while residing at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple in the Uji 
district ofYamashiro Province. 

Copied by me on the sixteenth day of the sixth lunar month in the first year of the Kenji era (July 
11, 1275). 

Ejo 


13. The Lord of Emptiness refers to the first of the Seven Buddhas, the One who lived during 
the Age of Emptiness, that is, before duality had first arisen. ‘Old Fists’ implies that arhats, 
from beginningless time, have been embodiments of Ultimate Reality. 



34 

On the Cypress Tree 

(Hakujushi) 


Translator’s Introduction: The subject of this discourse derives from a koan story in which a 
monk asks Meditation Master Joshu what Bodhidharma’s intent was in coming to China. Joshu 
responds by alluding to a tree called a ‘hakuju ’ in Japanese and a ‘pai-shu ’ in Chinese. Even 
though these two words are written with the same Chinese characters, they designate two 
different types of tree: the Japanese hakuju tree is an oak (a deciduous tree), whereas the Chinese 
pai-shu tree is a type of cypress (an evergreen conifer). 

In China, since at least the time of Confucius, the cypress has been paired with the pine tree. 
Because these two trees, unlike all others, do not lose their foliage even in the severest of 
winters, they have been used as a common metaphor in China for friends who remain constant in 
adversity. When this metaphorical meaning is applied to Joshu’s alluding to the cypress, it 
describes the intent behind Bodhidharma’s coming to China, namely, to find a true spiritual 
friend (disciple) who would remain constant in adversity. The one he found was Eka, who 
proved his constancy by standing in the courtyard outside Bodhidhanna’s quarters in the ever- 
deepening snow and then later proffering his ‘severed arm’ to the Indian Master as evidence of 
his commitment. (This ‘severing’ may refer to giving up one’s attachments rather than to a 
literal, physical act.) The nature of the relationship between Bodhidharma as Master and Eka as 
disciple becomes clearer when Bodhidhanna is seen to represent the pine (a common metaphor 
for the Eternal) and Eka is seen as the cypress. In a subsequent koan story, this relationship is 
expressed as the Empty Sky and the cypress tree. 


Joshu was of the thirty-seventh generation after the Tathagata Shakyamuni. 
He was sixty-one years old when he first gave rise to the intention to seek the 
Truth and left home life behind to explore the Way. At that time he made a vow, 
saying, “Even if someone is a hundred years old, if that person is spiritually less 
advanced than I, I shall offer that person Teaching. And even if someone is seven 
years old, if that person has spiritually surpassed me, I shall ask that person for 
Teaching.” Vowing thus, he drifted southward like a cloud. 

While wandering about in search of the True Way, Joshu chanced to arrive 
at Mount Nansen, whereupon he went to make his prostrations to the Abbot, the 
monk Nansen Fugan, who happened to be in his quarters, resting, when Joshu 
came for his initial interview. 

Nansen immediately asked him, “Where have you just come 
from?” 


474 



Shobogenzo: On the Cypress Tree 


475 


Joshu replied, “From the Hall of the Auspicious Image .” 1 

Nansen asked, “And have you seen the Auspicious Image?” 

Joshu replied, “I have not yet seen the Auspicious Image, but 
what I have encountered is a reclining Tathagata .” 2 

Thereupon Nansen immediately arose and asked him, “Are you 
a novice that has a Master not?” 

Joshu responded, “A novice that has found his Master .” 3 

Nansen then asked, “And just who is that Master of yours?” 

Joshu replied, with all sincerity, “Though the early spring is 
still cold , 4 as I was doing my prostrations, I could not help but reflect 
on how grateful I am for the health of your august body, Venerable 
Monk. It is like ten thousand blessings.” 

Thereupon, Nansen called for the Head Monk of the Meditation 
Hall and told him, “Put this novice in the special place !” 5 

Thus it was that Joshu took up residence with Nansen, and, for thirty years, did his 
utmost to practice the Way, without once going off to some other temple. He never 
idled away a moment or engaged in other pursuits. Then, after he had been 
Transmitted and received the methods for teaching others how to train in the Way, 
he took up residence in Kannon-in Monastery in Joshu Province for another thirty 
years. While he was Abbot there, the things he did and how he did them were 
different from the behavior of ordinary monks in other places. 

On one occasion, he composed the following verse: 

In vain do I gaze upon the smoke from the hearths of my 
neighbors on all sides. 

Jam-filled buns and rice cakes, for a year now, have 
parted company from me. 

Thinking about them today, I can only swallow my spit. 


1. The name of a temple building on Mount Nansen. 

2. Nansen’s question has a double meaning. Taken on a conventional level it simply refers to a 
statue of the Buddha that is in a particular temple hall, whereas on a spiritual level it is 
asking Joshu whether he has had a kensho yet. Joshu’s response takes the latter intent. 

3. That is, as his subsequent remark implies, he already regards Nansen as his Master. 

4. Joshu’s reference to the early spring being cold is his way of expressing how young and 
inexperienced he is in training with a Master. 

5. The ‘special place’ is an area in the Meditation Hall directly behind the senior monks. New 
novices who had already demonstrated their understanding of what monastic life is about 
were seated there. 



Shobogenzo: On the Cypress Tree 


476 


Periods of mindfulness are few, bemoanings all too 
frequent. 

Among hundreds of families, not a single good and 
friendly face is to be found. 

Those who come by merely say, “I’ve just dropped in for 
a cup of tea. ” 

Unable to have any tea, they leave in a snit. 

How sad that a smoking fire in his own hearth was rare, that even a one-dish meal 
was so scarce, and that he had not had a varied meal since the year before. When 
anyone from among those hundreds of families came, they were in search of a cup 
of tea, and those who were not in search of a cup of tea did not come at all. There 
was not one from amongst those hundreds of families who came bringing tea . 6 
Occasionally, there was a novice who came to look at ‘the wise one ’, 7 8 but there 
was not a single dragon elephant * who wished to be his equal. 

On another occasion he composed a verse: 

When I think about those throughout the country who 
have left home life behind, 

How many can there be whose state resembles my state 
in life? 

Earth for a bed, broken reeds for a mat, 

An old elm branch for a pillow, and nothing at all for a 
coverlet. 

Before His revered image, there is no Peaceful Breath 
incense to be burned, 

o 

And from the ashes all I smell is the scent of cow dung. ” 

From what he said, we should recognize the spotlessness and purity of his temple, 
and we should learn from these traces that he left behind for us today. There were 


6. ‘In search of a cup of tea’ is a Zen Buddhist metaphor for someone seeking a Master in order 
to get ‘enlightenment’ but, in Joshu’s case, none were willing to stay and train. ‘Bringing 
tea’ is an allusion to those who come to a Master and selflessly offer their training, or to 
someone who has had a kensho and seeks to have it confirmed. 

7. This is an allusion to the custom of monks, and novices in particular, to go traveling to other 
monasteries during the summer months in order to train under a Master other than their own. 

* See Glossary. 

8. Peaceful Breath was a type of incense made from a tree resin and widely used in temples 
throughout China. The cheapest forms of incense were made from cow dung. 



Shobogenzo: On the Cypress Tree 


477 


not many monks in his assembly, maybe twenty at most. His Monks’ Hall was not 
large, lacking both a front hall and a back hall . 9 It had no lighting at night and there 
was no charcoal for wintry weather. Sad to say, the conditions there could be 
described as the way that old folks live in their declining years. And the 
deportment of Old Buddhas was like this. 

Once when a leg on his meditation platform broke, Joshu tied a charred log 
to it and it lasted for years. Whenever an officer of the temple commented that the 
leg needed to be repaired, the Master would not permit it. This is a good example, 
one rare in any generation. 

Customarily, the rice for their gruel was so thinned down that there was not 
even a single grain of rice in it, so the monks would distract themselves at meals by 
turning their gaze towards tranquil windows or towards the dust in some crack. 
Sometimes they would gather nuts or berries, which both the assembly of monks 
and the Abbot himself would use for their daily sustenance. We trainees of today 
should praise this deportment, and though we do not surpass the Master’s 
deportment, we should make our attitude of mind one of fond respect for the past. 


Once, when Joshu was addressing his assembly, he said: 

For thirty years, I lived in the south intent on nothing but doing 
seated meditation. If any of you wish to realize the One Great Matter,* 
you will encounter It by pursuing the principle of doing seated 
meditation. If after three years, or five years, or twenty years, or even 
thirty years, you can still say that you have not realized the Truth, take 
the skull of this old monk and make it into a pot to piss in. 

That is the kind of vow he took. Truly, doing the practice of seated meditation is 
the straight road of the Buddha’s Way. We should follow the principle of “Just sit 
and you shall see what happens.” Later, people would say of him, “Joshu was truly 
an Old Buddha.” 


Great Master Joshu once had a monk who asked him, “What 
did our Ancestral Master Bodhidharma come from the West for?” 

The Master replied, “For a cypress tree in the courtyard.” 


9. The front hall contained meditation platforms which were used by temple officials and 
guests. The back hall traditionally contained a washstand and was used as a cleanup area for 
the monks who lived in the Monks’ Hall. 



Shobogenzo: On the Cypress Tree 


478 


The monk then said, “Venerable Monk, pray, do not use some 
physical object to point it out to a person like me.” 

The Master said, “I am not pointing it out to you by using a 
physical object.” 

The monk again asked, “Well then, what did our Ancestral 
Master come from the West for?” 

The Master replied, “For a cypress tree in the courtyard.” 10 

Although this particular koan* sprang from the mind of Joshu, ultimately it is what 
all Buddhas have habitually put into practice with Their whole being. In doing so, 
They skillfully lead trainees by asking, “Who is the One in Charge?” 11 The main 
points that you need to recognize at present are the principles that a cypress tree in 
the courtyard does not refer to a concrete object and that ‘a cypress tree’ is not one 
particular person. This is why, when the monk said, “Venerable Monk, pray, do 
not use some physical object to point it out to a person like me,” Joshu replied, “I 
am not pointing it out to you by using a physical object.” What venerable monk is 
limited to being a ‘venerable monk’? Because he is not so limited, he will be 
Joshu’s T. And what 1 is limited to being that T? And even if he were so limited, 
he would still be referring to a person. And what physical object would not be 

limited by Bodhidharma’s intention of coming from the West, since a physical 

12 

object must certainly have been what he intended by coming from the West? 
Even so, his intention in coming from the West was not dependent on some 
physical object, nor was it necessarily for the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana, which is 
the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, that the Ancestral Master 
came from the West. Nor was it for someone’s heart or mind, or for a Buddha, or 
for some concrete thing. 

Now, “What did our Ancestral Master Bodhidharma come from the West 
for?” was not the monk’s asking some idle question, nor was it a matter of two 
people being able to see things alike. It was a matter of one person—namely, 
Joshu’s monk—who had still not been able to experience a mutual encounter with 
his Master, so how much could he himself have actually realized? 13 Or, to put it 


10. That is, Bodhidhanna came to find a true spiritual friend who, like the metaphorical ‘cypress 
tree’, would be constant in all adversity. 

11. ‘The One in Charge’ is another name for one’s Buddha Nature. 

12. That is, Bodhidharma did not come searching for a physical object in the form of a botanical 
tree. Rather, he came searching for a physical object in the form of a true spiritual friend, 
and happened to find such a one in the person of Eka. 

13. ‘A mutual encounter’ not only refers to a disciple meeting a Master who recognizes him as a 



Shobogenzo: On the Cypress Tree 


479 


another way, the monk had always been ‘that kind of person’. Therefore, even 
though he was mistaken time after time, because he was mistaken time after time, 
he was paying close attention to his mistakes in making mistakes. 14 Would this not 
be his hearing what is false and his taking its ramifications in hand? 

Because his openhearted spirit was devoid of any attachment to duality, the 
monk was a veritable ‘cypress tree in the courtyard’. When there is no physical 
object, there can be no ‘cypress tree in the courtyard’. Even though the cypress tree 
is a physical object, Joshu said, “I am not pointing it out to you by using a physical 
object,” and his disciple said, “Venerable Monk, pray, do not use some physical 
object to point it out to a person like me.” The monk was not like some old 
ancestral tomb. 15 And because he was not an old tomb to begin with, he was able 
to bring It forth from where It had been entombed. And because It had been 
brought forth from where It had been entombed, this was comparable to Joshu’s 
saying to his disciple, “Come on, return my efforts!” And because he was saying, 
in effect, “Come on, show me It!” he said, “I am not pointing it out to you by using 
a physical object, so, come on, show It to me!” Well, what will the monk use to 
point it out with? It could be by his responding, “I am also like this.” 


There was a monk who asked Great Master Joshu, “Does a 
cypress tree also have Buddha Nature?” 

The Great Master replied, “Yes, he has.” 

The monk then asked, “When does such a tree realize 
Buddhahood?” 

The Great Master replied, “He waits for the Empty Sky to come 
down to earth.” 

The monk then asked, “And when does the Empty Sky come 
down to earth?” 

The Great Master said, “It waits for a cypress tree to realize 
Buddhahood.” 


worthy vessel for the Dharma, but it also refers to the mutual recognition of each other’s 
Buddha Nature, that is, ‘Buddha recognizes Buddha, and Buddha bows to Buddha’. 

14. That is, a disciple who is a genuine vessel for the Dhanna will persist in making mistakes 
through misunderstanding what the Master is pointing to until he sees where he is wrong, 
which he can only do by being willing to make mistakes in the first place. 

15. That is, the monk was not spiritually dead to begin with. 



Shobogenzo: On the Cypress Tree 


480 


Listen to what the Great Master is saying now, and do not disregard what that 
monk is asking. The Great Master’s phrases, “when the Empty Sky comes down to 
earth” and “when a cypress tree realizes Buddhahood,” do not express their 
mutually waiting for each other. It is the monk’s asking about a cypress tree, about 
Buddha Nature, about ‘the time when’, about the Empty Sky, and about coming 
down to earth. 

Now, by the Great Master’s responding to the monk, “Yes, he has,” he 
means that the Buddha Nature of a cypress tree does exist. By penetrating into 
what he is saying, you will penetrate into the meaning of the bloodline of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. Saying that Buddha Nature exists in a so-called ‘cypress 
tree’ is saying something that cannot be expressed with conventional ways of 
speaking, nor had it ever yet been so expressed. A cypress tree already has Buddha 
Nature, so we need to clarify this state of affairs. Since he has Buddha Nature, we 
should inquire into how high a cypress tree is, how long his lifespan, what the 
measurements of his body are, and we should hear about his species and his 
lineage. Further, are the hundreds of thousands of cypress trees all of the same 
species or are they of different bloodlines? Can there be cypress trees that realize 
Buddhahood, and cypress trees that are doing the training and practice, and cypress 
trees that have awakened to the enlightened Mind? Though a cypress tree may 
have realized Buddhahood, will he not be equipped with such things as training 
and practice or will he not have an awakening to the enlightened Mind? And, pray, 
what are the causes and coexisting conditions that connect a cypress tree and the 
Empty Sky? If a cypress tree’s becoming Buddha is indeed the time when “I am 
awaiting Your coming down to earth,” is the merit of a cypress tree invariably 
synonymous with the Empty Sky? In regard to the status of a cypress tree, we need 
to do our utmost to explore in detail whether Empty Space is the tree’s initial 
position or his ultimate status. Let me put it to you, dear old Joshu, is it because 
you too were a withered cypress tree that you could breathe such life into these 
matters? 

In summary, a cypress tree’s having Buddha Nature is beyond the realm of 
non-Buddhists or those of the two Lower Courses,* and the like, and is something 
that academic teachers of Scripture and those who compose scholarly 
commentaries have not encountered or heard about. And how much less could it be 
presented by the flowery speech of some dead tree or some heap of cold ashes! 
Simply, it is only those of Joshu’s species who explore the Matter thoroughly 
through their training. 

Now, as to a cypress tree having Buddha Nature, which Joshu expressed, is a 
cypress tree limited by being called ‘a cypress tree’, and is Buddha Nature limited 
by being called ‘Buddha Nature’? This expression of Joshu’s is not something that 



Shobogenzo: On the Cypress Tree 


481 


a single Buddha or even two Buddhas have thoroughly exhausted. Even someone 
with the countenance of a Buddha would not necessarily be able to thoroughly 
exhaust what he expressed. Even among Buddhas, there may be Buddhas who 
express it and there may be Buddhas who cannot express it. 

The phrase ‘waiting for the Empty Sky to come down to earth’ does not 
describe something that cannot happen, since every time a cypress tree realizes 
Buddhahood, the Empty Sky comes down to earth. Its coming down to earth is not 
concealed, but rather it is louder than even a hundred thousand rolls of thunder. 
When a cypress tree realizes Buddhahood, it will not only be within the twenty- 
four hours of some day, but it will also be within the time that surpasses any day’s 
twenty-four hours. 16 The Empty Sky that comes down to earth is not only the 
empty sky that is seen by ordinary people or saintly ones. There is an Empty Sky in 
addition to the empty sky. It is something that others do not see, but which Joshu 
himself encountered. The Earth which the Empty Sky comes down to is also not 
the earth that ordinary people or saintly ones inhabit, for there is also an Earth 
apart from that. It is not something that darkness or light reaches, and it was 
reached by Joshu all alone. At the time when the Empty Sky comes down to Earth, 
even the Sun and Moon, even the Mountains and Rivers will have been waiting for 
It. Who says that Buddha Nature must invariably realize Buddhahood? Buddha 
Nature is a splendorous decoration that comes after realizing Buddhahood. Thus, a 
cypress tree and Buddha Nature are not different notes in the same tune. In other 
words, They are indefinable, so we need to explore Them by asking, “What are 
They like?” 

Delivered to the assembly during the season of the Japanese iris, on the twenty-first day of the 
fifth lunar month in the third year of the Ninji era (June 20, 1242), while residing at 
Kannondori Temple in the Uji district ofYamashiro Province. 

Copied by me on the third day of the seventh lunar month in the first year of the Kangen era 
(July 21, 1243). 

Ejo 


16. That is, it not only occurs within time (the twenty-four hours of a day) but goes beyond time 
(in the original text, this was expressed as ‘the twenty-six hours of a day’). 

17. That is, they are not different words for the same thing. 



35 

On the Brightness of the Light 

(Komyd) 


Translator’s Introduction: The word ‘komyd’ has various meanings in this discourse. It refers 
to a sort of light, or ‘glow’, which can be seen in someone for whom the clouds of spiritual 
ignorance have dispersed. However, it also refers to that which underlies this manifestation: the 
shining forth of one’s Buddha Nature both spiritually and physically. It also refers to the 
functioning of one’s innate wise discernment. Hence, in this translation it is rendered in a variety 
of ways, depending on the immediate context: (physical) brightness, luminosity, glow, (spiritual) 
Brightness, and the Light. 

Certain sections of this discourse may prove puzzling to some readers. Confusion may arise 
because Dogen moves easily back and forth between referring to the brightness as a physical 
manifestation and the Brightness as a spiritual manifestation. Sometimes he means them both 
simultaneously. This is particularly evident in his discussion of the Eastern Quarter. A similar and 
more complex situation arises in regard to the koan story of Meditation Master Ummon, where 
the practice of monks is likened to monastery buildings. 


Great Master Chosa Keishin of Hunan Province in Great Sung China, while 
addressing his assembly during a Dharma talk, once said: 

The whole universe in all ten directions is a mendicant 
monk’s Eye. 

The whole universe in all ten directions is a mendicant 
monk’s everyday speech. 

The whole universe in all ten directions is a mendicant 
monk’s whole body. 

The whole universe in all ten directions is the brightness 
of one s own being. 

The whole universe in all ten directions resides within the 
brightness of one s own being. 

In the whole universe in all ten directions there is not 
even one person who is not his, or her, own being. 

Our exploration of the words and ways of Buddhas through our practice with a 
Master must, by all means, be done with diligence. We must not become more and 
more casual and neglect it, for it is due to just such neglectfulness that teachers in 


482 



Shobogenzo: On the Brightness of the Light 


483 


the past who gained an understanding of what spiritual Brightness is were rare 
indeed. 

Emperor Kao-ming of the Later Han dynasty in China—his forbidden name 
was Chuang and his name at entombment was Emperor Hsein-tsung 1 —was the 
fourth princely son of Emperor Kuang-wu. In the tenth year of the Eihei era (67 
C.E.), during the reign of Emperor Kao-ming, two Indian monks, Kashapamatanga 
and Dharmaraksha by name, were the first to introduce Buddhist Teachings into 
China. In front of a platform that had been set up as a place to bum their copies of 
the Sutras if they lost, the two monks defeated the heretical followers of the Taoists 
through argument, thereby exhibiting the spiritual powers of Buddhas. 

Later, in the Chinese P’u-tung era (520-527), during the reign of Emperor 
Wu of the Liang dynasty, our First Ancestor, Bodhidharma himself, traveled from 
India to Kuangchou Province in South China. He was the legitimate heir to the 
genuine Transmission of the Treasure House of the Eye of the Tme Teaching. He 
was the twenty-eighth Dharma descendant from Shakyamuni Buddha. 
Subsequently, he was permitted to hang up his traveling staff at Shorin-ji 
Monastery on a remote mountain peak at the foot of Mount Suzan. He 
authentically Transmitted the Dharma to the Second Ancestor, our Great Ancestral 
Meditation Master Eka, who personally experienced the brightness of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors. Before that time, there was no one who had personally seen, or 
even heard of, the Brightness of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Much less did any of 
them recognize their own brightness. Even if they had encountered that brightness, 
bringing it forth from the crown of their own head, they did not explore it with 
their own Eye. As a result, they did not clarify whether the brightness was long or 
short, square or round, nor did they clarify whether the brightness was curling up 
or spreading out, tightening or loosening. Because they felt uncomfortable about 
encountering the Brightness, their brightness became more and more estranged 
from Brightness. Even though this estrangement was itself an aspect of the 
Brightness, it was obstmcted by the estrangement. 

Stinking skin bags* who have become more and more estranged from their 
Brightness—and their brightness—hold views and theories like the following, “A 
Buddha’s light, as well as our own brightness, must be red, white, blue, or yellow, 
like the light from a fire or light shimmering upon water, or like the luster of a 


1. In ancient China, emperors had a name that was for their use alone and, while the emperor 
was alive, no one, under penalty of death, was permitted to use that name as part of their 
own. 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Brightness of the Light 


484 


pearl or the sparkle of a jewel, or like the light from a dragon or a celestial being, 
or like the light of sun and moon.” Although folks such as these may sometimes be 
following a spiritually good teacher or what the Scriptures say, when they hear 
words of Teaching concerning brightness, they imagine it to be like the light of a 
firefly. This cannot be considered as exploring the Matter* with a Master by means 
of using their own heads and eyes. From the Han dynasty through the Sui, T’ang, 
and Sung dynasties down to the present day, such outpourings of opinions have 
been many indeed. This is why you should not study under scholastic Dharma 
teachers or pay attention to the questionable theories put forth by such teachers of 
meditation. 


What is called ‘the Brightness of the Buddhas and Ancestors’ is the whole 
universe in all ten directions; It is the whole of Buddhas and the whole of 
Ancestors; It is each Buddha on His own, as well as all Buddhas; It is the light of 
Buddha; It is the Buddha illumined. Buddhas and Ancestors treat Buddhas and 
Ancestors as Brightness. Training with and awakening to this Brightness, They 
become Buddha, They sit as Buddha, and They realize Buddhahood. This is why it 
is said that this Light has illumined eighteen thousand Buddha lands in the Eastern 
Quarter. 2 3 

This is the Light that is talked about in koan* stories. This Light is the Light 
of Buddha. What illumines the Eastern Quarter is the luminosity of the eastern 
quarter. The Eastern Quarter is something other than what conventional people 
discuss as some ‘here’ or ‘there’. It is the very heart of the Dharma Realm and the 
very middle of the Fist. Even though the phrase ‘the eastern quarter’ puts 
limitations on the Eastern Quarter, it is a veritable half-pound of brightness. 
Through your training, you need to explore the point that the Eastern Quarter exists 
in this land of ours, that the Eastern Quarter exists in other lands, and that the 
Eastern Quarter exists in the eastern quarter. In the term ‘eighteen thousand’, ‘ten 
thousand’ means ‘half a Fist’ and ‘half of this very heart and mind of ours’. It does 


2. The Eastern Quarter is the spiritual realm of Akshobya Buddha. 

3. In the Chinese and Japanese counting systems, ‘eighteen thousand’ is written with three 
characters that could be read as ‘(one unit of) ten thousand and eight units of one thousand’. 
Thus, since ‘eighteen thousand’ represents the whole of the Fist and the whole of our being, 
the phrase ‘(one unit of) ten thousand’, as half of the whole expression, represents half the 
Fist and half of this very heart and mind of ours. In other words, half of the whole is half of 
the Whole. 



Shobogenzo: On the Brightness of the Light 


485 


not always mean ‘ten units of one thousand’, nor does it mean, say, ‘ten thousand 
units of ten thousand’ or ‘a hundred units of ten thousand’. ‘Buddha lands’ refers to 
what is inside our eyes. 4 When we see or hear the phrase ‘what illumines the 
Eastern Quarter’, if we study it as if it were some white band of cloth extending in 
just one direction across the eastern sky, this will not be a case of our exploring the 
Way through our training. The whole universe in all ten directions is, simply, the 
Eastern Quarter, so we call the Eastern Quarter ‘the whole universe in all ten 
directions’. On this basis, the whole universe in all ten directions exists. When the 
phrase ‘the whole universe in all ten directions’ is uttered, we hear the phrase 
‘eighteen thousand Buddha lands’ being voiced. 


Emperor Hsien-tsung of the T’ang dynasty was the imperial father of two 
emperors, Mu-tsung and Hsiian-tsung, and was the grandfather of three emperors, 
Ching-tsung, Wen-tsung, and Wu-tsung. Once, when he requested that the ashes of 
the Buddha be brought to him so that he could make an alms offering to them, they 
gave off a light that illumined the night. The emperor was overjoyed. Early the 
next morning, his retainers and ministers all presented congratulatory letters which 
said, “It is the Saintly responding to His Majesty’s saintly virtue.” 

At that time there was a minister, Han Yu Wen-kung by 
name—he was also called Tui-chih. He was in the habit of exploring 
the Matter whilst sitting in the back row of the Buddhist Ancestors. 
Wen-kung alone did not offer a congratulatory letter. Emperor Hsien- 
tsung asked him, “All the other retainers and ministers have offered 
our royal presence a congratulatory letter. Why have you not done 
so?” 

Wen-kung replied, “Your humble servant has seen in Buddhist 
writings that the Light of Buddha is not something blue or yellow or 
red or white, so the present light must simply be the glow from some 
guardian dragon.” 

The emperor then asked, “Then what, pray tell, is the Buddha’s 
light like?” 

Wen-kung did not reply. 

Now, even though this Wen-kung is said to have been just an ordinary fellow in lay 
life, nevertheless he had the spirit of a stout-hearted trainee in the Way who had the 


4. That is, it refers to our own being when we look within ourselves. 



Shobogenzo: On the Brightness of the Light 


486 


ability to set the heavens and the earth a-spinning. Should any people undertake to 
explore the Matter through their training, this is the beginning attitude of mind that 
they should have. If they do not approach their study in this manner, they are apart 
from the Way. Even if flowers were to rain down upon them from the heavens 
when they were lecturing on the Scriptures, still their efforts would be in vain if 
they had not yet arrived at this principle in training. Even if they were among the 
‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’,* if they were to keep their long tongues in their 
mouths the same as Wen-kung did his, that would be evidence of their giving rise 
to the desire to realize the Truth and of their giving rise to training and 
enlightenment. 5 

Be that as it may, there is something in Buddhist writings that you, Han 
Wen-kung, have still not encountered or heard about. How have you understood 
the saying, “The Light of Buddha is not something blue or yellow or red or 
white?” If you had the ability to grasp the fact that, when someone looks at a light 
that is blue, yellow, red, or white, it is not the Light of Buddha, then, when you see 
the Light of Buddha, you must refrain from considering It from the perspective of 
Its being something blue, yellow, red, or white. If Emperor Hsien-tsung had been a 
Buddhist Ancestor, he would have pursued the Matter in this way. 

In short, the Light that is ever so clear is the luminosity of all the hundreds 
of things that sprout up like blades of grass, without anything being added to, or 
taken away from, their roots, stems, branches, leaves, fruit, glow, or color. There is 
the luminosity of the five paths, and there is the luminosity of the six paths. 6 Since 
these are the very places where the What exists, would that explain what light is 
and what brightness is? Surely, it must be describing how the great earth with its 
mountains and rivers suddenly came into existence. We need to explore in detail 
the saying by Master Chosa that the whole universe in all ten quarters is our own 
brightness. We need to explore that Self which is the Brightness as being the whole 
universe in all ten quarters. 

The coming and going of birth and death is the coming and going of one’s 
brightness; going beyond the mundane and transcending the holy are the indigo 
and vermilion of that Brightness; becoming a Buddha and becoming an Ancestor 
are the black and yellow of that Brightness. Training and enlightenment are not 
apart from It, for they are what color the Brightness is. Grasses and trees, walls and 


5. Long tongues are representative of the ability to eloquently voice the Dharma. 

6. ‘The five paths’ refers to the five worlds of existence: namely, that of celestial beings, 
humans, animals, hungry ghosts, and hells. The six paths are the five paths plus existence in 
the world of asuras. 



Shobogenzo: On the Brightness of the Light 


487 


fences, as well as skin, flesh, bones, and marrow are the scarlet and white of the 
Brightness. Smoke and mist, water and stones, as well as the path of birds and the 
hidden road, are the twists and turns of the Brightness. Experiencing one’s own 
Brightness is the mutual encounter of meeting and recognizing a Buddha. The 
whole universe in all ten directions is one’s true Self, and one’s true Self is the 
whole universe in all ten directions—there is no place to escape to. Were there 
some way to escape this, it could only be by getting outside of our own physical 
body. Our present-day seven feet of skull and bones is precisely the form and 
image of the whole universe in all ten directions. Indeed, the whole universe in all 
ten directions which trains and enlightens us in the Buddha’s Way is our skull and 
bones, our physical body with its skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. 


Great Master Ummon Bun’en was a descendant of the thirty-ninth 
generation from the World-honored Tathagata. He was the Dharma heir of Great 
Master Seppo Shinkaku. Even though he was a latecomer to training among the 
Buddha’s followers, he is a hero within our Ancestral lineage. Who could assert 
that a luminous Buddha had never emerged on Mount Ummon? 

There was a time when Ummon entered the Dharma Hall and 
addressed his assembly, saying, “All human beings, without 
exception, have the Light within themselves. But when they look for 
It, they do not see It, for It is shrouded in the darkness of ignorance. 

Just what is this Light that everyone has within themselves?” There 
was no one in his assembly who gave a reply. Putting himself in their 
place, he said, “The Monks’ Hall, the Buddha Hall, the Temple 

n 

Kitchen, and the Gate to the Mountain.” 

The present statement of the Great Master that all human beings, without 
exception, have the Light within themselves is not saying that It is something that 
will manifest at some time in the future, or that It was something that existed in 
some past generation, or that It is something that is fully manifesting Itself in front 
of some onlooker now. We need to clearly hear and remember his statement that all 
human beings, without exception, have the Light within themselves. This Light 
amasses hundreds of thousands of Ummons, helping them train together and say 


7. ‘The Gate to the Mountain’ is a common tenn for the entrance to a monastery. The whole of 
Ummon’s statement could also be translated as “the Monks’ Hall, the Buddha Hall, and the 
Temple Kitchen as the gateways to the monastery.” 



Shobogenzo: On the Brightness of the Light 


488 


the same thing as with one voice. Ummon is not dragging this statement out from 
himself: it is the brightness of all human beings that takes up the Light and speaks 
these words for the sake of everyone. “All human beings, without exception, have 
the Light within themselves” is equivalent to saying, “The whole of humanity itself 
is what has the Brightness.” The Brightness is what all human beings are. Taking 
hold of this Brightness, they turn It into external conditions and internal 
tendencies. Thus, we can say, “The Brightness is what totally possesses all human 
beings,” or “Each Light is each and every human being,” or “All human beings, by 
nature, have within themselves each and every human being,” or “Each moment of 
Light, by nature, contains every moment of Light,” or “Each instance of possession 
totally possesses every instance of possession,” or “Each moment of totality 
contains every moment of totality.” So, be aware that the Brightness that each 
human being completely possesses is what every human being fully manifests, and 
the Brightness is each individual human being, which each individual brightness 
completely possesses. 

Now, I would like to ask Ummon, “What is it that you are calling ‘each and 
every human being’? What is this thing you call ‘Light?’” Ummon himself had 
said, “Just what is this Light that everyone has within themselves?” This question 
is the very brightness itself, and any doubt will kill the conversation. Even so, 
when such a matter is being raised, every human being that is present will be an 
individual instance of Light. 

At the time, there was no one in his assembly who gave a reply. Even though 
they all had hundreds of thousands of answers, they spoke by means of not making 
a reply. This condition is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana, which is the Treasure 
House of the Eye of the True Teaching, and which all the Buddhas and Ancestors 
authentically Transmit. 

Ummon, putting himself in the place of his assembly, said, 

“The Monks’ Hall, the Buddha Hall, the Temple Kitchen, and the 
Three Gates.” 8 


8. From this point on in the discourse, Dogen cites the Gate to the Mountain by an alternative 
name: the Three Gates (both names are read as sammon in Japanese). This shift in names 
carries an implication that each person who undertakes the training (enters the Gate to the 
Monastery) encounters the three principle areas of life in a monastery: the Monks’ Hall 
(where one does meditation), the Buddha Hall (where one hears the Teaching), and the 
Temple Kitchen (where one carries out the ordinary tasks of everyday life). Since these areas 
of activity are also going on within the trainee, to that extent the trainee is the Monastery. In 



Shobogenzo: On the Brightness of the Light 


489 


The present statement, “putting himself in the place of,” means putting himself in 
the place of Ummon, putting himself in the place of his great assembly, putting 
himself in the place of the brightness, and putting himself in the place of the 
Monks’ Hall, the Buddha Hall, the Temple Kitchen, and the Gate to the Monastery. 
But what did Ummon mean by referring to the Three Gates of the Monks’ Hall, the 
Buddha Hall, and the Temple Kitchen? We ought not to call a great assembly, 
along with every human being in it, the Three Gates of the Monks’ Half the 
Buddha Hall, and the Temple Kitchen. After all, how many Three Gates of the 
Monks’ Hall, Buddha Hall, and Temple Kitchen are there? Should we regard them 
all as Ummon? Or as the Seven Buddhas?* Or as the twenty-eight Indian 
Ancestors? Or as the first six Chinese Ancestors? Or as the Fist? Or as the Nose? 
Even though the Three Gates of the Monks’ Hall, Buddha Hall, and Temple 
Kitchen are, so to speak, any Buddha or Ancestor, Buddhas and Ancestors are 
persons who do not escape from being human beings. And they go beyond just 
being ‘a human being’. Once they have become ‘such a one’,* there are instances 
where there are Buddha Halls that have no Buddha and where there are no Buddha 
Halls that lack Buddha. There are Buddhas who have luminosity and there are 
Buddhas who do not have luminosity. There is a luminosity without Buddha and 
there is a luminosity with Buddha. 


Great Master Seppo once addressed his assembly, saying, “I have fully 
recognized you all before the Monks’ Hall.” This was said at a time when Seppo’s 
whole being, through and through, was his Eye. It was an occasion when Seppo 
caught a glimpse of the true Seppo. It was a Monks’ Hall recognizing a Monks’ 
Hall. 

Hofuku, alluding to his Master’s remark, asked Gako, 9 “Putting aside his 
‘before the Monks’ Hall’ for the moment, where is it that Boshu Pavilion and 
Useki Peak recognize each other?” 10 Thereupon, Gako sped back to the Abbot’s 
quarters, whereas Hofuku straightaway entered the Monks’ Hall. In the present 
instance, the one’s returning to the Abbot’s quarters and the other’s entering the 
Monks’ Hall are both ways of expressing their having left self behind. It is a 


this sense what Ummon is saying could be translated as “The Monks’ Hall, the Buddha Hall, 
and the Temple Kitchen are the Three Gates.” 

9. Hofuku and Gako were two of Seppo’s disciples. 

10. Boshu Pavilion and Useki Peak are two scenic places on Mount Seppo that were used as 
meditation sites. 



Shobogenzo: On the Brightness of the Light 


490 


principle based on mutual recognition. It is two Monks’ Halls mutually recognizing 
each other. 11 


Great Master Jizo Keichin once said, “The Chief Cook has entered the 

Kitchen Hall.” This expression of his has put the Matter before the Seven Buddhas. 

Delivered to the assembly at Kannondori Koshohorin-ji Temple on a summer night during the 
fourth period of the third watch of the second day of the sixth lunar month in the third 
year of the Ninji era (about 2:00 A.M., July 1, 1242). At that time during the wet season, 
the rain was pouring down, the drops gushing off the eaves. Where was the brightness to 
be found then? My great assembly has still not escaped from having been pierced to the 
heart by what Ummon said. 

Copied by me in the office of the Abbot’s assistant at Daibutsu-ji Temple in Echizen Province on 
the third day of the twelfth lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (January 1, 
1245). 

Ejo 


11. That is, both having awakened to the Truth and having recognized this awakening in each 
other, the one goes to the Abbot’s quarters (a symbolic Boshu Pavilion) for spiritual 
confirmation and instruction, and the other goes to the Monks’ Hall (a symbolic Useki Peak) 
to continue his training through meditation. 



36 

On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 

(Shinjin Gakudd) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, the Japanese word shin is most often rendered as 
‘mind’. However, there are places where the reference is clearly to ‘heart’ or to ‘intention’ (what 
one has in mind), and it has been translated accordingly. 


You cannot realize the Buddha’s Way if you do not aim to practice the Way, 
and It will be ever more distant from you if you do not aim to study It. Meditation 
Master Nangaku Ejo once said, “It is not that your training and enlightenment are 
absent, but they must not be tainted with anything.” If we do not study the 
Buddha’s Way, then we will lapse into the ways of non-Buddhists or those who are 
immoral. This is why former Buddhas and later Buddhas all invariably trained in, 
and practiced, the Buddha’s Way. 

There are provisionally two ways to learn what the Buddha’s Way is: 
namely, to leam by means of our mind and to learn by means of our body. To learn 
by means of the mind is to learn by all sorts of minds. Those minds include the 
discriminative mind, the mind of feelings and emotions, and the mind that sees the 
oneness of all things, among others. Also, after we have established a spiritual 
rapport with a Master and have given rise to the mind that would realize full 
enlightenment, we take refuge in the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors and 
explore the daily functioning of the mind that seeks full enlightenment. Even if we 
have not yet given rise to the mind that truly aspires to realize full enlightenment, 
we should imitate the methods of the Buddhas and Ancestors of the past who gave 
rise to the mind that seeks enlightenment. This mind is the mind that has resolved 
to realize enlightenment; it is the manifestation of a sincere heart moment by 
moment, the mind of previous Buddhas, our everyday mind, and the three worlds 
of desire, form, and beyond form. All of these are the products of our mind alone. 

Sometimes we leam the Way by casting aside these various minds, and 
sometimes we learn the Way by taking them up. Thus, we leam the Way by 
thinking about these minds, and we leam the Way by not thinking about them. 
Sometimes a kesa* of gold brocade is forthwith Transmitted and duly accepted. 1 


* See Glossary. 


491 



Shobogenzo: On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 


492 


Sometimes there is Bodhidharma’s saying, “You have gotten what my marrow is,” 
followed by standing in place after making three full prostrations. There is 
learning Mind by means of mind, which is the Transmitting of a kesa to the one 
who pounded rice. ' To shave one’s head and dye one’s robes is nothing other than 
to turn one’s heart around and illumine one’s mind. To scale the castle walls and 
enter the mountains is to leave one frame of mind behind and enter another. 1 2 3 4 That a 
mountain monastery is being entered means that whatever one is thinking about is 
based on not deliberately thinking about some particular thing. 5 That the worldly 
life is being abandoned means that what one is specifically thinking about is not 
the point. To fix one’s gaze upon these thoughts is comparable to two or three 
rounded heaps: to play around with these thoughts in spiritual ignorance is 
comparable to myriad thousands of sharp edges. When we leam in this manner 
what the Way is, appreciation will naturally come from our making efforts, but 
efforts do not necessarily proceed from already having appreciation. Even so, to 
borrow unseen the Nostrils of an Ancestor of the Buddha and let them expel one’s 
Breath, and to use the hooves of a donkey or a horse and let them stamp the seal* 
of one’s awakening, these have been signposts of the Way for tens of thousands in 
the past. 6 

In short, the great earth with its mountains and rivers, along with the sun, 
moon, and stars, are the very stuff of our mind. So, right at this very moment, what 
sort of thing is appearing before our very eyes? When we speak of the great earth 


1. This is an allusion to a Zen Buddhist traditional account that Shakyamuni, when dying, gave 
His gold brocade kesa to Makakasho as proof of Transmission. 

2. This is a reference to the Mind-to-Mind Transmission from Bodhidharma to his disciple 
Taiso Eka. 

3. A reference to the Mind-to-Mind Transmission from Daiman Konin to Daikan Eno, which 
was accompanied by passing on the kesa that Bodhidharma had originally brought with him 
to China. 

4. An allusion to Prince Siddhartha’s leaving his life in his father’s palace behind and entering 
the mountains to seek the Way. 

5. An allusion to a koan story concerning Meditation Master Yakusan, recounted by Dogen in 
Discourse 26: On Wanshi’s ‘Kindly Advice for Doing Seated Meditation’ (Zazen Shin), pp. 
335-338. 

6. ‘Nostrils’ refers to one’s Buddha Nature, which is as plain as the nose on one’s face. ‘The 
hooves of a donkey’ refers to one’s commitment to plodding on, doing one’s daily training to 
clean up one’s karma. ‘The hooves of a horse’ refers to one’s commitment to galloping on, 
going wherever necessary to help all sentient beings realize the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 


493 


with its mountains and rivers, the mountains and rivers, for instance, will refer to 
some mountain and some flowing water: but ‘the great earth’ is not limited to just 
this place where we are now. 

Mountains are also of many types. There are great Mount Sumerus and there 
are small Mount Sumerus. There are those that lie horizontally and there are those 
that rise vertically. There are those within three thousand worlds and there are 
those in innumerable countries. There are those that depend on their form and there 
are those that depend on empty space. 

Rivers likewise are of many types. There are celestial rivers and there are 
earthly rivers. There are the four great rivers and there is Lake Anavatapta from 
which they flow. There are the four Anavatapta lakes in the northern continent of 
Uttarakuru, and there are oceans, and there are ponds. 7 

‘The earth’ does not necessarily refer to land, and land does not necessarily 
refer to ‘the earth’. The earth can refer to the land, and it can refer to the ground of 
our mind, and it can refer to earth that is treasured, such as a monastery. Though 
we say that earth is what all things are, this will not negate the concept of ‘earth’, 
for there may be worlds in which space is viewed as ‘earth’. 

There are differences in the way that the sun, moon, and stars are viewed by 
humans and celestial beings, since all their various viewpoints are not the same. 
Because this is the way things are, the perspectives of our whole mind function as 
one. These perspectives are already what our mind is. So, should we treat the great 
earth with its mountains and rivers, the sun, the moon and the stars as being within 
us or outside us, as arising or as departing? When we are bom, is one speck of 
something added to us? At death, does one mote of something depart from us? 
Where are we to find this birth-and-death, along with our views about it? Up to the 
present, they have been just one moment of the mind and then a second moment of 
the mind. One moment of the mind and then a second moment of the mind is one 
great earth with its mountains and rivers and then a second great earth with its 
mountains and rivers. Since such things as the great earth with its mountains and 
rivers are beyond a matter of existing or not existing, they are beyond being large 
or small, beyond being acquirable or not acquirable, beyond being directly 
knowable or not being directly knowable, beyond being penetrable or not being 
penetrable, and they do not change in accordance with our having awakened or not. 

You should definitely accept as tme that what we call Teaming the Way 
through mind’ is the mind, as it has just been described, accustoming itself to 


7. Lake Anavatapta is traditionally said to be in Tibet, and is considered the source of the four 
major rivers of India. In Indian cosmology, there are four continents surrounding Mount 
Sumeru, which is considered the center of the universe. Uttarakuru is the northern continent. 



Shobogenzo: On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 


494 


learning the Way. This truth goes beyond anything’s ‘being large or small’ or 
‘existing or not existing’. Our learning of the Way is described in one Scripture as, 
“Knowing that a home is not our Home, we abandon our home, leaving home life 
behind in order to become a monk.” This is beyond any measure of size, beyond 
any measure of proximity. It is beyond all the Ancestors from first to last, and it is 
even beyond a Master who has gone beyond Buddhahood by helping others to 
realize Buddhahood. There is verbally expounding upon the Matter* as being 

o 

‘seven feet or eight feet’. And there is actually embarking for the Other Shore, 
which is done for the sake of both oneself and others. This is what learning the 
Way is. Because learning the Way is as this, the tiles* and stones of our walls and 
fences constitute our very mind. Further, our learning the Way is beyond such 
sayings as “The three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form, and these alone, are 
what constitute the mind,” or “The whole universe, and this alone, is what 
constitutes the mind. It is the tiles and stones of our walls and fences.” What was 
nurtured in the years before the Chinese Hsien-tung era (860-873) broke down in 
the years after the Chinese Hsien-tung era. 9 To learn the Way is our ‘slogging 
through the mud and being drenched in the water’ 10 and our ‘binding ourselves 
without a rope’. 11 It is our having the ability to draw forth the Pearl and the skill to 
enter the Water for It. There will be the day when this Pearl dissolves, and there 
will be times when It is smashed to pieces, and there will be times when It is 
crushed to bits. We do not consider ourselves as being equal with those who are the 
pillars* of the temple, nor do consider ourselves to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with 
those who are as stone lanterns.* Because things are as they are, we leam the Way 
by running barefoot and we leam the Way by doing somersaults. 12 And who among 
you will fix your eyes upon It and look ? For each and every one of us, there is our 
going forth in accordance with whatever circumstances arise. At such a time, 


8. That is, after having awakened to the Truth, one employs skillful means, which are adjusted 
to whatever situation arises, without becoming fixed to only one way of responding. 

9. An allusion to a remark made by the tenth-century Meditation Master Sozan Honjaku who, 
along with his Master Tozan Ryokai, is credited with founding the Soto Zen lineage. The 
remark refers to his level of understanding early in his training as being superficial and to 
his understanding later as having gone beyond understanding. 

10. A common Zen Buddhist phrase describing a monk’s willingness to help others no matter 
what he or she may need to go through. 

11. An allusion to keeping to the Precepts without feeling bound up by them. 

12. This sentence describes how we leam, namely, by being willing to stumble on, stepping on 
all manner of things, and by being willing to be tossed head over heels, physically, mentally, 
and spiritually. 



Shobogenzo: On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 


495 


because our walls are falling down, this helps us to learn that the ten directions are 
open to us, and because there are no gates, this helps us to learn that we are not 
kept from going anywhere. 

As to the phrase, ‘the mind that has resolved to realize enlightenment’, this 
mind sometimes arises in a life-and-death situation, sometimes in the serenity of 
nirvana, and sometimes under other conditions. It does not depend on any place, 
and it is not obstructed by any place where it arises. The intention to seek 
enlightenment does not arise from any particular set of conditions and it does not 
arise from the intellect. It arises from the intention to seek enlightenment. In fact, it 
is the intention that seeks enlightenment. The intention that gives rise to seeking 
enlightenment is beyond existing or not existing, beyond the judgmental realm of 
‘good or evil’, and beyond moral indifference. It is not something that arises as an 
effect from some previous life, nor is it something that beings in lofty worlds can 
always realize. It is simply the arising of the intention to realize enlightenment at 
that moment in time. Because it is not concerned with external circumstances, at 
the very moment when this intention to seek enlightenment arises, the whole 
universe, through and through, also gives rise to the intention to seek 
enlightenment. Though it is said that this arising seems to turn external 
circumstances around, the intention to seek enlightenment is something that these 
circumstances do not recognize. The arising of this intention is like both self and 
other stretching out their hands to each other. And we ourselves stretch out our 
hands as go forth amidst beings who are alien to us. We give rise to the intention to 
realize enlightenment even within the worlds of the hells, the hungry ghosts,* the 
animals, and the asuras.* 

As to the phrase, ‘the manifestation of a sincere heart moment by moment’, 
at all moments we manifest a sincere heart. And we do it not for one or two 
moments, but moment by moment. 

The leaves of a lotus are round in their roundness 

And their roundness resembles a mirror: 

The spines of a water chestnut are sharp in their 
sharpness 

And their sharpness resembles an awl. 

We speak of the leaves resembling a mirror, but they are so just moment by 
moment; we speak of the spines resembling an awl, but they are so just moment by 
moment. 



Shobogenzo: On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 


496 


As to the phrase ‘the mind of previous Buddhas’: 

A monk of long ago once asked National Teacher Echu, “Just 
what is the mind of previous Buddhas?” 

The National Teacher responded, “The tiles and stones of our 
walls and fences.” 

Since this is so, you need to realize that the mind of previous Buddhas is beyond 
the tiles and stones of Their walls and fences, and ‘the tiles and stones of Their 
walls and fences’ goes beyond what is called ‘the mind of previous Buddhas’. This 
is how we learn what the mind of previous Buddhas is. 

When we want to understand what ‘mind’ is, be it in this world or some 
other world, it is simply our everyday mind. Yesterday departs from this place and 
today comes from this place. When yesterday departs, the whole of the heavens 
departs, and when today comes, every bit of the earth comes: this is our everyday 
mind. Our everyday mind opens and closes within these confines. Because a 
thousand gates and ten thousand doors open or close at any one time, they are what 
‘everyday’ is. 

Now, ‘the whole of the heavens’ and ‘every bit of the earth’ are like 
forgotten phrases, like some voice gushing up out of the ground. The phrases are 
equal, the minds are equal, and the Teachings are equal. Our living and our dying 
die out in every moment, but we are ever ignorant of what preceded this latest body 
of ours. Though we are ignorant, if we give rise to the intention to seek 
enlightenment, we are undoubtedly advancing along the road to enlightenment. 
Already we have established this place, and there is no doubt about it. And we 
already have doubts about it, which is what being ‘everyday’ is. 


The phrase, ‘learning the Way through the body’, means that we leam the 
Way by means of the body, that we leam the Way by means of our living flesh. Our 
Body comes from our learning the Way, and what has come from our learning the 
Way is our body along with our Body. The whole universe in all ten quarters is 
synonymous with our one real physical body, and the coming and going of birth 
and death is also synonymous with our real physical body. We train with this body 
when we part company with the ten evils, hold to the eight Precepts, take refuge in 
the Three Treasures, and give up our homes, leaving home life behind to become a 
monk—this is to tmly leam the Way. Thus we speak of this as ‘our tme human 
body’. By all means, those of us learning in these later times must not hold to the 
same opinions as those non-Buddhists who deny causality. 



Shobogenzo: On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 


497 


Meditation Master Hyakujo Daichi once said, “If you hold to the opinion 
that we are Buddhas by nature and are already in the Way of Meditation because 
we are innately immaculate and innately enlightened, then you belong among those 
non-Buddhists who deny causality.” Unlike broken tools in a vacant house, these 
words of his are the product of his merits and virtues accumulated through his 
learning the Way. Having leapt beyond the opposites, he is brilliantly clear in all 
aspects; having let everything drop away, he is like wisteria that no longer depends 
on a tree for its support. 

Sometimes those who leam the Way manifest in their own bodily form in 
order to help rescue others by giving voice to the Dharma, and sometimes they 
manifest in another bodily form in order to help rescue others by giving voice to 
the Dharma, and sometimes they do not manifest in their own bodily form in order 
to help rescue others by giving voice to the Dharma, and sometimes they do not 
manifest in another bodily form in order to help rescue others by giving voice to 
the Dharma, and so on, going so far as to not give voice to the Dharma in order to 
help rescue others. At the same time, when someone gives up their body and then 
raises their voice to proclaim the Dharma, there is something that silences all other 
voices. And by putting one’s life on the line, there is something that will get to the 

1 o 

Marrow when one opens one’s hara. Even if you had taken your first steps in 
learning the Way before the time of the Lords of Awe-inspiring Voices in the ever 
so distant past, you would have developed even further if you had been Hyakujo’s 
own children and grandchildren. 

‘The whole universe in all ten quarters’ means that each of the ten quarters is 
the whole universe. East, west, north, south, plus northeast, southeast, northwest, 
and southwest, along with the zenith and the nadir, are what we call the ten 
quarters. We need to consider the occasions when their front and back, length and 
width, are thoroughly whole. 14 What we call ‘considering’ means clearly seeing 
and determining that, even though it is said that our human body is restricted by 
‘self and other’, nevertheless it is the whole of the ten quarters. We hear in this 


13. ‘Opening the hara to get to the Marrow’ refers to a certain spiritual experience that may 
occur when someone’s meditative mind is focused on the hara, which is the area just above 
the navel. This is sometimes represented by a picture of a monk—or an arhat—pulling open 
the hara to reveal within Something that is variously described as a Golden Buddha, the 
Child of the Lord, or the Embryo of Buddha (Skt. Tathdgatagarbha). 

14. In other words, front and back, and length and width are not separate from each other, nor 
are they separate from the whole universe. Just as you cannot have a front without a back, so 
you cannot have anything that is somehow independent of the whole universe. 



Shobogenzo: On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 


498 


expression something that has not been heard before, due to its implications that 
the ten quarters are equal to each other and that the universe is equal to itself. 

A human body is composed of four elements* and five skandhas.* Its four 
elements and its six sense organs, all together, are not something thoroughly 
understood by ordinary, worldly people, but they are something that saintly people 
have thoroughly explored through their training. Further, we need to clearly see the 
ten quarters within a single dust mote, and it is not that the ten quarters are all 
packed up in one sack. 15 Sometimes, the Monks’ Hall and the Buddha Hall are 
erected within a single mote of dust, and sometimes the whole universe is erected 
in the Monks’ Hall and the Buddha Half for it is from these Halls that the universe 
has been built. The principle of this is that the universe in all ten quarters is our real 
Body. Do not follow erroneous views that deny causality. Since the universe is 
beyond measure, it is beyond being wide or narrow. The universe in all ten quarters 
is the eighty-four thousand skandhas that give expression to the Dharma, the 
eighty-four thousand meditative states, and the eighty-four thousand invocations. 
The eighty-four thousand skandhas that give expression to the Dharma are the 
turning of the Wheel of the Dharma, and the place where the Wheel of the Dharma 
turns spans the whole universe and spans all time. It is not a place without 
directions or boundaries: it is our real Body. You and I, right now, are human 
beings who are the real Body of the whole universe in all ten quarters. We leam the 
Way without ever making a mistake about such things. We go on, discarding one 
body and receiving another, for three great asamkhyeya eons, or thirteen great 
asamkhyeya eons, or immeasurable asamkhyeya eons, 16 during which time, 
without fail, we learn the Way. We leam the Way by now stepping forward, now 
stepping back. Our respectfully bowing, with hands in gassho,* is our everyday 
behavior of walking and standing still. In our painting a picture of a withered tree, 
or in our polishing a tile made of dead ashes, there is not the slightest break. 
Though our days, as they say, are short and swift in their passing, our learning the 
Way is profound and far-reaching. So, even though the demeanor of those who 
have abandoned their homes and left home life behind to become monks may seem 
bleak, do not confuse them with woodcutters. And even though their lives may 
seem a struggle, they are not the same as farmers working in rice fields. So, do not 
compare them by discussing whether they are deluded or enlightened, or good or 
bad; do not pursue such questions as “Are they false or true?” or “Are they genuine 
or fake?” 


15. That is, there is no inside or outside of them. 

16. ‘Asamkhyeya’ is a Sanskrit term of measurement for something that is experienced as being 
intenninably long, but which simply takes as long as it takes. 



Shobogenzo: On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 


499 


When people speak of living and dying, coming and going, as being what 
the real human body is, they use the words ‘living and dying’ to describe the 
wandering of ordinary, worldly people lost in samsara as well as to describe what 
the great saintly ones have escaped from. But this does not mean that going beyond 
the ordinary and transcending the holy are simply to be considered as ‘our real 
Body’, for life and death come in two kinds and in seven kinds. At the same time, 
because each and every one of these kinds, when thoroughly understood, is totally 
life-and-death, there is nothing that we need fear. And the reason why we need not 
fear life and death is that even before we have abandoned this life, we are already 
encountering death in the present. And even before we have abandoned death, we 
are already encountering life in the present. Life is not something that stands in the 
way of death, and death is not something that stands in the way of life. Neither life 
nor death are understood by ordinary, worldly people. Life may be likened to an 
oak tree in its growing; death may be likened to an iron man in its immobility. 
Though oak trees are restricted to being oak trees, life is never restricted by death, 
which is why we take up learning the Way. Life is not one sort of thing, and death 
is not another, second sort of thing. Never does death stand against life: never does 
life stand against death. 


Meditation Master Engo once said: 

Life fully manifests its function 

And death fully manifests its function as well, 

All within the limits of Great Unbounded Space, 

For they are both the moment-by-moment manifestations 
of a sincere heart. 

We need to do our utmost to tranquilly consider these words of his. Although 
Meditation Master Engo spoke these words, he still had not recognized that life and 
death are beyond the scope of their functions. When exploring ‘coming and going’ 
through our training, there is life-and-death in going, and there is life-and-death in 
coming. There is coming-and-going in life, and there is coming-and-going in death. 
With the whole universe in all ten directions as its two or three wings, coming-and- 
going flies off and flies back, and with the whole universe in all ten directions as 
its three or five feet, coming-and-going steps forward and steps back. With life- 
and-death as Its head and tail, the real Body, which is the whole universe in all ten 


17. There are various listings of the two and seven kinds of life and death, all of which describe 
different perspectives on how life and death function. 



Shobogenzo: On Learning the Way Through Body and Mind 


500 


directions, can reverse Itself and turn Its head around . 18 In reversing Itself and 
turning Its head around, It may look the size of a penny, or It may resemble the 
inside of a tiny mote of dust. The flat level ground is a precipitous cliff rising a 
thousand feet high. And the precipitous cliff rising a thousand feet high is the flat 
level ground. This is why there is the look of the southern continent and the look of 
the northern continent; by examining these, we leam the Way . 19 There is the Bones 
and Marrow of ‘being beyond deliberately trying to think about something and 
being beyond deliberately trying not to think about anything’. Only by our 
resisting the tendency to deliberately manipulate our thinking do we leam the Way. 

Delivered to the assembly at Koshohdrin-ji Temple on the double good fortune day (the ninth day 
of the ninth lunar month) in the third year of the Ninji era (October 3, 1242). 

Copied by me on the second day of the beginning of mid-spring in the fourth year of the Ninji era 
(February 22, 1243). 

Ejo 


18. That is, just as our physical body can turn itself around and go a different way, so our minds 
can also turn away from delusion and toward enlightenment. 

19. The southern continent of Jambudvipa is associated with the world of human beings who are 
capable of learning because they are aware of their suffering, whereas the northern continent 
of Uttarakuru is associated with the world of celestial beings who see no need to train 
because they are, at the moment, enjoying a constantly easy and blissful existence. 



37 


On a Vision Within a Vision 
and a Dream Within a Dream 

(Muchu Setsumu) 

Translator’s Introduction: The Chinese character ‘mu ’ in the title of this discourse is read in 
Japanese as ‘yume When translated into English, this single character encompasses the meaning 
of both ‘dream’ and ‘vision’, the former term denoting an experience that occurs while sleeping 
and the latter referring to an experience that occurs while being awake. The Japanese employ 
only the single word yume for both experiences. Also, in Buddhism, the whole of life and all that 
exists in the universe is viewed as being as insubstantial and impermanent as a dream or a vision. 
According to Dogen, this dream-vision is also a manifestation of the Truth, which we either see 
or do not see depending on whether we are spiritually awake or still spiritually asleep. 


Because the Truth, which all the Buddhas and all the Ancestors have 
manifested in this world, is something that existed before any thoughts or things 
had sprouted up, It is beyond anything that those with false and empty notions 
argue over. Accordingly, within the bounds of the Buddhas and Ancestors there has 
been the meritorious activity of That which goes above and beyond Buddhahood. 
Because this meritorious activity is independent of any specific occasion, it will far 
outlast the life span of any living being —be it for a shorter or longer time—for it 
never ceases, and it will be far beyond any way of measuring to be found in the 
realm of ordinary folk. 

Further, the turning of the Wheel of the Dharma is the standard for That 
which has existed since before any thoughts or things had ever sprouted up. Since 
the great merit of Its turning is beyond praise, It has served as a signpost and model 
in thousands of times past. Buddhas speak of this Wheel of the Dharma as being a 
vision from within a vision. Because They see what enlightenment is from within 
Their enlightenment, They give expression to Their vision from within Their 
vision. 

The place from whence They are giving expression to Their vision from 
within Their vision is the domain of Buddhas and Ancestors: it is the assembly of 
Buddhas and Ancestors. The domain and assembly of Buddhas, as well as the 
pathways and Dharma assemblies of the Ancestors, are based on Their innate 
enlightenment giving rise to Their experience of enlightenment and on Their 
subsequently giving expression to the vision that They are experiencing within 


501 



Shobogenzo: On a Vision Within a Vision and a Dream Within a Dream 


502 


Their vision. In encountering these sayings and expressions of Theirs, do not treat 
them as something apart from the Buddha’s assembly, for They are Buddhas 
turning the Wheel of the Dharma. Because this Wheel of the Dharma encompasses 
everything in all directions, the Great Ocean, Mount Sumeru, all lands, and all 
thoughts and things have fully manifested themselves. This is the vision expressed 
within the vision, which existed prior to any dreams. All that manifests within the 
whole universe is but a dream. This dream consists of all the hundreds of things 
that sprout up ever so clearly. It is the very moment when we are about to give rise 
to doubt, the very moment when we are confused. This moment is, say, a sprouting 
up of the dream, a sprouting up within the dream, and a sprouting up that gives 
expression to the dream. In exploring this through our training, we find that the 
roots and stalks with their branches and leaves, and the blossoms and fruits with 
their lustrous colors and forms altogether comprise the great dream. And you must 
not confuse it with dreaminess. 

Accordingly, when persons who have doubts about learning the Buddha’s 
Way encounter the phrase ‘a vision being expressed within a vision’, they vainly 
imagine that it probably refers to dreaming up things that actually do not exist, or 
they suppose that it may be like piling delusion upon delusion. But this is not so. 
Even though one says that there is also delusion within delusion, by all means we 
need to thoroughly explore, with utmost effort, the path that penetrates through this 
expression to the comprehension of what is really meant by ‘piling delusion upon 
delusion’. 

‘A vision expressed within a vision’ is what all Buddhas are, and all 
Buddhas are ‘wind and rain, water and fire ’. 1 2 They accept and keep in mind the 
latter epithet and They accept and keep in mind the former epithet. ‘A vision 
expressed from within a vision’ is what the Buddha of old was. Riding within His 
treasured Vehicle, He forthwith arrived at His sitting place, where He realized the 
Truth. ‘Arriving at His sitting place, where He realized the Truth’ is synonymous 
with ‘His riding within His treasured Vehicle’. “No matter whether the vision of 
trainees is distorted or correct, the Master either grabs hold of their deluded 
certainty or lets them go on in their own way, as he himself gives free rein to his 


1. That is, because Buddhas are beyond a personal self, They are a vision expressed within a 
vision, and when They express that vision, what They give voice to pours forth from Them 
like wind and rain, water and fire. 

2. A reference to the One Vehicle, which derives from the Lotus Scripture. Dogen discusses its 
meaning in detail in his Discourse 16: On ‘The Flowering of the Dharma Sets the Dharma’s 
Flowering in Motion’ (Hokke Ten Hokke), pp. 175-178. 



Shobogenzo: On a Vision Within a Vision and a Dream Within a Dream 


503 


elegantly skillful means.” At such moments, the Wheel of the Dharma sometimes 
sets into motion the realm of the great Dharma Wheel, which is beyond measure 
and beyond bounds. And sometimes It sets this realm in motion within a single 
dust mote, for even within a mote of dust, Its movement never ceases. The 
principle here is that no matter how the Dharma’s being set in motion may bring 
about the experience of That Which Is, even the hostile will smile and nod. And 
because this setting of the Dharma in motion has brought about an experience of 
That Which Is, regardless of where this may occur, it is synonymous with setting 
elegantly skillful means in motion. As a result, all at once the whole earth is a 
limitless Dharma Wheel and the universe throughout is undisguised cause and 
effect. For Buddhas, these two realms are the ultimate. Keep in mind that the 
provisional instructions of Buddhas and the heaping up of Their voicings of the 
Dharma have established limitless ways of teaching by provisional means and have 
made limitless places in which the Dharma can abide. Do not look for limits to 
Their comings and goings. Completely relying on the Dharma, They come; 
completely relying on the Dharma, They go. Thus, Their planting kudzu and 
wisteria and Their letting the kudzu and wisteria entwine is the nature and form of 
supreme enlightenment . 3 4 Just as enlightenment is limitless, so sentient beings are 
limitless and supreme. Notwithstanding the fact that enticements and snares are 
limitless, letting them go is also limitless. When your spiritual question appears, it 
will yield thirty blows for you, which is the manifesting of a vision that is being 
expressed within a vision. 

Thus, a rootless tree, an earth without opposites, and a valley that does not 
echo a shout are all manifest visions that are being expressed within a vision. This 
is not within the realm of ordinary people or those in lofty positions, nor is it what 
worldly folks take note of. The vision is enlightenment, so who could doubt it?— 
for it is not what is governed by doubt. And who could believe it?—for belief does 
not set it in motion. Because this supreme enlightenment is supreme 
enlightenment, we speak of it as a vision within a vision. There is the vision within 
and there is giving expression to the vision; there is the vision being expressed and 
there is one’s being within the vision. Without being within a vision there is no 
expressing a vision, and without expressing a vision, there is no being within a 
vision. Without expressing a vision, there are no Buddhas, and without being 
within a vision, the Buddhas do not emerge into the world to turn the wondrous 


3. A quotation from Dogen’s Master, Tendo Nyojo. 

4. ‘Planting kudzu and wisteria and letting them entwine’ is descriptive of setting up a Master- 
disciple relationship and then letting the interdependence of Master and disciple grow. 



Shobogenzo: On a Vision Within a Vision and a Dream Within a Dream 


504 


Wheel of the Dharma. That Dharma Wheel refers to each Buddha on His own, just 
as it refers to all Buddhas and to the vision that is expressed from within a vision. 
It is only in that vision which is expressed from within a vision that Buddhas and 
Ancestors exist as a supremely enlightened multitude. Further, the experience of 
what lies beyond the Dharma Body is a vision that is expressed from within a 
vision. Herein is there homage for each Buddha alone, together with all Buddhas. 
They have no attachment to head or eye, marrow or brain, body or flesh, hand or 
foot. And because They have no such attachments, as an ancient one once said, 
“The one who is a seller of gold will be a buyer of gold.” We call this ‘the 
Profound of the profound’ and ‘the Wondrous of the wondrous’ and ‘the 
Enlightened of the enlightened’ and ‘the Head that rests upon the head’. This is 
nothing other than the everyday behavior of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

In exploring this Matter* through your training, some of you may think that 
what is being referred to as a ‘Head’ is merely something extraneous atop the 
crown of a person’s head. But it may not have occurred to you that what is really 
atop the crown is Vairochana* Buddha. And even less may you think that It is the 
Head from which all the hundreds of things ever so obviously sprout up, to say 
nothing of knowing what the word ‘Head’ is pointing to. From ancient times, the 
phrase ‘placing a Head upon a head’ has habitually been handed down. Foolish 
people, on hearing this, think that this is merely a saying that warns against 
anything that is superfluous or excessive. They treat it as an everyday maxim by 
saying, “Why put a head atop a head?” to express that there is no need for 
something. Surely, this is a mistake. For, when giving expression to a vision from 
within a vision, there is no difference in how both worldly and saintly persons 
misuse the phrase ‘placing a Head upon a head’. Thus, for both worldly and saintly 
persons, their giving expression to a vision from within a vision must have 
occurred in the past and must still extend to the present day. You need to realize 
that when it comes to their having expressed a vision from within a vision in the 
past, they customarily believed that they were expressing a dream from within a 
dream. And when it comes to their expressing of a vision from within a vision 
today, they still treat it as their expressing a dream from within a dream. This, 
accordingly, is what the joy in meeting a Buddha is all about. Even though the 
vision that the Buddhas and Ancestors have of all the hundreds of things which 
sprout up ever so clearly is more obvious than a hundred thousand suns and moons, 
how sad that those who are spiritually blind do not see It. What a pity ! 5 


* See Glossary. 

5. To paraphrase this complex passage, in the same way that people do not understand the 



Shobogenzo: On a Vision Within a Vision and a Dream Within a Dream 


505 


The ‘Head’ in the phrase ‘the Head that rests upon the head’ is the Head of a 
hundred sproutings, the Head of a thousand kinds of things, the Head of ten 
thousand varieties of things, the Head of one’s whole being, the Head that is the 
whole universe which has never been hidden, the Head that is the whole universe 
in all ten quarters, the Head that matches a phrase of Scripture, the Head that is the 
top of a hundred-foot pole. You should explore through your training, and do it 
thoroughly, that both ‘what is resting’ and ‘what is upon’ is the very Head of heads. 

Thus it is that the saying from the Diamond-cutting Scripture that “Buddhas 
and the supreme, fully perfected enlightenment of Buddhas all come forth from 
this Teaching of Mine” is also expressing a vision from within the vision wherein 
the Head habitually rests upon the head. When this Teaching gives expression to a 
vision from within the vision, supreme enlightenment causes all Buddhas to come 
forth. And what is more, all Buddhas, being enlightened, give voice to this 
Scripture, which is, beyond doubt, Their expressing a vision from within the 
vision. Since the cause of the vision is not obscured, the result of the vision is not 
hidden from sight. It is simply a matter of one strike of a clapper making a 
thousand hits or ten thousand hits, or of a thousand strikes or ten thousand strikes 
making one hit or half a hit. Accordingly, you need to know that there is such a 
thing as giving expression to a vision from within the vision—one that involves the 
experiencing of That Which Is—and there are times when the one who gives 
expression to a vision from within the vision is ‘such a person’.* And there is the 
giving expression to a dream from within a dream—one that does not involve the 
experiencing of That Which Is—and there are times when the one who gives 
expression to a dream from within a dream is not ‘such a person’. And you need to 
know that the principle being recognized here is dazzlingly clear, namely, that 
giving expression all day long to a vision from within the vision is simply giving 
expression to a vision from within the vision. This is why a former Buddha once 
said, “For your sakes, I am now giving expression to the vision from within the 
vision. The Buddhas of the three periods of time—past, present, and future—all 
expressed the vision from within the vision and the first six Chinese Ancestral 
Masters also expressed the vision from within the vision.” You should clearly study 
these words. 


spiritual meaning of the phrase ‘pacing a Head upon a head’, they also misunderstand the 
nature of their everyday experience. Rather than seeing the Buddha Nature within all the 
myriad things that exist, they only see the insubstantiality of all things. By viewing things in 
this one-sided way, they sadly miss the joy of meeting Buddha, until and unless they 
encounter ‘such a one’ who can explain the deeper spiritual significance of all that exists. 



Shobogenzo: On a Vision Within a Vision and a Dream Within a Dream 


506 


‘Holding the flower aloft, with eyes atwinkle’ is giving expression to the 
vision from within the vision, and ‘respectful bowing securing for you the very 
Marrow of the Way’ is also giving expression to the vision from within the vision . 6 

In sum, ‘gaining the Way through a single verse of Scripture’, as well as “I 
do not understand,” and “I do not personally know that One,” are all ways of 
expressing the vision from within the vision . 7 Because the Bodhisattva* of Great 
Compassion’s making use of His ever so many hands and eyes is the same, His 
meritorious functions of ‘seeing colors and seeing sounds’ and of ‘hearing colors 
and hearing sounds’ are sufficient. Sometimes, one gives expression to the vision 
from within the vision by manifesting oneself in various forms to aid deluded 
beings. Sometimes, one gives expression to the vision from within the vision by 
giving voice to the Dharma over and over again. It is giving expression to the 
vision from within the vision when a Master grabs hold of the deluded certainty of 
his trainees or lets them go on in their own way. ‘Pointing directly’ is giving 
expression to the vision, just as ‘hitting the target’ is giving expression to the 
vision. Whether grabbing hold of the deluded certainty of one’s trainees or letting 
them go on in their own way, you need to leam how to use an ordinary weighing 
scale. When you have learned this, then, beyond question, your ability to spot the 
difference between a pound and an ounce will emerge, and you will have your way 
of expressing the vision from within the vision. 

If you have not yet reached equilibrium and are still arguing over how many 
ounces to a pound, you will not manifest balance. When you have achieved 
equilibrium, then you will see what balance really is. When you have completely 
achieved equilibrium, you will not depend on what is being weighed, or upon some 
scale, or upon the way a scale functions. You need to thoroughly explore that, even 
though you may rely on That which is as unbounded space, if you have not attained 
equilibrium, you will not see what balance is. When you yourself are relying on 
That which is as unbounded space, letting the objects you encounter float freely in 


6. ‘Holding the flower aloft, with eyes atwinkle’ is a reference to the Transmission of the 
Dhanna from Shakyamuni Buddha to his disciple Makakasho. Dogen explores the reference 
to ‘respectful bowing’ in his Discourse 10: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure for You the 
Very Marrow of the Way’ (Raihai Tokuzui). 

7. ‘Gaining the Way... ’ is an allusion to the Sixth Chinese Ancestor Daikan Eno, who awoke to 
the Truth upon hearing someone recite a single verse from the Diamond-cutting Scripture. “I 
do not understand [the Buddha’s Teaching]” is also an allusion to Daikan Eno, whose 
understanding went beyond an intellectual understanding of Scripture. “I do not personally 
know that One” was Bodhidharma’s reply to Emperor Wu’s question, “And who, pray, is 
this one who is confronting my royal presence?” 



Shobogenzo: On a Vision Within a Vision and a Dream Within a Dream 


507 


space, it will be your giving expression to the vision from within the vision, and 
within that space you will physically manifest equilibrium. Balance is the great 
truth of a scale, whereon we weigh space and we weigh things. Whether it is space 
or an object being weighed, when you reach equilibrium, you will express the 
vision from within the vision. 

There is nothing that is not a liberated expression of the vision from within 
the vision. ‘Vision’ is synonymous with the whole of the great earth, and the whole 
of the great earth is synonymous with equilibrium. Therefore, our endlessly turning 
our head and setting our brains in motion are nothing other than our accepting in 
trust and acting in devotion, by means of which we realize the vision within our 
dreams. 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said in verse, 

The Buddha with His body all in gold 
Was adorned with the marks of a hundred blessings. 
His very existence was like a pleasant dream 
In which He heard the Dharma and voiced It for the 
sake of all. 

And in His dream He became a nation s king, 

One who forsook palace and household, 

As well as all desires for finer things, 

To find, instead, a place to train for Truth. 

Beneath the Bodhi tree 

He took His place upon the Lion s seat * 

And sought the Truth for seven days 
Before He reached the wisdom that He sought. 

Having fully reached the Supreme Way, 

He arose and turned the Dharma s Wheel, 

Expressing Truth for the sake of all 
As hundreds of thousands of millions of kalpas* 
passed Him by. 

Beyond delusion is His wondrous Dharma 
That helps all beings reach the Other Shore. 

Then the day came when He entered nirvana 
Like a lamp going out, its fuel spent. 



Shobogenzo: On a Vision Within a Vision and a Dream Within a Dream 


508 


If any in later times 

Should express His peerless Dharma, 

They too will reap great benefits 

Like the meritorious virtues herein described. 

By exploring through your training what the Buddha is saying in the present 
instance, you will fully realize what the assembly of all Buddhas is, for what He is 
saying is not a metaphor. The wondrous Dharma of Buddhas is simply that of each 
Buddha on His own, just as it is for all the Buddhas. Therefore, all things, both in a 
dream state and in an awakened one, are manifestations of the Truth. Within the 
awakened state, there is a turning of the heart, practice and training, enlightenment, 
and nirvana, and within the dreaming state there is likewise a turning of the heart, 
practice and training, enlightenment, and nirvana. The dream state and the 
awakened state—each is a manifestation of the Truth. They are beyond large and 
small, beyond superior and inferior. 

At the same time, seeing or hearing a phrase like “And in His dream He 
became a nation’s king,” people in the past and present have mistakenly 
understood it to mean that, due to the influence of this foremost Dharma having 
been voiced, their own nighttime dreams will come true. Their understanding the 
phrase in this way means that they have not yet fully understood what the Buddha 
was Teaching. Dreaming and being awake have always been as one and the same, 
for they are both manifestations of the Truth. And even if the Buddha’s Teaching 
were a metaphor, it would still be a manifestation of the Truth. And, as already 
stated, It is not a metaphor. What we create in a dream is the reality of the 
Buddha’s Teaching. Shakyamuni Buddha, as well as all the Buddhas and 
Ancestors, have turned Their hearts around and done the training and practice, and 
They have alike achieved a genuine awakening, and all within a dream. Because 
this is so, what the Buddha said as Teaching for the present-day mundane world is 
nothing other than ‘what we create within a dream’. 

Seven days expresses a measure for how long it takes to attain the wisdom 
of a Buddha. Turning the Wheel of the Dharma to help sentient beings reach the 
Other Shore has already been described as the passing of hundreds of thousands of 
millions of kalpas, for we should not speculate on the speed with which time 
passes within a dream . 8 


8. That is, time is how we experience it rather than how it is measured by a clock. Therefore, 
the seeming length of a ‘day’ and the length of a ‘kalpa’ are variable. 



Shobogenzo: On a Vision Within a Vision and a Dream Within a Dream 


509 


The Buddha with His body all in gold 

Was adorned with the marks of a hundred blessings. 

His very existence was like a pleasant dream 
In which He heard the Dharma and voiced It for the 
sake of all. 

Clearly you must have realized from this that ‘a pleasant dream’ is what the 
Buddha is. There is the Tathagata’s phrase “His very existence,” for He was not 
just some hundred-year long dream. “Voicing It for the sake of all” was His 
manifesting Himself in various forms. “Hearing the Dharma” was the sound that 
was heard by His Eye, the sound that was heard by His Heart, the sound that was 
heard by the old habits that He abandoned like an empty nest, and the sound that 
was heard before time began. 

The Buddha with His body all in gold 

Was adorned with the marks of a hundred blessings. 

This is saying that ‘a pleasant dream’ is the bodily existence of the Buddha, which 
is His forthwith having arrived at the Now and having doubts no more. Even 
though the instructions of the Buddha do not cease for someone who has 
awakened, the principle of the Buddhas’ and Ancestors’ complete manifesting is, of 
necessity, Their manifesting a vision from within a vision. Through your training, 
you need to explore what it means not to vilify the Buddha’s Dharma. When you 
explore through your training what not vilifying the Buddha’s Dharma means, the 
present words of the Tathagata will immediately come forth. 

Given to the assembly on the twenty-first day of the ninth lunar month in the third year of the 
Ninji era (October 16, 1242) in Yamashiro Province, Uji District, at Kannondori in 
Koshohorin-ji Temple. 

Copying finished by me on the third day of the third lunar month in the first year of the Kangen 
era (March 24, 1243). 


The Abbot s Assistant Ejo 



38 

On Expressing What One Has Realized 

(Dotoku) 


Translator’s Introduction: While ‘dotoku’, the key term in this discourse, can be translated in 
various ways, all point to the same matter, namely, the way in which someone expresses, often 
through words, what has been realized spiritually. This is different from experiencing a 
psychological insight or having an intellectual comprehension. 


All the Buddhas and all the Ancestors express what They have realized. This 
is why the Buddhas and Ancestors, when singling out an Ancestor of the Buddha, 
invariably ask, “Can that person express their realization or not?” They ask this 
question with Their heart and mind, with Their body, with Their traveling staff and 
ceremonial hossu, and as a pillar of Their temple and as a stone lantern . 1 For those 
who are not Buddhas or Ancestors, the question does not arise. The matter of their 
expressing what they have realized does not arise because such a state does not 
exist for them. 

Expressing what one has realized is an ability that is not to be had by 
keeping in step with other people, nor is it some innate talent; simply, whenever 
trainees thoroughly practice the Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors, then they will 
be able to express what Buddhas and Ancestors have realized. While expressing 
Their realization for others, the Buddhas and Ancestors of the past continued Their 
training and practice, and thereby thoroughly awoke to the Way. In the present, we 
should also do our meditation wholeheartedly and do our utmost to practice the 
Way. When Ancestors of the Buddha wholeheartedly do the meditation of Buddhas 
and Ancestors and undertake to put into practice the Truth that the Buddhas and 
Ancestors have expressed, Their expression of what They have realized represents 
the effort of three years, or eight years, or thirty or forty years, as They express 
what They have realized with all Their might. 

Within these time spans, however many decades long they may have been, 
there has been no disparity in how ‘such a one’ * has expressed what he or she has 
realized. Thus, when you become fully awake, what you will realize through your 

1. Please see the Glossary for the symbolic meanings of the last four terms in this sentence. 

* See Glossary. 


510 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing What One Has Realized 


511 


direct encounter with It will be the Truth. Because this encounter confirms as true 
the direct encounters of former times, when we now express what we have 
realized, it is beyond doubt. Thus, our expressing what we have realized in the 
present is supported by That which we directly met with in former times, and we 
support That which we directly met with in former times by expressing our 
realization today. This is why we can now express what we have realized, for we 
have personally met with It through our own experience. The expression of our 
realization in the present and our direct seeing in the past are as a single iron bar 
whose ends are ten thousand miles apart . 2 3 Our present efforts are directed by what 
we have realized of the Way and by what we have personally encountered. 

We pile up long months and many years of keeping to these efforts, and 
what is more, we cease to cling to our past efforts over the months and years. 
When we attempt to let go, our skin, flesh, bones, and marrow alike strive to let go. 
And along with them, the land we live in with its mountains and rivers also strives 
to let go. At this time, while we are striving to let go so that we may arrive at the 
Ultimate Treasured Place, our effort to arrive fully comes forth, and, as a result, at 
the very moment of letting go, we will spontaneously express our realization as it 
immediately manifests before our very eyes. Even though it is said to be beyond 
the power of our body and mind, we will, nevertheless, spontaneously express 
what we have realized. Once our realization has occurred, we see that it is not 
something curious or strange. 

Be that as it may, when you use words to express what you have realized, 
you will leave unsaid whatever is inexpressible through words. Even if you can see 
that you have indeed expressed what you have realized, if you have not realized 
that not all things can be verbally expressed, then you will lack the look of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, and you will lack the Bones and Marrow of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors. As a consequence, how could Eka’s expressing his realization by 
doing three prostrations before Bodhidharma and then standing silently in his place 
possibly be equaled by that bunch who are stuck on ‘skin, flesh, bones and 
marrow’? Furthermore, the understanding of that bunch who are stuck on ‘skin, 


2. That is, they are fundamentally one and the same, while appearing as if they were totally 
separate. 

3. The allusion here is to what occurred with the four disciples of Bodhidharma, three of whom 
expressed their understanding of their Master’s Teaching verbally, whereas Eka, the fourth, 
bowed to the Master whilst remaining silent. Each disciple, in turn, was described by 
Bodhidharma as having realized one of four attributes: the Master’s Skin, the Master’s 
Flesh, the Master’s Bones, and the Master’s Marrow. In the present context, Dogen is 
alluding to the literal-minded who are stuck with the notion that ‘Skin, Flesh, Bones, and 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing What One Has Realized 


512 


flesh, bones and marrow’ does not even come close to Eka’s understanding, as 
expressed by his doing three prostrations before Bodhidharma and then standing in 
his place, much less were any of that bunch equipped with what Eka had. Those 
whom we encounter right now as we do our practice amidst different kinds of 
sentient beings are just like those whom Eka encountered in the past as he did his 
practice amidst different kinds of sentient beings . 4 For us, there is a basis for our 
verbally expressing what we have realized and a basis for our not verbally 
expressing what we have realized. And for Eka, there was a basis for his verbally 
expressing what he had realized and a basis for his not verbally expressing what he 
had realized. And for that bunch, there is a ‘self and other’ in what they say and a 
‘self and other’ in what they do not say. 


Great Master Joshu Shinsai, in instructing his assembly, once said, “If you 
were to spend your whole life not leaving the monastery, sitting as still as a 
mountain and not saying a word for five or ten years, no one would call you a 
mute, and later on, not even the Buddhas would be your equal !” 5 Accordingly, 
when you reside in a monastery for five or ten years as the frosts of winter and the 
flowers of summer, time and again, pass you by, and when you esteem doing your 
utmost to practice the Way whilst spending your whole life without leaving the 
monastery even once, then your sitting as still as a mountain, which severs the 
roots of your dualistic thinking, will, before long, be an expression of your 
realization. Your walking, sitting, and reclining whilst not leaving the monastery 
will be instances of no one calling you a mute. Even though we do not know what 
our whole life will be like, if we make our lifetime one of not physically leaving 
the monastery, this will be our way of ‘not leaving the monastery’. And what path 


Marrow’ represent four spiritual states in ascending order of superiority, rather than 
recognizing that each of the four disciples had obtained the substance of Bodhidhanna’s 
Teaching. 

4. ‘Doing one’s practice amidst sentient beings” is a Zen Buddhist phrase referring to helping 
sentient beings reach the Other Shore, particularly those sentient beings whose perception of 
things is alien to the Buddhist Way. 

5. Throughout this text, the word ‘monastery’ can be understood literally as referring to the 
physical place where trainees come in order to train together and figuratively as one’s place 
of training, which is wherever one does the practice. 

In the present context, the Zen Buddhist term l akan ’, translated here as ‘a mute’, refers 
to a thoroughly inexperienced trainee who is unable to say even a word in response to a 
Master’s question. 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing What One Has Realized 


513 


through the trackless sky could one traverse in order to go beyond such terms as 
‘our whole life’ and ‘a monastery’? So, simply strive to sit as still as a mountain, 
and do not speak of ‘not expressing It through words’. ‘Not expressing It through 
words’ is a way of expressing It that is correct from beginning to end. 

Sitting as still as a mountain is for a whole lifetime, or for two whole 
lifetimes: it is not just for one or two occasions. When you have spent five or ten 
years in sitting as still as a mountain without saying a word, even the Buddhas will 
not think lightly of you. Truly, when you are sitting as still as a mountain without 
saying a word, even the Eyes of Buddhas will be unable to catch a glimpse of you, 
and even the strength of a Buddha will be unable to make you sway. At such a 
time, even the Buddhas will be unable to equal you. 

Joshu said that the expression ‘sitting as still as a mountain’ is beyond 
anything that even the Buddhas would call ‘being a mute’, and it is also beyond 
anything that They would call ‘not being a mute’. Accordingly, a whole life spent 
without leaving the monastery is a life spent wholly expressing what one has 
realized. Sitting as still as a mountain without saying a word for five or ten years is 
synonymous with expressing what one has realized for five or ten years. It is a 
whole life spent without departing from ‘not verbally expressing’ what one has 
realized, and it is a whole lifetime of five or ten years, and it is hundreds and 
thousands of Buddhas sitting to cut off Their dualistic thinking, and it is hundreds 
and thousands of Buddhas sitting to cut Themselves free from a ‘self’. 

Thus, the basis of the Buddhas’ and Ancestors’ expressing Their realization 
is Their spending Their whole life in not leaving the monastery. Even if you were a 
mute, you would still have this as a basis for expressing what you have realized, so 
do not draw the conclusion that a mute cannot have a way of expressing what he 
has realized. The person who has a way of expressing what he has realized is not 
necessarily someone who is not a mute, since a mute, too, has his way of 
expressing what he has realized. You need to be able to hear His mute voice: you 
need to listen to His mute words. If you are not mute, how can you possibly meet 
with a Mute, or converse with a Mute? Given that That Person is as silent as a 
mute, how are we to meet with Him or converse with Him? Exploring the Matter* 
in this way, you should thoroughly put into practice being as silent as a mute. 


There was a monk in the assembly of Great Master Seppo Shinkaku who 
went just outside the mountain monastery and built himself a hermit’s thatched hut. 
Though the years accumulated, he did not shave his head. Who can know what 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing What One Has Realized 


514 


kind of life went on within that hut? As a rule, life within the mountains was 
depressing indeed. 

He had fashioned a dipper out of wood and would go to the nearby ravine to 
get water for drinking. Truly, he must have been the sort who drinks from ravines. 
Consequently, as the days came and the nights passed, word of his customary 
habits leaked out, so that one day a monk came and asked him, “Why was it that 
the Ancestral Master Bodhidharma came here from the West?” The hermit replied, 
“Since the ravine is so deep, the handle of my dipper is long.” 

The inquiring monk was so dumbfounded that he left without bowing or 
asking the hermit for elucidation. Climbing back up the mountain, he recounted the 
event to Seppo. When Seppo heard the account, he said, “How wondrously 
strange! Even if it is as you say, this old monk will go and see for himself. By 
testing him, I’ll get to the bottom of this, right off.” 

The heart of what Seppo said is that the merit of the hermit’s remark was 
excellent, right up to the point of being wondrous, and even so, the old monk 
Seppo needed to go and see for himself. So, one day Seppo suddenly set off, 
asking his personal attendant to come along with a razor. He straightway arrived at 
the hermit’s hut. No sooner had he spotted the hermit than he asked him, “If you 
can say what you have realized, should I not shave your head?” 

We need to get to the heart of this question. “If you can say what you have 
realized, should I not shave your head?” can also be understood as “My not 
shaving your head means that you have a way of expressing the Matter,” right? If 
the hermit’s way of expressing what he has realized really did express the Matter, 
Seppo, in the last analysis, would not shave him. Those who have the capacity to 
hear this expression of the Matter need to listen, and should also clearly expound it 
for the sake of others who have the capacity to listen. 

The hermit then washed his head and came before Seppo. Had he come as 
his way of expressing what he had realized or had he come as his way of not 
expressing what he had realized? Whichever the case, Seppo, accordingly, shaved 
the hermit’s head. 

This one episode is like the blossoming of an udumbara flower ; 6 not only is 
it something rarely met with, it is rarely even heard about. It goes beyond the realm 
of the seven times saintly or the ten times saintly: it goes beyond what is glimpsed 
by the thrice wise or the seven times wise.* Those who are academic teachers of 
Scripture and writers of erudite commentaries, along with that bunch who crave 
mystical or magical powers, cannot fathom it at all. When we speak of 


6. The udumbara flower is said to blossom only once in every three thousand years. 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing What One Has Realized 


515 


encountering the emergence of a Buddha into the world, we are speaking of 
hearing a story like this one. 

Now, what could Seppo’s remark, “If you can say what you have realized, 
should I not shave your head” really mean? When people who have not yet given 
expression to the Truth hear this story, those who are capable may be startled and 
doubt their ability, whereas those who are not yet capable may be completely 
bewildered. Seppo did not ask the hermit about ‘Buddha’, nor did he speak of ‘the 
Way’: he did not ask him about deep meditative states, nor did he speak of 
invocations . 7 Even though his inquiring as he did resembles asking a question, it is 
actually analogous to an assertion. You should explore this in detail through your 
training. 

The hermit, though, had the look of the Genuine about him, so he could not 
help but give expression to the Dharma for the sake of others by his way of 
expressing what he had realized, and, as a result, he was not bewildered by Seppo’s 
remark. He did not seek to go back into seclusion, as was his customary way, but 
washed his head and came forth. This is an expression of Buddha Dharma whose 
boundaries not even the wisdom of the Buddha Himself can reach. Expressing It 
can take the form of manifesting the Body, or giving voice to the Dharma, or 
rescuing sentient beings from their suffering, or washing one’s head and coming 
forth. 

Now then, if Seppo had not been the spiritually Real Person that he was, he 
would probably have thrown down the razor and burst out into gales of laughter. 
But Seppo had the essential spiritual strength and was that kind of Real Person, so 
he shaved the hermit’s head. Truly, if Seppo and the hermit had not been ‘Buddhas 
on Their own, together with all Buddhas’, it could not have been like this; if they 
had not been ‘one and the same Buddha, and also two Buddhas’, it could not have 
been like this; if they had not been one dragon meeting another, it could not have 
been like this. The Black Dragon vigilantly guards the black pearl that He prizes so 
highly, and yet it naturally rolls into the hands of one who knows how to receive it. 

Keep in mind that when Seppo tested the hermit, the hermit saw who Seppo 
really was. In expressing what was realized without saying what was realized, the 
one was shaved and the other did the shaving. Accordingly, there are pathways 
whereby good spiritual friends who express the Truth unexpectedly meet each 


7. Discussing ‘Buddha’ and ‘the Way’ refers to the intellectualizing of Buddhism by scholarly 
commentators and academic teachers of Scriptural texts, whereas deep meditative states and 
invocations are areas that those seeking magical powers are apt to get into. An invocation is 
a phrase having spiritual significance, which is sometimes chanted as part of a trainee’s 
ceremonial practice. 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing What One Has Realized 


516 


other. And among friends who claim that they have not realized anything, there 
have been occasions when they have recognized the True Self, even though they 
had no expectations of doing so. When you undertake through your training to 
recognize the True Self, you will express what you have realized when It manifests 
before your very eyes. 

Written down at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple and given to the assembly on the fifth day 
of the tenth lunar month in the third year of the Ninji era (October 30, 1242). Composed 
and proofread by this mendican t monk. 

Copied on the second day of the eleventh lunar month in the third year of the same era 
(November 25, 1242). 

Ejo 



39 

On ‘A Picture of a Rice Cake’ 

(Gaby 6) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen begins by exploring, from a literal 
perspective, the saying by Meditation Master Kyogen Chikan that “A picture of a rice cake 
cannot satisfy one’s hunger.” In other words, a mental construct is no substitute for the direct 
experience of That Which Is. Also, knowing that suffering exists does not allay suffering. He 
then subtly turns this perspective around and shows how what we call a direct experience is 
shaped by how our mind depicts things. 


Because all Buddhas are enlightened, all worldly beings are enlightened. 
Even so, Buddhas and worldly beings are not of one and the same nature or of one 
and the same frame of mind. Nevertheless, at the time when both manifest their 
enlightenment, the enlightenment of one does not inhibit the enlightenment of 
others. At the time when both manifest their enlightenment, they will manifest it 
without the two coming in contact with each other’s manifesting it. This is the 
forthright Teaching that is characteristic of our Ancestors. So do not hold up some 
measure of sameness or difference as the gauge of someone’s capacity to train. 
This is why it is said, “When we just barely comprehend what a single thing is, we 
comprehend what myriad things are.” What is spoken of here as ‘comprehending 
what a single thing is’ does not mean that we deny the appearance that some thing 
previously had, nor does it mean that we make one thing stand against another, nor 
does it mean that we treat some thing as absolute and unique. Treating some thing 
as absolute and unique is synonymous with treating it as an obstruction and then 
being obstructed by it. When our comprehension is freed from the obstruction of ‘I 
comprehend’, one instance of comprehension is equivalent to myriad instances of 
comprehension. One instance of comprehension is equivalent to a single thought or 
thing, and the comprehension of one thought or thing is synonymous with the 
comprehension of myriad thoughts and things. 


A Buddha of old once said, “A picture of a rice cake never satisfies hunger.” 
Patch-robed novices who are seeking for a Master with whom to explore this 


517 



Shobogenzo: On A Picture of a Rice Cake ’ 


518 


saying, as well as bodhisattvas* and shravakas* who have come hither from all 
directions, are not all uniform in reputation and rank. And this includes those 
having the head of a celestial being or the face of a demon, all of whom come 
hither from all directions, their hides thick or thin. Although they may say that they 
are studying what Buddhas of the past and present have said, they are actually 
spending their lives living under some tree or in a hermit’s thatched hut. As a 
consequence, when they are at the point of passing on the traditions of our 
monastic family, some may refer to this statement about a rice cake by saying, “He 
said what He did because engaging in the study of the Scriptures and commentaries 
will not instill true wisdom.” And there are others who may say, “He spoke this 
way because He was trying to say that studying the Scriptural texts on the three 
provisional vehicles* and the one True Vehicle* is, moreover, not the path to 
enlightenment.” In both instances, this is their engaging in judgmental thinking. 

Speaking more broadly, those who assert that provisional Teachings are 
completely useless are greatly mistaken. They have not had the meritorious 
behavior of Ancestors in our tradition genuinely Transmitted to them, so they are in 
the dark about the sayings of Buddhas and Ancestors. Since they have not clarified 
what this one saying is about, who could affirm that they had thoroughly explored 
the sayings of other Buddhas? 

For instance, the saying “A picture of a rice cake never satisfies hunger” is 
like the saying from the Agama Scripture , “Refrain from all evil whatsoever, and 
uphold and practice all that is good .” 1 And it is like Daikan Eno’s query, “What is 
It that has come about like this?” And it is like Tozan Ryokai’s statement, “I am 
always eager here in this place.” For the time being, you need to explore these 
statements in a similar manner through your training. 

Folks who have encountered the expression ‘a picture of a rice cake’ are few, 
and none of them have fully delved into what it means. How do I know this? In my 
testing one or two smelly skin bags* in the past, they had reached neither the level 
of certainty nor even the level of uncertainty: they simply seemed indifferent, as if 
they were refusing to lend an ear to some neighbor’s chitchat. You need to realize 
that what is called ‘a picture of a rice cake’ includes the appearance of what is bom 
of “father” and “mother”, as well as the appearance of what has not yet been bom 


* See Glossary. 

1. That is, the Precepts (refraining from evil, etc.) will alleviate suffering (hunger), but only so 
long as one is living by them and not just mouthing them. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘A Picture of a Rice Cake ’ 


519 


2 

of “father” and “mother”. At the very moment when a rice cake is actually made 
by using rice or wheat flour, without doubt, it is the moment when the reality of it 
manifests and the term for it is fulfilled. Do not explore through your training that 
a picture of a rice cake is something as trifling as our perception of the comings 
and goings of things. The ‘colors’ we use in ‘painting a rice cake’ will find their 
equivalents in the colors we use in painting a landscape. That is, in painting a 
landscape we use cerulean blue and earthen red pigments, and in painting a picture 
of a rice cake we use rice and wheat flour. Since, in both cases, the projects and the 
planning are equivalent, the materials we are using are also equivalent. 

As a consequence, ‘a picture of a rice cake’ may refer to such things as a rice 
dumpling, a bean cake, a cake of tofu, a baked wheat cake, a fried rice cake—all of 
which arise from a picture we have drawn in our minds. You need to recognize that 
there are such things as pictures, cakes, and thoughts and things. Therefore, the 
cakes that are appearing in the here and now are all together ‘pictures of rice 
cakes’. Should we seek for ‘a picture of a rice cake’ apart from this, ultimately we 
will never encounter it, for such a thing has never been thought up. Although a 
picture of a rice cake manifests at some one time, it does not manifest at some 
other time. Nevertheless, it lacks the characteristics of being old or young, and it 
leaves no traces of its coming and going. At the same time, nations and lands as 
‘pictured cakes’ come forth and materialize here and now. 

In the phrase ‘will never satisfy hunger’, ‘hunger’ does not refer to 
something that is under the sway of the twenty-four hours of a day. And, at the 
same time, when one encounters a picture of a rice cake, it is not some convenient 
thing, for even were we to sample a picture of a rice cake, ultimately it would fail 
to satisfy our hunger. There is no rice cake that depends on our being hungry. And 
because there is no rice cake that depends on there being rice cakes, the vigorous 
way of living fails to be transmitted, and the traditional ways of training are not 
passed on. Hunger is a monk’s traveling staff* Whether borne horizontally or 
vertically, it undergoes thousands of changes and myriad transformations. A rice 
cake is also one manifestation of body and mind, be it blue, yellow, red, or white, 
or long, short, square, or round. 

Now, when we paint a picture of a landscape, we use cerulean blue, verdant 
green, and earthen red colors to depict awesome cliffs and strangely shaped rocks, 


2. Not yet bom of “father” and “mother” refers to the time before duality arises, whereas what 
is born of “father” and “mother” refers to the arising of dualistic thinking. 



Shobogenzo: On A Picture of a Rice Cake ’ 


520 


as well as making use of the seven treasures and the four treasures . 3 Managing the 
painting of a rice cake is also like this. When painting a human, we make use of the 
four elements* and the five sk and has;* when painting the Buddha, we not only 
make use of a clod of earth or mud, we also make use of His thirty-three auspicious 
characteristics, of a blade of grass, and of innumerable kalpas* of training and 
practice. Because depicting the Buddha in a scroll painting has always been like 
this, all Buddhas are depicted Buddhas and all depicted Buddhas are Buddhas. We 
need to investigate what a painted Buddha is and what a painted rice cake is. We 
need to explore in detail and with the utmost effort what a black turtle of stone is 
and what a monk’s traveling staff of iron is, what a physical thing is and what a 
mental thing is. When we make such an effort, life and death, as well as coming 
and going, are simply drawings of a picture, as is, in a word, supreme 
enlightenment. In sum, neither the Dharma realms nor empty space are other than 
painted images. 

djb 

CX) 


A Buddha of old once said in verse: 

When I finally realized the Way, 

The white snow, which had blanketed all in a 
thousand layers, departed 
And, in my making a picture of this, 

Blue-tinged mountains emerged on scroll after scroll. 

This is talk about the great realization. It is His way of expressing that His having 
done His utmost to practice the Way had come to full fruition. As a consequence, at 
the very moment of His having realized the Way, He has created a picture, wherein 
He calls blue-tinged mountains and white snow ‘scroll upon scroll’. 
Notwithstanding that, there is not a movement or a moment of stillness that is not 
part of His making a picture. Our own efforts to do our utmost at the present time 
are simply obtained from our own pictures. The ten epithets of the Buddha and the 


3. In a mundane sense, ‘the seven treasures’ refers to various precious and semi-precious 
stones, as well to the seven treasures of a universal monarch, whereas ‘the four treasures’ 
refers to the four basic tools of a painter, namely, brush, ink, inkstone, and paper. On a 
spiritual level, ‘the seven treasures’ refers to the seven types of jewel trees that are to be 
found in the Pure Land, whereas ‘the four treasures’ refers to four divisions of the 
Scriptures: the Buddha’s Teachings for all (the Sutras), His instructions for monastics (the 
Vinaya), the commentaries on the Buddha’s Teachings (the Shastras ), and the prayer-like 
invocations (the Dharanis). 



Shobogenzo: On ‘A Picture of a Rice Cake ’ 


521 


three insights are ‘scroll paintings ’. 4 The five spiritual agents, the five spiritual 
powers, the seven characteristics of enlightenment, and the Noble Eightfold Path 
comprise ‘scroll paintings ’. 5 Were you to say that such pictures are not real, then 
all thoughts and things are also unreal. If thoughts and things are not real, then the 
Buddha Dharma is unreal. If the Buddha Dharma is real, then it follows that a 
picture of a rice cake must be real as well. 


Ummon Bun’en was once asked by a monk, “What would you 
call talk that goes beyond ‘Buddha’ and transcends ‘Ancestor?’” 

The Master replied, “A rice dumpling .” 6 7 

We need to take our time to investigate this saying of his. Once a ‘rice dumpling’ 
has been brought into existence, there will be an ancestral Master who will speak 
out about “talk that goes beyond ‘Buddha’ and transcends ‘Ancestor.’” And there 
are the ‘trainees of iron will’ who may not listen to him. And there are novices 
who will listen because the Master has brought forth an expression of Dharma. 

Now, Ummon’s displaying the Matter* and hitting the bull’s-eye by saying 
“a rice dumpling” are, to be sure, a couple of slices of a painted rice cake. And they 


4. The ten epithets of the Buddha are ‘The One Who Comes Thus’, ‘The One Worthy of 
Respect’, ‘The Self-enlightened One’, ‘The One of Perfect Conduct’, The One Who is Well- 
gone’, ‘The Knower of the World’, ‘The Unsurpassed One’, ‘The Supreme Trainer of Those 
Who Can be Trained’, ‘The Teacher of Gods and Humans’, and ‘The Awakened One Who is 
the Refuge of the World’. The three insights are the recognition of impennanence, the 
recognition of no fixed, unchanging self, and the recognition of suffering. 

5. The five spiritual agents are trust, zeal, reflection, contemplation, and wise discernment. The 
five spiritual powers destroy doubt by trust, negligence by zeal, falsity by reflection, 
confused or wandering thoughts by contemplation, and all illusions and delusions by wise 
discernment. The seven characteristics of enlightenment are being able to distinguish the 
true from the false, being undeflected from one’s training and practice, being joyful, being 
rid of heaviness of mind, being at ease, being able to keep the mind focused, and not being 
thrown off by whatever arises. 

6. The term ‘a rice dumpling’ is being used in Dogen’s discussion as a metaphor for a question 
that the intellect ‘cooks up’ to chat about. 

7. Here, ‘trainees of iron will’ refers to those senior monks who hear the Dharma being voiced 
by a Master but have ceased to listen. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘A Picture of a Rice Cake ’ 


522 


contain talk about going beyond ‘Buddha’ and transcending ‘Ancestor’, and they 
contain a pathway for entering Buddhahood or for entering demonhood . 8 


My former Master once said, “Tall bamboo and plantain enter into the 
making of a picture .” 9 This expression is one by which those who have gone 
beyond long and short have explored ‘making a picture’ through their training. 

‘Tall bamboo’ is the Chinese name for what we in Japan call ‘long-stemmed 
bamboo’. Although people say that bamboo is the result of an interplay of yin and 
yang, it is we who are setting ‘yin and yang’ in motion. Even so, there is the time 
of a tall bamboo, but that time cannot be measured in terms of yin and yang . 10 
Even though great saintly ones may catch a glimpse of yin and yang, they cannot 
fathom what yin and yang really are. Because yin and yang together constitute the 
impartiality of thoughts and things, the impartiality of weights and measures, and 
the impartiality of words and ways, it is something beyond the yin and yang that 
the minds and eyes of non-Buddhists and those of the two Lesser Courses* depend 
on. It is the yin and yang of tall bamboo; it is the reckoning of the stages in the life 
of a tall bamboo; it is the world of tall bamboos. The Buddhas in all ten directions 
exist as the household of tall bamboos. You need to realize that the cosmos with its 
heavens and earths is the roots, stems, branches, and leaves of a tall bamboo. 
Therefore, it causes the cosmos with its heavens and earths to endure, and it causes 
Mount Sumeru within the Great Ocean, along with the whole universe in all ten 
directions, to have substantiality, and it causes a Master’s traveling staff and 
lacquered bamboo bow to be both complete and not complete . 11 


8. That is, Ummon’s reply is fine as far as it goes, but if the disciple remains attached to 
concepts like ‘Buddha’ or ‘Ancestor’ or ‘transcendence’, then he has entered the path to 
demonhood rather than the one to Buddhahood, where all such concepts are dropped off. 

9. Bamboo and plantain have long been used as subjects for both Chinese and Japanese 
paintings. Both have also been used as metaphors and carry various meanings. On the basis 
of the present quotation by Dogen’s Master, Tendo Nyojo, as well as Dogen’s discussion of 
it, bamboo is descriptive of the Master and plantain is descriptive of the trainee. 

10. That is, the life of a Master cannot be measured by applying mundane, dualistic measures 
such as yin and yang. 

11. The lacquered bamboo bow was entwined with a wisteria vine and was sometimes used by 
Zen Masters ceremonially in pointing to the Master-disciple relationship. 



Shobogenzo: On A Picture of a Rice Cake ’ 


523 


Plantain has earth, water, fire, wind, and space, as well as mind, will, 
consciousness, and wisdom. These are its roots, stems, branches, and leaves, along 
with the brightness of its flowers and fruit. So, when the winds of autumn envelop 
it and tear it, there is not a single mote of dust that remains on it. It can doubtless 
be described as pure and clean, for there is no sinew or bone within its core, nor 
any glue or other sticky substance upon its form. Liberation is its goal. Further, 
since it is not clinging to immediacy, it is beyond discussion of such measures of 
time as minutes and seconds. Through this endeavor, earth, water, fire, and wind 
are brought to life, and mind, intent, consciousness, and wisdom are made to 
experience the Great Death. Thus, in this lineage of ours, we have habitually 
received the Precepts, employing spring and fall, winter and summer, as Their 
tools. 

The present activities of tall bamboo and plantain are making a picture. 
Accordingly, those who may awaken upon hearing the sound of bamboo being 
struck will make a picture, whether they be dragons or garter snakes, for they will 
not harbor any doubts about the sentimental concerns of the mundane or the 
saintly. 

That cane can be long, this way, 

And this cane can be short, this way, 

This cane can be long, this way, 

13 

And that cane can be short, this way. 

Because these are all images in a picture, they are, of necessity, in accord with each 
other. When there are long pictures, short pictures will not be lacking. Clearly, you 
need to thoroughly explore this principle. Because the whole universe and all 
thoughts within it are the act of drawing a picture, every human thought and thing 
emerges from a picture, and Buddhas and Ancestors come forth from pictures as 
well. Thus, beyond the image of a rice cake there is no medicine to satisfy our 
hungers, beyond the image of hunger there is no mutual encountering among 
humans, and beyond the image of fulfillment there is no capability. 


12. Here, ‘dragons’ refers to monks of marked spiritual achievement combined with singular 
intellectual prowess, whereas ‘garter snakes’ refers to monks whose abilities are less 
pronounced. In either case, both are quite capable of distinguishing between the genuine and 
the mundane in spiritual matters. 

13. To paraphrase what this poem is pointing to, those of mundane thinking may discriminate 
among Masters, particularly on the basis of how long such a one has been functioning as a 
Master, but from a spiritual perspective, someone who is a Master is so because he or she is 
‘this way’, that is, ‘such a person’, one who has fully realized the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘A Picture of a Rice Cake ’ 


524 


In sum, to be satisfied with being hungry, to be satisfied with not being 
hungry, not to satisfy one’s hunger, and not to satisfy one’s not being hungry—all 
these would be impossible and inexpressible were it not for an image of hunger. 
You need to explore through your training that the concrete here and now at this 
very moment is a picture of a rice cake. When you explore the fundamental point 
of this through your body and mind, you will begin to master the meritorious 
function of ever so slightly setting things in motion and of your being set in motion 
by things. Prior to this meritorious function manifesting itself before your very 
eyes, your ability to leam the Way has not yet manifested fully. When you make 
this meritorious function fully manifest, you will fully realize just what a picture is. 

Given to the assembly on the fifth day of the eleventh lunar month in the third year of the Ninji 
era (November 28, 1242) at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple. 

Copied by me on the seventh day of the eleventh lunar month in the third year of the Ninji era 
(November 30, 1242) in the Koshohorin-ji Guest Office. 

Ejo 



40 

On Functioning Fully 

(Zenki) 


Translator’s Introduction: As the postscript at the end of this discourse indicates, this talk was 
given by Dogen not only for the benefit of his monastic community but also for the benefit of his 
lay followers, including his major lay patron, the Governor of Izumi Province. The discourse has 
an underlying assumption which may not be immediately evident to Western readers, namely 
that all humans have Buddha Nature, and indeed, are Buddha Nature, and that Buddha Nature is 
our True Self. Thus, even though we may not yet have recognized that this is the case, 
nevertheless our Buddha Nature is constantly functioning as Buddha Nature at all times, in life 
and in death, never ceasing or disappearing or lying dormant, ever displaying Itself right before 
our very eyes. 


When we thoroughly explore what the Great Way of the Buddhas is, we find 
that It is liberation from delusion and letting our True Self manifest to the full. For 
some, this liberation from delusion means that life liberates us from life, and death 
liberates us from death. Therefore, both our getting out of birth-and-death and our 
entering into birth-and-death are the Great Way. Both our laying birth-and-death 
aside and our going beyond birth-and-death to the Other Shore are also the Great 
Way. Our True Self revealing Itself to the full is what life is, and life is our True 
Self revealing Itself to the full. At the time when our True Self reveals Itself, we 
can say that there is nothing that is not a full displaying of life, and there is nothing 
that is not a full displaying of death. 

It is the operating of this True Self that causes life to come about and causes 
death to come about. At the very moment when we fully manifest this functioning 
of our True Self, It will not necessarily be something great or something small, or 
the whole universe or some limited bit of it, or something drawn out or something 
short and quick. Our life at this very moment is the True Self in operation, and the 
operating of our True Self is our life at this very moment. 

Life is not something that comes and life is not something that goes; life is 
not something that reveals itself and life is not something that is accomplished. 
Rather, life is a displaying of one’s Buddha Nature to the full, and death is also a 
displaying of one’s Buddha Nature to the full. You need to realize that both life and 
death occur in the immeasurable thoughts and things within ourselves. 


525 



Shobogenzo: On Functioning Fully 


526 


Also, calmly reflect upon whether this life of the present moment, as well as 
the various thoughts and things that co-exist with this life, are a part of life or are 
not a part of life. There is nothing—not a single moment, not a single thought or 
thing—that is not a part of life. There is nothing—not a single matter, not a single 
state of mind—that is not also a part of life. For instance, life is like a time when I 
am on board a boat. While I’m on this boat, I manipulate the sails, I handle the 
rudder, I push the punting pole. At the same time, the boat is carrying me along, 
and there is no ‘I’ that is outside this boat. My sailing in a boat is what makes this 
boat be a boat. You need to do your utmost to explore through your training what is 
going on at this very moment, for at this very moment there is nothing other than 
the world of the boat. The sky, the water, the shore—all have become this moment 
of the boat, which is completely different from occasions when I am not on a boat. 
Thus, life is what I am making life to be, and I am what life is making me to be. 
While being carried on a boat, my body and mind, with their inner causes and outer 
conditions, are, all together, a part of the way a boat functions. The whole of the 
great earth and the whole of the expanse of space are, likewise, a part of the way a 
boat functions. What this metaphor is saying is that life is what T is, and T is 
what life is. 


The venerable monk Meditation Master Engo Kokugon once said, “Life is a 
manifestation of one’s entire being, and death is a manifestation of one’s entire 
being.” We need to thoroughly explore this saying and clarify what it means. In the 
present instance, what ‘thoroughly exploring this saying’ refers to is the principle 
that life is a manifestation of one’s entire being and is not concerned with 
beginnings and endings, for life is the whole of the great earth and the whole of 
unbounded space. At the same time, not only does this principle not stand against 
life’s being a manifestation of one’s entire being, but it also does not stand against 
death’s being a manifestation of one’s entire being. When death is also a 
manifestation of one’s entire being, it is the whole of the great earth and the whole 
of unbounded space. And at the same time, not only does this principle not stand 
against death’s being a manifestation of one’s entire being, but it also does not get 
in the way of life’s being a manifestation of one’s entire being. Hence, life does not 
get in the way of death, and death does not get in the way of life. Both the whole of 
the great earth and the whole of unbounded space exist within life, and they exist 
within death as well. 

Even so, it is not that the whole of the great earth is one thing and the whole 
of unbounded space is another thing; both operate to the full in life and both 
operate to the full in death. Therefore, even though it is not a matter of their being 



Shobogenzo: On Functioning Fully 


527 


one single thing, it is also not a matter of their being different things. And even 
though it is not a matter of their being different things, it is also not a matter of 
their being identical things. And even though it is not a matter of their being 
identical things, it is also not a matter of their being many things. Hence, there are 
the various thoughts and things that are manifestations of one’s entire being in life, 
and there are also the various thoughts and things that are manifestations of one’s 
entire being in death, and there are the manifestations of one’s entire being that are 
beyond ‘life’ and beyond ‘death’. Both life and death exist within the manifestation 
of one’s entire being. 

Thus, all functions in life-and-death will be present, like a strong-armed man 
flexing his muscles or like someone at night reaching behind himself to grope for 
his pillow. They come forth whenever there is abundant luminosity from one’s 
marvelous innate spiritual abilities. At the very moment of their coming forth, 
because the person is functioning fully within their coming forth, such a one may 
thi nk that before they fully appeared in front of him, they had not appeared at all. 
Yet, before this full manifestation, there were previous manifestations of that 
person’s True Nature. Even though such a person may say that he had some 
previous manifestation of his True Nature, it has not inhibited the present 
appearance of his True Nature. Thus it is that discriminatory opinions may arise 
before one’s very eyes . 1 

Delivered to the assembly in the Kyoto office of the Governor of Izumi Province on the 
seventeenth day of the twelfth lunar month in the third year of the Ninji era (January 10, 
1243) 2 

Copied by me on the nineteenth day of the first month in the fourth year of the same era 
(February 9, 1243 ). 3 

Ejo 


1. Such as the opinion that the manifestation of one’s True Nature is a one-time thing. 

2. The governor, Yoshishige Hatano, was one of Dogen’s principle supporters. 

3. The seeming contradiction that both the third and the fourth years of the Ninji era occurred 
in 1243 is due to the fact that, in the lunar calendar, the last day of the third year fell on 
January 21, 1243, according to the Western solar calendar. The new lunar year, by our 
reckoning, then began on January 22. 



41 


On Expressing One’s True Nature 
by Expressing One’s Intent 

(Sesshin Sessho) 

Translator’s Introduction: This title contains an ambiguity that is lost in translation. The term 
sesshin can be rendered either as ‘expressing one’s intent’ or as ‘expressing one’s mind’. 
However, Dogen refers to the phrase ‘expressing one’s mind’ as a misinterpretation, especially if 
‘expressing’ is taken to mean ‘talking about’, implying an intellectual discussion about the nature 
of mind. Sessho, ‘expressing one’s intent’, refers specifically to actively expressing one’s 
spiritual intention to help all sentient beings reach the Other Shore. This is the way in which 
someone expresses his or her True Nature, which Dogen identifies as one’s Buddha Nature. And 
the expression of one’s True Nature takes the form of expressing one’s spiritual intent. 


Once when Meditation Master Shinzan Somitsu was out on a 
walk with Great Master Tozan Ryokai, the latter pointed to a nearby 
temple and said, “Within that temple, there is one who is expressing 
his True Nature by expressing his intention.” 

Shinzan, his elder brother in the Sangha, asked, “And who is 
that one?” 

Tozan replied, “With your asking this one question, my elder 
brother in the Sangha, that one has forthwith succeeded in completely 
passing away into death.” 

His elder brother Shinzan then asked, “Then who is it that is 
expressing his intention and expressing his True Nature?” 

Tozan replied, “He has revived from within death .” 1 

The statement “To express one’s intention is to express one’s True Nature” is the 
foundation of the Buddha’s Way from which Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor 
after Ancestor have emerged. Were it not for Their expressing Their True Nature by 
expressing Their intent, the wondrous Wheel of the Dharma would never have 
turned, the intention to realize Buddhahood would never have arisen, and training 
and practice would never have manifested. And the Truth would never have been 


1. This dialogue has a deeper meaning which Dogen will reveal later. In the meantime, this 
dialogue can be understood as a reference to the dropping off of the illusory self. 


528 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing One s True Nature by Expressing One s Intent 


529 


realized simultaneously with the great earth and its sentient beings, for there has 
never been any sentient being who lacked Buddha Nature. Shakyamuni’s raising of 
the flower, His eyes atwinkle, was His way of expressing His intention as an 
expression of His True Nature. Makakasho’s face breaking out into a smile was his 
way of putting it. Our Second Chinese Ancestor Eka’s respectfully bowing to 
Bodhidharma and then standing quietly in his place was his way of putting it. Our 
Ancestral Master Bodhidharma’s entering China during the Liang dynasty was his 
way, and Daiman Konin’s Transmitting the kesa* to Daikan Eno was his way. A 
certain Master’s holding up his traveling staff* was his way, and another Master’s 
laying down his ceremonial hossu* was his way of expressing his intention as an 
expression of his True Nature. 

Generally speaking, every single meritorious action of Buddha after Buddha 
and Ancestor after Ancestor has been, through and through, Their expressing Their 
intention as an expression of Buddha Nature. There are ways of doing this in a 
normal, everyday manner, and there are ways of expressing it as ‘the tiles* and 
stones of one’s walls and fences’. And thus the principle described as “The arising 
of intentions is what gives rise to all the various thoughts and things” fully 
emerges, as does the principle described as “The dying away of intentions is the 
dying away of all the various thoughts and things.” Nevertheless, one’s intention is 
being expressed on such occasions, as is one’s True Nature. 

At the same time, run-of-the-mill folks have not penetrated into what 
intention means and they have not mastered what True Nature means, therefore 
they are in the dark as to what ‘expressing intention’ and ‘expressing True Nature’ 
really mean. Being ignorant of the profundity of what is being talked about and of 
the wonders that are being discussed, they say—and teach—that such things 
cannot possibly exist in the Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Because they do 
not know that ‘expressing mind and expressing nature’ means ‘expressing one’s 
intention and expressing one’s True Nature’, they think of it as ‘talking about the 
mind and talking about the nature of things’. This is because they have not made an 
effort to critically examine whether they have indeed penetrated the Great Way. 


A certain monk called Meditation Master Daie Soko , 2 once said: 


* See Glossary. 

2. Daie was in the Rinzai Zen tradition, and is credited with having instituted the practice of 
focusing on deliberate penetration into classic koan stories, rather than keeping to themeless 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing One s True Nature by Expressing One s Intent 


530 


Folks today are fond of talking about mind and talking about 
nature, and because they are fond of talking about profundities and 
talking about wonders, they are slow to realize the Way. Since mind 
and nature form a duality, once these folks have discarded this duality, 
and have forgotten all about the profound and the wondrous as well, 
then dualities will no longer arise, and they will experience the Truth 
that the Buddha promised them. 

These remarks of his show that he was still unaware of the silken thread that binds 
the Buddhas and Ancestors together, nor had he comprehended what the lifeline of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors is . 3 Accordingly, he only understood ‘mind’ to refer to 
discriminative thinking and consciousness, so he spoke this way because he had 
not learned that the various functions, such as discriminative thinking and 
consciousness, are what the intellective mind is. He wrongly viewed ‘nature’ to 
mean something that is abundantly clear and peacefully inactive, and did not 
understand whether Buddha Nature and the nature of all thoughts and things 
existed or did not exist. And because he had not seen his True Nature as It is, not 
even in his dreams, he had a false view of what Buddha Dharma is. The ‘mind’ that 
the Buddhas and Ancestors spoke of is the very Skin and Flesh, Bones and 
Marrow. And the ‘nature’ that the Buddhas and Ancestors have preserved is a 
monk’s traveling staff and the shaft of a bamboo arrow . 4 The Buddhas and 
Ancestors have profoundly realized the Buddhahood promised Them by the 
Buddha, and this is what is meant by being a pillar* of the temple or a stone 
lantern.* How wondrous it is that the Buddhas and Ancestors hold up and offer to 
us Their wise discernment and understanding! 

From the first, the Buddhas and Ancestors who are really Buddhas and 
Ancestors have always learned that this ‘mind’ and this ‘nature’ refer to ‘intention’ 
and ‘Buddha Nature’, and have given expression to them, and have put them into 
practice, and have awakened to them. They have preserved and kept to this 
profound and wondrous Teaching, exploring It through their training with their 
Master. We call those who are like this the Buddha’s descendents who are truly 


meditation. Dogen, in a rare criticism of specific monks, held Daie responsible for what he 
considered a perversion and betrayal of the pre-Daie Rinzai tradition. 

3. The particular silken thread that is mentioned here was used to bind Scriptural texts together 
and, as a metaphor, refers to the ‘thread of Transmission’ that runs through, and binds 
together, the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

4. A monk’s traveling staff and the shaft of a bamboo arrow are common metaphors for what a 
Zen Master uses to point a disciple to the truth. 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing One s True Nature by Expressing One s Intent 


531 


studying the Buddhas and Ancestors. Those who are not like this are not really 
studying the Way. 

Thus, Daie, your ‘attaining the Way’ does not attain the Way, and when it is 
time to go beyond attaining the Way, you are unable to do so. You stumble your 
way through both the times of attaining and the times of going beyond attaining. 
As you would have it, Daie, since mind and nature form a duality, we ought to 
discard them. This is your little attempt to explain ‘mind’, an effort that can only 
explain one-hundred-thousand-millionth of it! To say that the profound and the 
wondrous are both to be discarded is but one small aspect of it, and yet it is the 
only aspect that you bring up for discussion when talking about them. Without 
learning what the key point to all of this is, you foolishly speak of forgetting all 
about them, having considered them to be things that have left your own hands and 
departed from your own being. You have not yet discarded the narrow views of the 
Lesser Course,* so how could you possibly penetrate the inner depths of the 
Greater Course,* to say nothing about understanding the key point of what is above 
and beyond Buddhahood! It is difficult to say that you have ever tasted the tea and 
rice of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Simply, to earnestly explore this Matter* under a Master is to thoroughly 
experience, at this very moment of our existence, the expressing of our intention as 
the expression of our True Nature. This is how it was in the past and will be in the 
future. We should thoroughly explore this Matter for ourselves, since there is 
nothing that stands second or third to this . 5 


There was that time when our First Chinese Ancestor 
Bodhidharma gave instruction to his disciple Eka, saying, “If you 
simply bring to a halt all entanglements with things outside yourself 
and do not let your mind pant after things, then, with your very mind 
that is like walls and fences, you will thereby be able to enter the 
Way.” 

Eka tried in various ways to express his intention as well as his True Nature, but he 
did not succeed in realizing the Buddhahood that the Buddha had promised. Then, 
one day, he suddenly realized the Truth. 

As a result, he said to our First Ancestor, “This time, for the 
first time, your disciple has brought his entanglements to a halt.” 


5. That is, it is unique and not simply one thing among many. 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing One s True Nature by Expressing One s Intent 


532 


Our First Ancestor, already knowing what Eka had become aware of, did not probe 
further into the nature of his disciple’s experience. 

He simply asked him, “You haven’t realized total cessation of 
these entanglements, have you?” 

Eka replied, “No.” 

The First Ancestor then asked, “What is it like, then, for you?” 

Eka replied, “As I am constantly recognizing It, I realize that 
words do not come near It.” 

The First Ancestor then remarked, “That is precisely the 
substance of Mind which has been Transmitted by all the Buddhas 
and all the Ancestors of the past. Since you now have It, you yourself 
must guard It well.” 

There are those who have doubts about this story, and there are those who 
take it up and expound upon it. Well, this is just one story among a number of 
stories on how Eka trained under Bodhidharma and served him. Eka repeatedly 
tried expressing his intent and his True Nature. At first he did not succeed in 
realizing what the Buddha had promised, but, little by little, he accumulated merits 
and piled up virtues until he finally realized the Way that our First Ancestor had 
spoken of. Those who are slow of wit have considered this to mean, “When Eka 
first attempted to express his intention and his True Nature, he had not yet 
awakened to what the Buddha had promised. The fault lay in his trying to express 
his intention and his True Nature, but later he let go of ‘expressing my intention 
and expressing my True Nature’, and thereby realized what the Buddha had 
promised .” 6 They are speaking in this way because they have not yet penetrated 
the saying, “With your very mind that is like walls and fences, you will thereby be 
able to enter the Way.” They are especially in the dark about how to go about 
studying the Way. And, should you ask why this is so, well, from the time when 
you first give rise to the intention to spiritually awaken and incline your steps 
towards training and practice of the Buddha’s Way, you will be heartily putting into 
practice a difficult course of training. And, though you put it into practice, you may 
not hit the bull’s-eye even once in a hundred tries. Even so, you will ultimately hit 
the target, sometimes by following the advice of your spiritual friend and 
sometimes by following Scriptural texts. The one hit today is due to the strength of 
a hundred misses in the past. It is the fulfillment of those hundred misses. Your 
listening to what is taught, training in the Way, and awakening to the Truth—none 


6. That is, they viewed Eka as treating his intention and his True Nature as a duality, whereas 
they are really two aspects of the same thing. 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing One s True Nature by Expressing One s Intent 


533 


of these are any different from this. Although yesterday’s efforts to express your 
intention and your True Nature were equivalent to a hundred misses, yesterday’s 
hundred misses become today’s suddenly hitting the bull’s-eye. When you first 
begin to practice the Buddha’s Way, it may be said that you have not yet 
thoroughly penetrated the Truth due to lingering attachments. You cannot attain the 
Buddha’s Way by abandoning It in favor of other ways. Folks who have not yet 
penetrated the training and practice of the Buddha’s Way from start to finish find it 
difficult to clarify what this principle of penetration is. 

The Buddha’s Way is the Buddha’s Way even when one first gives rise to the 
intention to train, and It is the Buddha’s Way even when one fully realizes the 
Truth: It is the Buddha’s Way—beginning, middle, and end. It is comparable to 
someone’s walking for thousands of miles. When walking ten thousand miles, all 
that one can do is to take one step at a time, and within ten thousand miles are tens 
of thousands of steps. Even though the first step and the ten-thousandth step are 
different, all of it is still simply the act of walking ten thousand miles. At the same 
time, folks who have reached the height of folly believe that during the time when 
one is studying the Buddha’s Way, one has not yet reached the Buddha’s Way, for 
only when one has gone beyond Buddhahood is It really the Buddha’s Way. They 
are like this because they do not know that the whole Way is our expressing the 
Way, that the whole Way is our practicing the Way, and that the whole Way is our 
realizing the Way. Those folks talk the way they do because they have been taught 
that only deluded people experience the great realization through their training and 
practice of the Buddha’s Way. As a result, they do not realize that non-deluded 
people also experience the great realization through their training and practice of 
the Buddha’s Way. 

Even before we have realized what the Buddha promised, expressing our 
Buddha Nature by expressing our intent is already the Way of Buddhas. At the 
same time, it is through our expressing our True Nature by expressing our intent 
that we realize what the Buddha promised. We must not explore through our 
training that ‘realizing what the Buddha promised’ is restricted to the first great 
realization of a deluded person. The deluded have their great realization, and the 
enlightened have their great realization, and the unenlightened have their great 
realization, and the undeluded have their great realization, and all those who have 
realized what the Buddha promised have actually realized what the Buddha 
promised. 

Consequently, expressing one’s intention as an expression of one’s True 
Nature is being straight and true within the Buddha’s Way. Not having thoroughly 
comprehended this principle, Daie advises us that we should express neither our 
intention nor our True Nature, but this is not a principle of the Buddha Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing One s True Nature by Expressing One s Intent 


534 


And, alas, things are so bad today in Great Sung China that there is no one who can 
even come up to gentleman Daie’s low level of understanding. 


Our Founding Ancestor, Great Master Tozan Ryokai, who was uniquely 
venerated among our Ancestors, had thoroughly penetrated the principle that 
‘expressing one’s mind’ and ‘expressing one’s nature’ are comparable, on a deeper 
level, to expressing one’s intention as an expression of one’s True Nature. An 
Ancestral Master who has not thoroughly penetrated this principle cannot have an 
expression comparable to the one Tozan made in the account I told at the 
beginning of this discourse. 

Once when Meditation Master Shinzan Somitsu was out on a 
walk with Great Master Tozan Ryokai, the latter pointed to a nearby 
temple and said, “Within that temple, there is One who is expressing 

t H 

His True Nature by expressing His intention.” 

From the time when our Founding Ancestor set up his temple, his Dharma 
descendants have, without exception, correctly Transmitted our Ancestral tradition. 
It is something that those in other traditions have not even dreamed of. How much 
less could they know, even in a dream, how to understand it! Only his authentic 
heirs have correctly Transmitted it. Had they not correctly Transmitted this 
principle, how could anyone penetrate to what is fundamental in the Buddha’s 
Way? The principle that we are now talking about, whether we plumb its depths or 
merely scratch its surface, is that of some human being expressing his or her intent 
and True Nature. The mind expressing itself, both on the outer surface and deeply 
within, is the True Nature expressing Itself both on the outer surface and deeply 
within. You need to do your utmost to thoroughly explore this. There is no 
expression that lacks True Nature, and there is no intention that lacks an 
expression. 

What we call ‘Buddha Nature’ means that all things are expressing It, and 
what we call Tacking a Buddha Nature’ also means that all things are expressing It. 
Though we may explore through our training that Buddha Nature is what is meant 
by ‘nature’, if we should fail to explore through our training that we have Buddha 
Nature, it would not be the way to study the Way. And if we should fail to explore 
through our training that we lack a Buddha Nature, it would also not be the way to 


7. This change in rendering the dialogue that Dogen presented in the opening of this discourse 
presents a deeper, spiritual meaning behind this exchange. 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing One s True Nature by Expressing One s Intent 


535 


o 

explore the Matter through our training. When we explore the Teaching that 
expressing our intention through our training is synonymous with our True Nature, 
we become a Dharma heir of an Ancestor of the Buddha; when we trust that our 
True Nature is expressing Itself, we become an Ancestor of the Buddha for our 
Dharma heirs. 

To state that “One’s mind is ever restless, whereas one’s nature is steady” is 
an assertion of non-Buddhists. To state that “The innate nature of things is 
profoundly clear, whereas their forms are ever shifting” is also an assertion of non- 
Buddhists. The way that Buddhists study ‘mind’ and ‘nature’ is not the way those 
folks study it. The way that Buddhists put their intentions into practice so as to put 
their Nature into practice is in no way like the behavior of non-Buddhists. The way 
that Buddhists clarify what Mind and Nature are finds no equivalent in what non- 
Buddhists teach. 

In the Buddha’s Way, there is an expression of intention that is personal and 
an expression of True Nature that is also personal, and there is an expression of 
both of them that goes beyond the personal. Also, there is a way of not expressing 
them that is personal, and there is a way of not expressing them that goes beyond 
the personal. When we have not yet studied the expressing of intention that goes 
beyond the personal, then this will be an expressing of intention which has not yet 
reached fertile ground. When we have not yet studied the expressing of intention 
that is personal, this too will be an expressing of intention that has not yet reached 
fertile ground. We study the expressing of intent that goes beyond any person, we 
study That which goes beyond the personal in expressing Its intent, we study a 
personal expressing of intention, and we study that there is someone who expresses 
his intention. 

The strongest way that Rinzai phrased it was merely as ‘a real person who is 
beyond rank’; he still had not phrased it as ‘a real person who has a rank’. He had 
not yet displayed any other ways of exploring this through his training or any other 
ways of putting it. Thus, we must say that he had not yet reached the field of the 
Ultimate. Because expressing one’s intention and expressing one’s Nature is 
synonymous with expressing Buddha and expressing Ancestor, we and our Master 
may encounter each other through hearing, and we may encounter each other 
through seeing. 

Shinzan, Tozan’s elder brother in the Sangha, said, “And It is 

Who.” 


8. The meaning of Tacking a Buddha Nature’ is thoroughly explored by Dogen in his 
Discourse 21: On Buddha Nature (Bussho). 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing One s True Nature by Expressing One s Intent 


536 


Elder brother Shinzan, in letting this way of expressing It emerge, could have put it 
this way earlier and he could put it this way later as well. ‘It is Who’ is his 
expressing his intention and his Buddha Nature right there at that moment . 9 
Accordingly, at the time when it is put as “Who is It?” and at the time when it is 
put as “It is Who,” this will be Its expressing Its intention and Its expressing Its 
True Nature. This expressing of Its intention and of Its True Nature is something 
that folks throughout the ten quarters have never known. Because they have lost 
sight of their Child and take It to be a thief, they likewise judge a thief to be their 
child. 

Tozan replied, “With your asking this one question, my elder 
brother in the Sangha, that One has forthwith succeeded in completely 
passing away into death.” 

Many who are middling in their training, upon hearing these words, think, 
“Someone who is expressing his mind and expressing his nature is saying, ‘Who is 
it?’ and must be able forthwith to completely pass away into death.” As a 
consequence, they are not conscious of its other meaning—‘it is Who’—and never 
succeed in having an encounter with a Master, so it must be for them a dead and 
meaningless phrase. It isn’t necessarily dead and meaningless. Those who have 
penetrated what this ‘expressing True Nature by expressing intent’ means must 
surely be few. To completely pass into death does not mean just being ten or 
twenty percent dead, for it means passing into death one hundred percent . 10 At that 
very moment, who can say that this is not some limiting of the heavens and some 
covering up of the earth? It will be our letting go of trying to shed light upon our 
past, our present, our future, and, indeed, it will be our letting go of trying to shed 
light upon this very moment of now. 

His elder brother Shinzan then said, “And It is Who that 
expresses His intention and expresses His True Nature.” 

Although the name referred to by the previous “Who is it?” and the present “And It 
is Who” is a veritable ‘third son of a Mr. Chang’, the One being referred to is 
actually ‘the fourth son of a Mr. Lee ’. 11 


9. Shinzan’s response can be taken both as a question and as an answer: “Who is It that resides 
within?” and “It is Who (one’s Buddha Nature) that resides within.” 

10. ‘Passing into death one hundred percent’ refers to completely and absolutely letting go of 
the false self. 

11. That is, in both cases these two phrases seem to be exactly the same, but they are actually 
completely different in meaning. 



Shobogenzo: On Expressing One s True Nature by Expressing One s Intent 


537 


Tozan replied, “He has revived from within death.” 

This phrase, ‘within death,’ points to having been able to pass directly into 
death. And Shinzan’s saying “It is Who,” which was not a casual remark, points 
directly to the condition of expressing his Nature by expressing his intent. This 
‘Who’ directs the person who is expressing His intention and expressing His True 
Nature. Something to explore through your training is the assertion that we do not 
necessarily anticipate a one hundred percent passing away into death. The Great 
Master’s statement, “He has revived from within death,” refers to the manifesting 
of sounds and forms before one’s very eyes, which expresses both intent and True 
Nature. And yet, even this will only be some ten or twenty percent of the entirety 
of passing away into death. Life, even though it is the totality of life, is not 
something wherein death is transformed and manifests as life. It is simply our 
letting go, from start to finish, of the notion of our ‘possessing’ life. 

In sum, in the words and ways of the Buddhas and Ancestors, there is an 
expressing of one’s intent and of one’s True Nature like that described above, 
which is to be thoroughly explored through one’s training. And to take this further, 
when we die a one hundred percent death, we have lived our life to the full. 

You need to realize that from the T’ang dynasty to today, there have been 
many pitiable creatures who have not clarified that expressing intention and 
expressing one’s True Nature is what the Buddha’s Way is about. Further, they 
have been going around in the dark about the Teachings, practice, and direct 
experience, and have therefore made reckless remarks and unfounded assertions. 
We need to help them overcome what they have been and to realize what they can 
be. For their sake, we say that expressing Their True Nature by expressing Their 
intent has been the essential function of the Seven Buddhas* along with our 
ancestral Masters. 

Delivered to the assembly in the first year of the Kangen era (1243) in Japan, at Kippo-ji Temple 
in the Yoshida Prefecture of Echizen Province. 

Copied by me on the eleventh day of the first lunar month in the second year of the same era 
(February 20, 1244) while at the office of the Abbot’s assistant. 

Ejo 


12. Whereas Dogen begins by discussing this dialogue from the standpoint of the dropping off 
of self, he now discusses it from the point of view of dropping off ‘dropping off’. In other 
words, since the concept of self is an illusion, there is nothing to be dropped off. However, 
we cannot know this until the time when the false ego has been let go of. At that time, we 
discover that ‘That Which Is’ is the One who has actually done the dropping off, for It has 
ever been the only true reality. 



42 


On Invocations: 

What We Offer to the Buddhas and Ancestors 

(Darani) 

Translator’s Introduction: Traditionally, a darani (Skt. dharani) is a prayer-like invocation 
used to pay homage to Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, and it may include some form of supplication. 
Dogen expands upon the use of this verbal form to include other manners of expressing homage 
and supplication, such as making respectful bows to one’s Master. 


When someone’s eye for exploring the essential Matter* through training 
with a Master is clear, the Eye of the True Teaching will be clear. And because the 
Eye of the True Teaching is clear, that person’s eye for exploring the essential 
Matter through training with a Master can be clear. Whenever someone receives 
the authentic Transmission of this key point, it is inevitably due to the strength of 
that person’s showing respect for a great spiritual friend. This is the great 
relationship: this is the Great Invocation. ‘The great spiritual friend’ refers to an 
Ancestor of the Buddha, one to whom a trainee should dutifully serve towel and 
water pitcher . 1 Thus, to bring tea to your Master or to make tea for your Master is 
to manifest the very heart and essence of the Teaching. It is to manifest the utmost 
marvelous spiritual ability . 2 To bring wash-up water to your Master and to pour it 
out for him is to leave coexisting conditions undisturbed and to discern what is 
going on from the next room. It is not only exploring through your training the 
very heart and essence of the Teaching of the Buddhas and Ancestors, it is your 
mutual encounter with one or two Ancestors of the Buddha within the very heart 
and essence of the Teaching. It is not only your receiving and making use of the 


* See Glossary. 

1. One of the first everyday tasks for an Abbot’s Assistant was to bring the Abbot a towel and a 
pitcher of warm water for him to use in perfonning his morning ablutions. 

2. The marvelous spiritual ability is spontaneously doing our everyday activities whilst 
remaining free of a false self; it is our anticipating what needs to be done and then just doing 
it. Dogen discusses this ability in Discourse 24: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities (Jinzu). 

3. It was customary for an Abbot’s Assistant to anticipate the Master’s needs whilst waiting in 
the assistant’s room, which adjoined that of the Master. 


538 



Shobogenzo: On Invocations: What We Offer to the Buddhas and Ancestors 539 


marvelous spiritual ability of the Buddhas and Ancestors, it is your having found 
seven or eight Ancestors of the Buddha within your marvelous spiritual ability. 
Accordingly, the marvelous spiritual ability of each and every Buddha and 
Ancestor has been fully realized in this one bouquet of activities; the very heart 
and essence of the Teaching of each and every Buddha and Ancestor has been fully 
expressed in one picking of this bouquet. Because of this, in showing your respect 
for the Ancestors of the Buddha, there is nothing wrong in doing so by offering 
incomparable flowers and incense. Even so, to raise up the invocation of your 
meditative state and respectfully make an alms offering of it is to be an offspring of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

What is called ‘the Great Invocation’ refers to paying our respects, and 
because paying our respects is the Great Invocation, to pay our respects is to 
mutually encounter the Buddhas and Ancestors within our paying respect to Them. 
The term ‘paying our respects’ is patterned on a Chinese way of speaking and has 
been in social usage for ever so long. Be that as it may, it was not passed on to us 
from the Brahmanical Heaven or from India, but was correctly Transmitted from 
the Ancestors of the Buddha. It is beyond the physical realm of sights and sounds, 
so do not discuss whether it is something that comes before or after the Lords of 
Awe-inspiring Voices. 

This paying of our respects is our lighting incense and respectfully making 
prostrations before our Master. Sometimes our Master is the one who ordained us 
upon our leaving home life behind and sometimes our Master is the one who 
Transmitted the Dharma to us. And there are cases where the Master who 
Transmitted the Dharma to us may also be the very Master who ordained us upon 
our leaving home life behind. To continually depend upon and show respect to 
these Masters is our prayer for seeking out a Master to put one’s spiritual question 
to. As it is said, we should do our training under them and give them our support, 
without letting any moment be wasted. 

At the beginning and end of our summer retreat, at the time of the winter 
solstice, and at the beginning and middle of each month, without fail, you should 
light incense and respectfully make prostrations to your Master. The following 
procedures should be used when paying your respects. A customary time for doing 
this is just before or just after taking your breakfast gruel. Dressed in a respectful 
way, pay your visit to the Master’s quarters. ‘Dressed in a respectful way’ means 
wearing your kesa,* carrying your bowing mat, arranging your indoor sandals and 
white socks, and carrying a stick of some incense, such as aloes or sandalwood. 
When you come before your Master, you make monjin.* The attendant monk then 
prepares the incense burner and sets up a candle. If the Master is already seated, 
you should forthwith light the incense, or if the Master is behind the curtain, you 



Shobogenzo: On Invocations: What We Offer to the Buddhas and Ancestors 540 


should forthwith light your incense. 4 If the Master is lying down or eating, then 
you should forthwith light your incense. If the Master is standing up, you should 
ask the venerable monk to be seated and then make monjin to him, or ask him to 
make himself comfortable: there are various conventional ways of asking him to be 
seated. After you have let the venerable monk get seated in a chair, you make 
monjin to him. It should be a deep bow, as prescribed. After you have finished 
making monjin, you walk up to the incense stand and place the incense stick that 
you have been carrying into the incense burner in an upright position. Prior to 
being lit, the incense is sometimes carried by sticking it between the back of your 
robe and your neckband, or sometimes you carry it tucked in the bosom or the 
sleeve of your robe, as you wish. After making monjin, you take this incense stick 
out and, if it is wrapped in paper, turn your shoulder to the left and remove the 
wrapping paper. Then, holding the lit incense stick aloft with both hands, place it in 
the incense burner. You should set the incense straight. Do not let it lean to the 
side. When you have finished setting up the incense stick, you walk to the right 
with hands held in shashu.* When you arrive in front of your Master, facing the 
venerable monk you make a deep bow, doing monjin in the prescribed manner. 
Once you have finished, you spread your bowing mat and respectfully do your 
prostrations. You do either nine prostrations or twelve. When your prostrations are 
over, fold up your bowing mat and make monjin. And there are times when you 
just spread out your mat and do three prostrations, and then offer the compliments 
of the season. With the present nine bows, you do not offer the compliments of the 
season, but should just spread your mat and make three prostrations three times. 
This custom has been passed on from the Seven Buddhas* in the distant past. We 
use this custom since it directly Transmits the fundamental principle of our 
tradition. Whenever we encounter a time for respectfully doing our prostrations, 
we should not fail to do them in this manner. In addition to this, whenever we have 
the opportunity to receive the benefits of a Dharma talk, we respectfully make our 
bows, and we respectfully bow when asking our Master for an explanation of some 
story about the Chinese Zen Masters. In the past, whenever the Second Chinese 
Ancestor asked the First Ancestor for his viewpoints, Eka always respectfully 
made three bows just like this. Whenever Bodhidharma expounded his perspective 
on the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, the Second Ancestor would 
respectfully make three bows. 

You need to realize that respectfully bowing is the Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching, and that the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 


4. This curtain is made of a thin, semi-transparent cloth and is often used as a room divider. 



Shobogenzo: On Invocations: What We Offer to the Buddhas and Ancestors 541 


Teaching is the Great Invocation. In requesting a Master for an explanation, there 
are many in recent times who employ one prostration during which they thump 
their head on the ground, but the traditional manner is to do three prostrations. 
Prostrations done in gratitude for the benefit of the Dharma are not necessarily nine 
or twelve in number, but they may be three prostrations, or one less formal bow 
done respectfully, or six prostrations. All these are bows in which the forehead 
touches the mat. 5 In India, these were called the supreme bows of respect. Also, 
there are the six bows in which the forehead strikes the ground. (It has been said 
that when the forehead contacted the ground, it struck with such force that it would 
cause bleeding. For this reason too, the bowing mat was spread out.) Be it one bow, 
three bows, or six bows, in all cases the forehead comes in contact with the ground. 
Sometimes this is called ‘kowtowing’. This type of bowing also exists in secular 
society, where there are nine types of bows. When receiving the benefits of the 
Dharma there is also ‘continuous bowing’. That is, we respectfully bow without 
ceasing, which can reach hundreds of thousands of bows. These are all bows which 
are habitually used within the assembly of an Ancestor of the Buddha. 

Speaking generally about these bows, you should simply follow the 
directions of your venerable monk and do your bows in the prescribed manner. In 
sum, when respectful bowing abides in the world, the Buddha Dharma will abide 
in the world. Should respectful bowing pass away, then the Buddha Dharma will 
disappear. 

In bowing respectfully to the Master who is Transmitting the Dharma to us, 
we do not choose only a specific time or argue over a specific place, we just bow. 
Sometimes we bow to him when he is lying down or eating, and sometimes we 
bow to him when he is occupied with relieving nature. Sometimes we are separated 
from him by a wall or a fence, and sometimes we are separated from him by a 
mountain or a river, but, looking from afar, we respectfully bow to him. Sometimes 
we respectfully bow to him even though we are separated from him by eons of 
time, and sometimes we respectfully bow to him even though we are separated 
from him by life and death, or by coming and going. And sometimes we 
respectfully bow to him even though we are separated from him by enlightenment 
and nirvana. 

A disciple may do various bows like these, whereas the venerable monk who 
is your Master does not return your bow, but simply puts his hands in gassho.* 


5. ‘The forehead touches the mat’ is a rendering of a technical tenn for a form of prostration in 
which one raises one’s hands, palms upward, once the head has lightly touched the mat. It is 
done as if to raise above one’s head the feet of the person being bowed to. 



Shobogenzo: On Invocations: What We Offer to the Buddhas and Ancestors 542 


There may be occasions when he spontaneously makes use of a single bow, but 
customarily he does not employ that ceremony. At the time of your making such 
respectful bows, you do them while facing north. The venerable monk who is your 
Master is sitting upright, facing south. Standing on the ground, right before the 
venerable monk who is your Master, and facing north, you do your bow to him. 
This is the basic ceremony. 6 It has been correctly Transmitted that when genuine 
trust in the Master arises within someone, respectfully bowing while facing north is 
inevitably the first thing that occurs to that person. 

This is why, in the days of the World-honored One, the human beings, 
celestial beings, and dragons who had taken refuge in the Buddha respectfully 
bowed whilst facing north out of reverence for Him. At first, after the Tathagata 
had realized the Truth, His five ascetic companions—Ajnyata Kaundinya, Ashvaji, 
Mahanama, Bhadrika, and Bashpa, who are known in Japan as Korin, Ahei, 
Makakori, Batsudai, and Jurikikasho —without giving it a thought, rose up and 
turned to face the Tathagata, offering Him their respectful bows whilst facing 
north. When non-Buddhists and bands of demons completely discarded their false 
views and took refuge in the Buddha, they invariably faced north and respectfully 
bowed, giving no heed to themselves or others. 

Since then, for twenty-eight generations in India and the various generations 
in China, all those who have come to the assemblies of Ancestral Masters and have 
taken refuge in the True Dharma have respectfully bowed whilst facing north. This 
is an affirmation of the True Dharma and is beyond simply paying heed to the 
desires of Master or disciple. It is the Great Invocation. 

There is the Great Invocation that, for our sake, is called 
fully perfected understanding ’, 

And there is the Great Invocation that, for our sake, is 
called ‘paying our respects ’, 

And there is the Great Invocation that is the full 
manifestation of bowing respectfully, 

And there is the Great Invocation whose name is the 
kesa, 

And there is the Great Invocation whose name is the 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. 


6. The north-south positions were conventionally used in Chinese Buddhism to indicate who is 
the host (north) and who the guest (south) and did not necessarily correspond to 
geographical north and south. 



Shobogenzo: On Invocations: What We Offer to the Buddhas and Ancestors 543 


By reciting this invocation, we continually remain in stillness and thereby preserve 
the whole of the great earth. By continually remaining in stillness, we thereby fill 
the worlds in all the quarters. By continually remaining in stillness, we make 
manifest the whole sphere of time. By continually remaining in stillness, we 
cultivate the whole of the Buddha Realms. And by continually remaining in 
stillness, we realize what is within our hermit’s hut and what is outside our hermit’s 
hut. You need to thoroughly explore through your training that this is what the 
Great Invocation is really like. All invocations take this Invocation as their matrix. 
All invocations fully manifest as dependents of this Invocation. From the gateway 
of this Invocation, all Buddhas and Ancestors, bar none, derive Their giving rise to 
Their intention to realize the Truth and to earnestly follow the Way, right up to 
Their realization of the Truth and Their turning the Wheel of the Dharma. Since we 
are already the offspring of the Buddhas and Ancestors, we should thoroughly 
explore this Invocation in detail. 

In sum, the robe that covered Shakyamuni Buddha has also covered all 
Ancestors of the Buddha in the ten quarters. And the robe that covered 
Shakyamuni Buddha is the kesa. The kesa is as a flag flown by Buddhists; it is the 
standard for their practice of the Buddha’s Way. The chance to see the kesa and to 
undertake the practice is rarely encountered, rarely met with. You have received a 
human body in a remote land, which is rare enough, and, though some may say 
that you are foolish, the strength of your good roots from invocations performed in 
past lives is fully manifesting so that you now have the opportunity to encounter 
the Dharma of Shakyamuni Buddha. Though you are doing respectful bows to the 
Buddhas and Ancestors who have realized the Truth and are helping others to 
realize the Truth amidst the hundreds of thoughts and things that are sprouting up, 
this is Shakyamuni Buddha’s fulfilling the Way; it is Shakyamuni Buddha’s doing 
His utmost to practice the Way; it is Shakyamuni Buddha’s wondrous 
transformation of the Great Invocation. Even though you may do respectful bows 
to former Buddhas of the past and present for billions of kalpas* beyond count, 
they will still simply be moments of being Shakyamuni Buddha. 

To cover our body with a kesa even once is to have already obtained 
Shakyamuni Buddha’s body and flesh, hands and feet, head and eyes, marrow and 
brains, and to shine forth, turning the Wheel of the Dharma. Such is the case when 
we wear the kesa, for this is our fully manifesting the merit of wearing the kesa. 
We preserve it and rely upon it, we love it and devote ourselves to it, and, over 
time, we protect it. We wear the kesa as we respectfully bow and make our 
offerings to Shakyamuni Buddha. This is our doing our utmost to pursue the Way 
through our training and practice over incalculable eons of time. 



Shobogenzo: On Invocations: What We Offer to the Buddhas and Ancestors 544 


Our respectfully bowing to Shakyamuni Buddha and making our offerings to 
Him means that we are respectfully bowing and making our offerings to the Master 
who has Transmitted the Dharma to us and to the Master who shaved our head. 
This is nothing other than our encountering Shakyamuni Buddha. It is our making 
a Dharma offering to Shakyamuni Buddha. It is our offering an invocation to 
Shakyamuni Buddha. In pointing this out, my former Master, the Old Buddha of 
Mount Tendo, said, “It is like Eka’s coming over the snows to do his respectful 
bowing or like Eno’s standing amidst the winnowed rice and doing his respectful 
bowing; these are excellent examples. They are the traces of former Ancestors. 
They are the Great Invocation.” 

Delivered to the assembly during the first year of the Kangen era (1243) at Kippo-ji Temple in 
Echizen Province. 

Copied by me on the thirteenth day of the first month in the second year of the same era 
(February 22, 1244) in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant below the Kippo-ji hermitage 
in the same province. 

Ejo 



43 

On the Moon as One’s Excellent Nature 

(Tsuki) 

Translator’s Introduction: Although the Chinese characters that Dogen employs for the title of 
this discourse may be translated as ‘one’s excellent Nature’, this term does not occur in the text 
itself. Rather, Dogen appears to have used it to spell out with Chinese characters the Japanese 
word tsuki, ‘the moon’, which is a common Buddhist metaphor for one’s innate Buddha 
Nature—the Moon of our Original Nature. And, at the same time, one’s excellent Nature is 
synonymous with one’s innate Buddha Nature. 

Some readers may find this discourse less obscure if they substitute the words ‘Buddha 
Nature’ for the word ‘Moon’. 


Instances of Moons becoming full are not just ‘three and three before that’ 
and ‘three and three after that’. And our innately fully perfected Moons are 
likewise not just ‘three and three before that’ and ‘three and three after that’. 1 This 
is why Shakyamuni Buddha said: 

The true Dharma Body of the Buddha 
Is unbounded, like empty space. 

It reveals Its form by conforming to an object, 

Like water reflecting the moon. 

The Ultimate Reality described as being Tike water reflecting the moon’ may also 
be expressed as ‘the Water and Its Moon’, ‘the real Water’, ‘the real Moon’, ‘being 
within Reality,’ or ‘the Reality within’. It goes beyond expressing what things 
appear to be like as Reality, for Reality is what is. 

The real Dharma Body of the Buddha is just like unbounded space. And 
because this ‘unbounded space’ is the real Dharma Body of the Buddha, the whole 
earth, the whole of all realms, all thoughts and things—that is, all things that 
manifest—are, in themselves, unbounded space. The hundreds of things that sprout 
up and the myriad forms that they take—all of which manifest before our very 
eyes—are just like the Dharma Body of the Buddha, and they are the real Dharma 


1. That is, instances of people fully realizing their Buddha Nature (that is, having a kensho) are 
just as beyond count as the number of people who have Buddha Nature, which is everyone. 


545 



Shobogenzo: On the Moon as One s Excellent Nature 


546 


2 

Body of the Buddha, and they are like the moon in water." The time of the Moon’s 
arising is not invariably at night, and the night is not necessarily the dark, so do not 

■j 

depend simply on narrow human ways of measuring things. Even in places where 
there is no sun or moon, there will be day and night, for the sun and moon do not 
exist for the sake of day and night. And because the Sun and Moon are, both 
together, what is ultimately real, there is not just one or two Moons, nor just a 
thousand or myriad Moons. Even if some people say of themselves that their own 
Moon supports and relies upon their personal opinion of what the Moon is, such is 
their personal view of the Moon, and it is not necessarily an expression of the 
Buddha’s Truth nor an instance of their wisely discerning what the Buddha’s Truth 
is. Thus, even though we may say that there is a Moon tonight, the Moon tonight is 
not last night’s Moon. You need to explore through your training that tonight’s 
Moon through and through—beginning, middle, and end—is just tonight’s Moon. 2 3 4 
Because a Moon has inherited the Truth from a Moon, the Moon exists as such, but 
It is not something new or old. 

djb 

CX) 


Meditation Master Banzan Hoshaku once said: 

The Moon of our heart and mind is solitary and at the 
full, 

Its light swallows up all forms that arise . 5 
Its light is not something that illumines concrete objects, 
And concrete objects, in turn, are not things that truly 
exist . 6 

When Its light and objects both vanish from sight, 

There is still That which is the What. 


2. That is, the Dharma Body of the Buddha has two characteristics: It is like unbounded space 
and It is unbounded space. Further, all things that arise and manifest themselves have three 
characteristics: they are like the Dhanna Body of the Buddha, they are the Dharma Body of 
the Buddha, and they are reflections of the Dharma Body of the Buddha. 

3. That is, a kensho does not necessarily occur in the middle of the night. 

4. That is, how one’s Buddha Nature may manifest today (like today’s phase of the Moon) will 
be just for this day, and it will still be the whole of one’s Buddha Nature. 

5. ‘Swallows up’, both here and throughout this discourse, is a metaphor meaning ‘takes in and 
comprehends’. 

6. That is, they do not have a permanent, unchangeable nature. 



Shobogenzo: On the Moon as One s Excellent Nature 


547 


What is now being expressed is that, without fail, the Ancestors of the Buddha, as 
disciples of the Buddha, possess the Moon of their heart and mind because they 
treat their Moon as their heart and mind. If It were not the Moon, It would not be 
their heart and mind, and without a heart and mind, there is no Moon. ‘Solitary and 
at the full’ means that It lacks for nothing. Whatever is more than ‘two or three’, 
we call ‘all things’. When all things are in the Moon’s Light, they are not seen as 
‘all things’, hence Its Light swallows up all things. Since all things spontaneously 
absorb the Moon’s light completely, Its Light swallows up the Moon’s light, which 
means that Its Light swallows up all things. For instance, it will be the Moon 
swallowing up the Moon, and the Light swallowing up the Moon. 7 Accordingly, 
the Master expressed the Matter* as: 

Its light is not something that illumines concrete objects, 

And concrete objects, in turn, are not things that truly 
exist. 

Because Banzan had attained such a state, when people could be helped to reach 
the Other Shore by means of a Buddha Body, he would forthwith manifest his 
Buddha Body and give voice to the Dharma for their sake. And when people could 
be helped to reach the Other Shore by means of an ordinary physical body, he 
would forthwith manifest that customary physical body of his and give voice to the 
Dharma for their sake. It is said that he never failed to turn the Wheel of the 
Dharma from within his Moon. Even though the lunar yin energy and the solar 
yang energy illumine objects by means of the fire jewel—which is the Sun—and 
the water jewel—which is the Moon—he would forthwith manifest both. This 
heart and mind of his was nothing other than his Moon, and this Moon of his was, 
as a matter of course, his own heart and mind. This is how the Buddha’s Ancestors, 
as disciples of the Buddha, master the principle of mind and the details of mind. 


A Buddha of the past once said, “The whole of your mind contains 
everything, and everything contains the whole of your mind.” Since this is so, your 
mind is everything, and everything is your mind. Because your heart and mind are 
your Moon, your Moon must be the Moon. Because everything, which is your 


7. ‘The Moon’s light’ refers to the reflected light of the Sun (that is, Buddha Nature), whereas 
‘the Moon’s Light’ refers to the Sun Itself. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Moon as One s Excellent Nature 


548 


heart and mind, is completely the Moon, the whole universe throughout is the 
whole Moon throughout. And being intimately acquainted with your self, through 
and through, is being intimately acquainted with your Moon, through and through. 
Even with the ‘three and three before, or three and three after’ over time 
immemorial, who among them is not a Moon? The Buddha with the Solar Face and 
the Buddha with the Lunar Face—which are our body and mind along with their 
internal propensities and external conditions at this present moment—will both be 

o 

within our Moon. Birth-and-death and coming-and-going will both be in our 
Moon, and the whole universe in all ten quarters will be the top, bottom, left, and 
right within our Moon. Whatever is going on right now in our daily life will be just 
some of the hundreds of things that sprout up in our mind ever so clearly within 
our Moon, and it will be what sprouts up in the minds of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors within Their Moon. 


Great Master Tosu Daido of Shuchou Province was once asked 
by a monk, “What is the Moon like when It is not yet full?” 8 9 

The Master answered, “It swallows up three or four Moons.” 

The monk then asked, “And after It is full, what is It like?” 

The Master replied, “It vomits out seven or eight Moons.” 10 

What is being thoroughly explored here are the terms ‘not yet full’ and ‘after 
becoming full’. Both of them are phases of the Moon. Within the three or four 
Moons that are in your Moon, there will be One that is not yet full; within the 
seven or eight Moons that are in your Moon, there will be One that is now at Its 
full. ‘Swallowing up’ is associated with ‘three or four Moons’; such a moment as 
this is synonymous with a time when one’s Moon is not yet full. ‘Vomiting out’ is 
associated with ‘seven or eight Moons’; such a moment as this is synonymous with 
a time after one’s Moon has reached Its full. When the Moon swallows up Moons, 


8. The Buddha with the Solar Face is said to have a lifespan of 1,800 years, whereas the 
lifespan of the Buddha with the Lunar Face is said to be one day. This reference was used by 
Meditation Master Baso to describe our original Buddha Nature as being beyond any 
temporal measure, such as ‘long’ or ‘short’. 

9. The topic of the discourse now shifts from the Moon as a reference to our Buddha Nature 
being ‘what we are’ to the Moon’s phases, which is how our Buddha Nature manifests at 
different times. 

10. ‘Vomits out’ is a metaphor for ‘giving spiritual expression to’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Moon as One s Excellent Nature 


549 


It will involve three or four of Them. 11 There will be signs of the Moon’s 
swallowing up and manifestations of the Moon’s vomiting out. In the Moon’s 
vomiting out phases, there will be seven or eight of Them. There will be a Moon 
that manifests in the vomiting out, for the Moon is also a manifestation of vomiting 
out. Therefore, It is our swallowing up completely and our vomiting out 
completely. The whole of the earth and the whole of the heavens is what we vomit 
out. The whole universe is what we swallow up. We need to swallow up self and 
swallow up other, and we need to vomit out self and vomit out other. 


Once when Shakyamuni Buddha was giving Teaching to the Bodhisattva 
Vajragarbha, 12 He said: 

Just as the moving eye, for instance, can make still waters seem 
to pitch and roll, and just as the steady eye makes fire seem to spiral 
up, so too, when clouds are hastening by, the moon seems to move in 
the opposite way, and when one’s boat is departing, the shore appears 
to drift in a counter direction. 

We need to thoroughly explore and clarify just what it is that the Buddha has said 
concerning the hastening of clouds and the moving of the moon, as well as about 
the departing of one’s boat and the drifting of the shore. Do not study this in haste 
or try to make it accord with the views of ordinary, worldly people. At the same 
time, it is a rare person who can recognize what this Buddha has voiced as the 
Voicing of a Buddha. When you can say that you are studying this statement as 
what a Buddha has voiced, then you will understand that full realization does not 
necessarily refer to ‘body and mind’ or to ‘enlightenment and nirvana’, and 
‘enlightenment and nirvana’ do not necessarily refer to ‘full realization’ or to ‘body 
and mind’. 

As to the hastening of clouds and the moving of the moon, as well as the 
departing of the boat and the drifting by of the shore of which the Tathagata spoke, 
at the time when the clouds hasten, the moon appears to move, and at the time 


11. That is, when people are on the verge of having a spiritual experience, they will begin to 
show signs of its coming, which is often described as someone’s ‘beginning to ripen’. 

12. Vajragarbha, ‘He Who is a Veritable Treasure House for the Diamond of Wisdom’, is a 
manifestation of Samantabhadra Bodhisattva, who represents patient, loving activity. Please 
see the Glossary for an explanation of the tenn ‘Bodhisattva’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Moon as One s Excellent Nature 


550 


when the boat sails off, the shore appears to drift by. This is saying that the clouds 
and the moon are simultaneously moving at the same pace, at the same time, and in 
the same manner, which is beyond one beginning as the other ends, and beyond 
one being before and the other after. Also, it is saying that the boat and the shore 
are simultaneously moving at the same pace, at the same time, and in the same 
manner, which is beyond one starting when the other stops and beyond the two 
moving in cycles. When we learn about how people behave, human behavior is 
beyond just a matter of starting and stopping, and the behavior of starting and 
stopping is beyond just being human. Do not compare or judge the behavior of 
humans by taking up ‘starting and stopping’. The hastening of clouds and the 
moving of the moon, as well as the sailing off of a boat and the drifting off of the 
shore, are all like this. Do not foolishly take a narrow-minded view of this. Do not 
overlook the main point. The hastening of a cloud is not described by ‘east, west, 
south, or north’ and the moving of the moon is without cease, day and night, in 
both the past and present. The sailing off of the boat and the drifting of the shore 
are beyond the three temporal worlds of past, present, and future, and they can 
make use of the three temporal worlds. Therefore, having ‘arrived’ right away at 
this very moment, one is sated and no longer feels hungry. 

At the same time, foolish people fancy that an unmoving moon appears to be 
moving due to the moving of the clouds, and that the drifting shore appears to be 
drifting due to one’s sailing off on a boat. If it were as these foolish people say, 
how could it possibly be the Teaching of the Tathagata? The main point of the 
Buddha Dharma is beyond the small-minded views of ordinary human beings and 
those in lofty positions. Although It is beyond reckoning, there is still training and 
practice in accord with the trainee’s abilities. Who among you would fail, time and 
again, to cast your line for boat and shore, and who among you would fail to 
quickly cast an eye to clouds and moon? What you need to understand is that the 
Tathagata was not using the clouds as a metaphor for something physical or 
mental, nor was He using the moon as a metaphor for something physical or 
mental, nor was He using the boat as a metaphor for something physical or mental, 
nor was He using the shore as a metaphor for something physical or mental. You 
need to take your time to thoroughly and diligently explore this principle. One inch 
of the Moon’s movement is equal to the full realization of the Tathagata, and the 
full realization of the Tathagata is but an inch of the Moon’s movement. It is not a 
matter of moving or halting, nor is it a matter of progressing or retreating. Because 


13. In other words, the reality of Buddha Nature is beyond our nonnal ways of thinking about 
body and mind. 



Shobogenzo: On the Moon as One s Excellent Nature 


551 


the movement of the Moon goes beyond being merely a metaphor, Its essential 
nature and the way It appears are Its being ‘solitary and at the full’. 

Keep in mind that the pace of the Moon, even if it is at a gallop, is beyond 
having a beginning, middle, and end. This is why the first Moon has a second 
Moon. The first (which is Its Essential Nature) and the second (which is the way It 
appears) are, both alike, Moons. ‘A good time for training and practice’ is what the 
Moon is, and ‘a good time for making offerings’ is what the Moon is, and, with a 
swish of one’s sleeves, taking one’s leave to go to the Meditation Hall is what the 
Moon is . 14 Its roundness or squareness is beyond the turning of the wheel of 
coming and going. Whether making use of the turning wheel of coming and going 
or not making use of it, the Master grabs hold of the deluded certainty of his 
trainees or lets them go on in their own way as he gives free reign to his elegantly 
skillful means, and so it is with many Moons. 

Written by me on the sixth day of the first lunar month in the fourth year of the Ninji era 
(January 27, 1243), whilst at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple. 

The Mendicant Monk Dogen 

Copied by me on the day before of the end of the summer retreat in the first year of the Kangen 
era (July 22, 1243). 

Ejo 


14. This sentence presents the three responses to the question “How is the Moon right now?” 
which was put by Baso to his three disciples, Seido Chizo, Hyakujo Ekai, and Nansen 
Fugan, who were watching the moon one night. 



44 


On the Flowering of the Unbounded 

(Kuge) 

Translator’s Introduction: Kuge, the title of this discourse, has various meanings. The term is 
used in the Shurangama Scripture to refer to a physical disease in which one sees non-existent 
‘flowers’ in the sky, and it is employed in the same Scripture as a metaphor for the effects of 
delusion, caused by one’s being spiritually ‘bleary-eyed’. Dogen extends the meaning of kuge to 
refer to things as they really are: the flowerings of Buddha Nature (That Which Is as Unbounded 
as Space), as seen by one whose spiritual vision has become ‘unfocused’, due to his having left 
off hard-edged, dualistic thinking, which assumes that its mental constructs are real. The 
flowering that Dogen speaks of refers to the whole universe as it is, which blossoms forth from 
within Buddha Nature, as well as to the blossoming of a kensho, (that is, the seeing of one’s True 
Nature) and the manifestation of Buddhas. 


Our highest Founding Ancestor Bodhidharma once said in verse: 

And when the Single Blossom opened Its five petals, 

The fruit thereof naturally came about of itself 

You need to explore through your training the occasion for this opening of the One 
Blossom, along with exploring Its radiance and the form It takes. The One 
Blossom is comprised of five petals, one atop the other. The opening up of the five 
petals forms the One Blossom. When you have penetrated the principle of the one 
blossom, it will be in accord with Bodhidharma’s statement: 

From the first, I came to this land to Transmit the 
Dharma 

That I might rescue deluded beings . 1 

Seeking the radiance and form of this blossoming is what your investigation 
through your training should be all about. What Bodhidharma calls ‘the resulting 
fruit’ is something that one leaves to the fruit: he describes this as ‘what naturally 
comes about of itself’. ‘What naturally comes about of itself’ is his term for 


1. These two lines are the opening lines of a quatrain by Bodhidharma, whose closing lines 
Dogen quoted at the start of this text. 


552 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


553 


mastering causes and being conscious of effects. There are the causes of the whole 
universe and there are the effects of the whole universe; there is our mastering the 
causes and effects of this whole universe and there is our being conscious of the 
causes and effects of this whole universe. One’s natural self is oneself. This self, to 
be sure, is ‘you’, that is to say, it is the four elements* and the five skandhas* of 
which you are comprised. Because Bodhidharma is allowing for ‘a true person 
devoid of any rank’, he is not referring to a specific T or to some ‘other’. 
Therefore, that which is indefinable is what he is calling ‘a self’. This natural state 
of ‘being as it is’ is what he is acknowledging . 2 The natural state of ‘being as one 
is’ is the time when the Single Blossom opens and Its fruit results: it is the occasion 
when the Dharma is Transmitted and one is rescued from one’s delusions. 

For instance, the moment when the blue lotus bursts into bloom is like being 

■j 

in the midst of a fire at the time of fire. The fire’s sparks and flames all converge 
at the point where the blue lotus bursts into bloom at the very moment when it 
bursts into bloom. If it were not the time and place of the blue lotus’s blossoming, 
not even a single spark of fire would emerge, not even a single spark of fire would 
come to life. You need to know that there are hundreds of thousands of blue lotuses 
in a single spark of fire: they blossom forth throughout boundless space and 
throughout the earth. They blossomed forth in the past and they blossom forth in 
the present. When you witness the time and place of the fire emerging, you are 
witnessing the blossoming of the blue lotus. Do not let the time and place of the 
blue lotus pass you by, but be a witness to its blossoming. 


An enlightened one of long ago once said in a poem, “The blue lotus blooms 
amidst the fire.” Thus it is that the blue lotus invariably blossoms forth in the midst 
of the fire. If you wish to know where ‘being in the midst of the fire’ is, it is the 
very place where the blue lotus blossoms forth. Do not neglect investigating ‘being 
in the midst of the fire’ through adopting the views of either ordinary people or 
those in lofty positions. Should you harbor any doubts, you might also doubt that 


* See Glossary. 

2. What the translation does not make clear is that Dogen is analyzing the word jinen in 
Bodhidharma’s poem (rendered as ‘naturally’) as being comprised of two words: ji meaning 
‘self’ and nen meaning ‘being as it is’. 

3. The blue lotus refers to the blossoming of the spiritual flower of one’s training and 
enlightenment, not to an actual plant. 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


554 


the lotus arises within the water, and you might doubt that branches and twigs have 
any blossoms as well. Further, should you harbor such doubts, you might well 
doubt the existence of the outer, objective world. But this you do not doubt. If 
someone is not an Ancestor of the Buddha, such a person does not know that with 
the opening of the blossom, the whole world arises. ‘The opening of the blossom’ 
means ‘three and three before that, as well as three and three after that’. In order to 
make the number of these more extensive, they have accumulated a luxurious 
growth, soaring ever higher . 4 

Letting this principle of blossoming come of its own accord, we need to 
consider whether it is spring or autumn. Blossoms and fruit do not only appear in 
spring and in autumn. There will invariably be other times when blossoms and fruit 
emerge. Every flowering and fruiting has endured while they have waited for their 
opportunity, and every opportunity has endured while it has waited for a flowering 
and a fruiting. Thus, all the hundreds of things that sprout up have their time of 
flowering and their fruiting, just as all manner of trees have their time of flowering 
and their fruiting. All manner of trees—such as those of gold, silver, copper, iron, 
coral, or crystal—have their flowering and their fruiting. Trees of earth, water, fire, 
wind, and boundless space have their flowering and fruiting. Human trees have 
their blossoming, human flowers have their blossoming, and withered trees have 
their blossoming. 

It is within this context that the World-honored One spoke of the flowerings 
within Unbounded Space. On the other hand, those folks who pay attention to very 
little and see even less are unaware that petals and blossoms with their varied hues 
and brilliance are to be found within everything. These are ‘the flowers of 
Unbounded Space’, and such folk are only barely aware of a flowering of 
Unbounded Space. You need to be aware that the flowers of Unbounded Space are 
discussed within the words and ways of the Buddha, whereas non-Buddhists have 
no knowledge of such discussions about the flowers of Unbounded Space, much 
less do they have any understanding of them! Only the Buddhas and Ancestors 
have known about the blossoming and falling of the flowers of Unbounded Space 
as well as that of earthly flowers. Only They have known of such things as the 
blossoming and falling of the flowers within the human world. Only They have 
known that such things as the flowers in Unbounded Space, earthly flowers, and 
the flowers within the human world are all Scriptures; this is the standard by which 


4. To paraphrase, while the number of persons realizing the Truth is indefinite (‘three and three 
before that, as well as three and three after that’) it is decidedly more than just a few people. 
In fact, the number is staggering and ever increasing. 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


555 


we investigate what Buddha is. Because what has been taught by the Buddhas and 
Ancestors is this flowering of Unbounded Space, the realm of Buddha and the 
Teachings of Buddhas are therefore synonymous with the flowerings of 
Unbounded Space. 

At the same time, when those who are commonplace and foolish hear about 
what the Tathagata said—namely, that what is seen by those with bleary-eyed 
vision are the flowerings in Unbounded Space—they assume that ‘bleary-eyed 
vision’ refers to topsy-turvy vision in human beings. Because their own diseased 
vision is already topsy-turvy, they believe that one experiences flowers in 
Unbounded Space as something floating in an absolute void. Being attached to this 
understanding, they have concluded that the three worlds of desire, form, and 
beyond form, the six worlds *of existence, the existence of Buddhahood, and the 
state of going beyond Buddhahood, are all really non-existent but are mistakenly 
seen as having existence. They go about making their living by asserting that, if we 
were to bring to a halt this bleary-eyed vision brought about by our delusions, we 
would no longer see these flowers in the void since, from the beginning, the void is 
devoid of flowers. How sad that folks like these do not know, from start to finish, 
the times of which the Tathagata spoke when flowers bloom in Unbounded Space. 
The principle of seeing flowers in Unbounded Space with ‘bleary-eyed’ vision—of 
which the Buddhas have spoken—is not understood by ordinary, everyday people 
and those who are non-Buddhists. The Buddhas and Tathagatas have trained with 
these flowers in Unbounded Space and They have put them into Their practice. By 
doing so, They have obtained Their robe, Their sitting place, and Their access to 
the Master’s quarters, all of which is Their realizing the Way and attaining Its 
fruits. Holding aloft the blossom, with eyes twinkling , 5 is the raising of the 
spiritual question, which manifests our seeing flowers in Unbounded Space with 
bleary-eyed vision. That the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, 
which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana, has now been correctly Transmitted 
without a break is what we call seeing flowers in Unbounded space with bleary- 
eyed vision. Enlightenment, nirvana, giving rise to the intention to realize the 
Truth, one’s own True Nature, and so forth, are two or three petals among the five 
which the blossoming of Unbounded Space opens up. 


5. This is a reference to the Transmission of the Dharma from Shakyamuni Buddha to his 
disciple Makakasho. This occurred when the Buddha held aloft an udumbara blossom and 
Makakasho smiled in response. 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


556 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said in verse: 

Further, it is like one with bleary-eyed vision 
Seeing blossoms in Boundless Space; 

When that bleary-eyed sickness is eradicated, 

The blossoms disappear into the Unbounded Space. 

There have never been any mundane academics or scholars who have understood 
this saying. Because they do not know what Unbounded Space is, they do not 
know what blossoms in Unbounded Space refers to, and because they do not know 
what blossoms in Unbounded Space refers to, they do not recognize ‘one of bleary- 
eyed vision’, nor are they themselves ‘one of bleary-eyed vision’, nor do they ever 
become ‘one of bleary-eyed vision’. When those of unfocused vision mutually 
recognize each other, they will know what flowers in Unbounded Space are and 
they will see the flowering of Unbounded Space. After they have seen the flowers 
in Unbounded Space, they will also see the flowers disappearing into Unbounded 
Space . 6 To think that once the flowers have disappeared into Unbounded Space 
they cannot return again is the view of those of the Lesser Course.* 7 When the 
flowers within Unbounded Space cannot be seen by such people, what can exist for 
them? By merely thinking that flowers within Unbounded Space are something to 
be dropped off, they do not recognize the Great Matter* that lies within the 
blossoming of Unbounded Space, nor do they know of the seeding, ripening, and 
falling away of That which blossoms within Unbounded Space. 

Among the mundane academics and scholars of today, there are those who 
think that the yang-energy must govern empty space, and there are those who think 
that the sun, moon, and stars must be suspended in empty space. Accordingly, they 
consider what they expediently call ‘flowers in empty space’ to be something that 
takes on an appearance and form not unlike that of drifting clouds in the clear sky, 
or they think it must be like blossoms sent flying in the wind, hither and yon, up 
and down. They do not know that the four elements—which can create other things 
and which are, themselves, created—along with the various things of the outer 
world, as well as such things as one’s innate enlightenment and Original Nature, 
are all called flowers in Unbounded Space. Further, they do not know that the four 
elements exist to do their creating in accordance with thoughts and things, nor do 
they know that, in accordance with thoughts and things, the outer world abides in 

6. That is, they will see what ‘going beyond Buddhahood’ refers to. 

7. That is, they believe that one cannot have multiple experiences of realizing Truth, and that 
once one has realized Truth, the need to train is at an end. 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


557 


its place. They simply recognize that there are thoughts and things that are in 
accord with the outer world. They only comprehend that there are flowers in empty 
space because of one’s bleary-eyed vision, and do not comprehend the principle 
that there is an unfocusing of one’s vision due to a blossoming in Unbounded 
Space. 

You need to realize that what the Buddha called ‘one with bleary-eyed 
vision’ is one who is fundamentally enlightened, one who is wondrously 
enlightened, one who is at one with the Buddhas, one who is of the three worlds of 
existence, one who has gone on beyond Buddhahood. So, do not, out of 
befuddlement, explore the foolish notion that being ‘bleary-eyed’ means being 
deluded and therefore go looking for some other way of progressing. Were you to 
do so, yours would be a meager view of the Matter. If the blossoming of bleary- 
eyed vision were a delusion, then that which attaches to the erroneous view that 
this is an erroneous view, as well as the attachment itself, would both be delusions. 
If both were delusions, then establishing what the underlying principle is would be 
impossible. If there were no underlying principle that could be established, then it 
would be impossible to establish that the blossoming seen by those of bleary-eyed 
vision is a delusion. 

When enlightenment is seen as ‘being bleary-eyed’, then everything is 
within enlightenment and all things are bedecked with the quality of being out of 
focus. When delusion is seen as ‘being bleary-eyed’, then everything is within 
delusion and all things are bedecked with the quality of being out of focus. For the 
present, we can say that when one’s bleary vision is impartial, the flowerings 
within Unbounded Space are impartial, that when bleary-eyed vision has not 
arisen, a flowering within Unbounded space has not arisen, and that when all 
thoughts and things have their True Form, bleary-eyed vision has its True Form. 
You should not get into discussions about past, present, and future, and do not hang 
onto ‘beginning, middle, and end’. By not being hindered by ‘arising and 
disappearing’, you can make arisings and disappearings arise and disappear. They 
arise within Unbounded Space and they disappear within Unbounded Space; they 
arise within that which is out of focus and they disappear within that which is out 
of focus; they arise within flowering and they disappear within flowering, and so 
on, doing the same for all other times and places. 

Learning about flowers within Unbounded Space may well take many forms. 
There is what is seen with bleary-eyed vision, and what is seen with wondrous 
eyes, and what is seen with the Eye of a Buddha, and what is seen with the eyes of 
an Ancestor, and what is seen with the vision of the Way, and what is seen with 
blind eyes, and what has been seen for three thousand years, and what has been 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


558 


seen for eight hundred years, and what has been seen for hundreds of kalpas,* and 
what has been seen for immeasurable kalpas . 8 Though it is said that all of these see 
a flowering in Unbounded Space, Unbounded Space is already of various kinds, 
and flowering, as well, is of all sorts. 

By all means you need to realize that space is simply one form of sprouting. 
This space invariably produces its flowerings, just as the hundreds of sproutings of 
thoughts and things produce their flowerings. In asserting this principle, the 
Tathagata said that Unbounded Space originally had no flowering. Although It 
originally had no flowering, today It has Its flowerings, just as do the peach and 
damson trees and just as do the plum and willow trees . 9 It is as if the Tathagata had 
said, “Although yesterday the plum had no flowers, come the spring, the plum will 
have flowers.” Well and good, for when its season arrives, it will produce flowers, 
since it will be the time for its flowering and the arriving of its flowering. The 
actual moment of its flowering is never arbitrary. The flowers of the plum and the 
willow invariably blossom on plum and willow trees. Upon seeing their flowers, 
we recognize them as those of the plum and the willow: upon seeing the plum and 
the willow, we discern what their flowers are. The flowers of the peach and the 
damson never bloom on plum or willow trees. The flowers of the plum and willow 
trees bloom on plum and willow trees, whereas the flowers of the peach and 
damson trees bloom on peach and damson trees. Likewise, the flowers of 
Unbounded Space bloom in Unbounded Space—they do not bloom on other things 
that sprout up or upon other trees. By looking at the various forms of the flowers of 
Unbounded Space, we can estimate that the flowers of Unbounded Space are 
boundless. By looking at the opening and falling of the flowers in Unbounded 
Space, you should investigate the spring and autumn of the flowers in Unbounded 
Space. The springtime for flowers in Unbounded Space and the springtime for 
other flowers will be alike. Just as the flowers of Unbounded Space are various, so 
will their springtimes be many. Thus there are the springs and autumns of past and 
present. Those who have been taught that the flowers of Unbounded Space are not 
real, though other flowers are real, are persons who have not encountered or heard 
what the Buddha taught. Upon hearing the Buddha’s Teaching that Unbounded 
Space originally had no flowers, if one were to study this as meaning that there are 


8. ‘What has been seen for three thousand years...for immeasurable kalpas’ refers to what has 
been experienced by Buddhas since before the time of Shakyamuni Buddha, by 
Bodhidharma, and by Ancestor after Ancestor at all times, past, present, and future. 

9. The peach and damson trees are a common Chinese metaphor for disciples, whereas the 
plum and the willow represent the most beautiful of flowering trees. 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


559 


now flowers of Unbounded Space where originally there were none, this would be 
narrow-minded and short-sighted. We need to step forward and take a more 
broadminded view. 


Our Ancestral Master Eka once said, “The flowers, moreover, have never 
appeared.” The main point of this is the principle, for example, that the flowers 
have never appeared, that they have never disappeared, that they have never been 
‘flowers’, and that Unbounded Space has, moreover, never been ‘space’. Do not 
look with suspicion upon what preceded or followed the time of their blossoming, 
or engage in idle discussions concerning their existence or nonexistence. Flowers 
invariably seem to be dyed with some color or other, but these various colors are 
not necessarily limited to flowers. In the various seasons, there are colors such as 
blue, yellow, red, and white. The spring ushers in flowers, and the flowers usher in 
spring. 

djb 


The highly accomplished Mandarin scholar Ch’ang Cho was a lay disciple 
of Sekiso Keisho. Upon awakening to the Way, he composed a poem: 

Its brilliant light serenely illumines everywhere amidst 
worlds as numerous as the sands of the Ganges . 10 

This brilliant light has clearly illuminated the Monks’ Hall, the Buddha Hall, the 
kitchen, and the mountain gate to the monastery. ‘Everywhere amidst worlds as 
numerous as the sands of the Ganges’ is where the brilliant light manifests and it is 
a manifestation of the brilliant light. 

Sentient beings, both the ordinary and the saintly, are 
within my family. 

It is not that there are no ordinary, everyday people or that there are no wise and 
saintly ones, but in accord with this, be sure not to speak ill of either ordinary, 
everyday people or the wise and saintly. 

When not a single thought arose, Its whole Body 
manifested Itself. 


10. This is the first line of an eight-line poem, which Dogen quotes line by line. Each line is 
followed by his short commentary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


560 


Thought after thought is just one after the other; this is certainly ‘non-arising’. This 
is Its whole body completely manifesting. This is why he said that not a single 
thought arose. 

When my six sense organs moved even slightly, my mind 
was covered with clouds. 

Although the six sense organs are the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind, 
they are not necessarily a matter of two times three; they can be some group of 
three, and then three before or after those three . 11 ‘Moving’ is like Mount Sumeru, 
like the great earth, like the six sense organs, like moving even slightly. Because 
moving is already like Mount Sumeru, not moving is also like Mount Sumeru. 

Attempting to cut myself free from my defiling passions 
just added to my heap of spiritual diseases. 

It is not that he had never been sick before, for there was the disease of ‘Buddha’ 
and the disease of ‘Ancestor ’. 12 But now, using his perceptiveness to cut off his 
passions, he piled up his illnesses and increased his sickness. The very moment of 
cutting oneself free is invariably synonymous with having a passion: they are 
simultaneous, and they are beyond being simultaneous. Passions are invariably 
bound up in the measures taken to cut oneself free from them. 

To go after the Truth is also the wrong thing. 

To turn one’s back on Truth is wrong. To confront Truth is wrong. The Truth is the 
very confronting and the turning of one’s back. Each and every instance of 
‘confronting’ and ‘turning one’s back on’ is what Truth is. And who knows that this 
‘wrong’ is also what Truth is? 

Submitting myself to worldly connections is not a 
hindrance. 

He submitted himself to one worldly connection after another, for submission after 
submission is what worldly connections are. This is called ‘not being hindered’. As 
for being hindered or not being hindered, you should accustom yourself to letting 
your eyes be hindered. 


11. That is, the sense organs are not necessarily just the standard six (two times three), but may 
manifest in countless ways. 

12. That is, the spiritual greed to become a Buddha or an Ancestor. 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


561 


Nirvana and birth-and-death are simply flowers in 
Unbounded Space. 

Nirvana is synonymous with supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. This is where 
the Buddhas and Ancestors reside, along with Their disciples. Birth-and-death is 
synonymous with one’s True Body. Nirvana and birth-and-death exist in this 
manner and they are flowers in Unbounded Space. The roots and stems, the 
branches and leaves, the flowers and fruit, along with the brilliance and forms of 
the flowers of Unbounded Space, are all the blossoming forth of flowers in 
Unbounded Space. They are invariably connected with the fruits of Unbounded 
Space, which bestow the seeds of Unbounded Space. Because the three worlds of 
desire, form, and beyond form, which we are now experiencing, are the opening of 
the five petals, it is best to see these three worlds as the three worlds. You need to 
explore through your training that the three worlds are the true form of all thoughts 
and things, that they are the flowering of all thoughts and things. All thoughts and 
things beyond measure are the flowers of Unbounded Space and the fruits of 
Unbounded Space, and they are identical with the flowers of plum and willow, 
peach and damson. 

djb 


When Meditation Master Fuyozan Reikun in the Fuchou district 
of Great Sung China first came to train under Meditation Master Kisu 
Shishin, he asked his Master, “Just what is Buddha?” 

Master Kisu replied, “If I tell you straight to your face, will you 
believe me?” 

Reikun then said, “How would I dare not to believe your 
sincere words, O Venerable Monk?” 

Master Kiso responded, “You yourself are precisely what It is.” 

Reikun then asked, “How am I to preserve and maintain It?” 

Master Kiso answered, “When there is a single moment of your 
eyes being bleary, the flowers of Unbounded Space will come 
fluttering down.” 

The words that Master Kisu has just spoken, namely, “When there is a single 
moment of your eyes being bleary, the flowers of Unbounded Space will come 
fluttering down,” express how Buddha is preserved and maintained. So, you need 
to realize that the fluttering down of the flowers of bleary-eyed vision is what all 
Buddhas manifest. By seeing the flowering and fruiting of Unbounded Space 
which Their Eye, all Buddhas preserve and maintain these flowers and fruit. By 
means of Their bleary-eyed vision, They cause the Eye to manifest. They have 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


562 


manifested the flowering of Unbounded Space within Their Eye and They have 
manifested Their Eye within the flowering of Unbounded Space. It is simply a 
matter of “When the flower of Unbounded Space is within Their Eye, a single 
moment of bleary-eyed vision flutters down, and when Their Eye is within 
Unbounded Space, all instances of bleary-eyed vision flutter down.” Thus, bleary- 
eyed vision is a manifestation of all functions, and the Eye is also a manifestation 
of all functions, and Unbounded Space is also a manifestation of all functions, and 
flowering is also a manifestation of all functions. ‘Fluttering down’ is synonymous 
with ‘thousands of Eyes’ and with ‘our whole body being covered with eyes ’. 13 In 
short, at the time and place when the single Eye occurs, there will invariably be a 
blossoming in Unbounded Space along with the blossoming of that Eye. We call 
the blossoming of one’s Eye ‘flowers in Unbounded Space’. The expression ‘the 
blossoming of one’s Eye’ is invariably synonymous with opening to the luminous, 
that is, to enlightenment. 

This is why Great Master Roya Ekaku said in a poem, 

How wondrous the Buddhas in the ten quarters are! 

From the first, They have been flowers in your Eye. 

If you desire to make the acquaintance of the flowers in 
your Eye, 

They are, of course, the Buddhas in the ten quarters. 

If you desire to make the acquaintance of the Buddhas in 
the ten quarters, They will not be flowers in your 
eyes. 

If you desire to make the acquaintance of the flowers in 
your eyes, they will not be the Buddhas in the ten 
quarters. 

When you understand this clearly, 

The blame will lie with the Buddhas in the ten quarters. 

When this is not yet clearly understood, 

Shravakas are prone to dance 

Andpratyekabuddhas take to adorning themselves . 14 


13. Dogen explores these references to ‘thousands of Eyes’ and to ‘being covered with eyes’ in 
his Discourse 32: On Kannon, the Bodhisattva of Compassion (Kannon). 

14. To paraphrase the end part, when you understand clearly the difference between ‘flowers in 
one’s eyes’ (delusion) and ‘flowers in one’s Eye’ (enlightenment), it will be due to the 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


563 


Keep in mind that the Buddhas of the ten quarters are not unreal, but, from 
the first, They are flowers in our Eye. The place where the Buddhas of the ten 
quarters abide is within our Eye. If They were not within our Eye, then our Eye 
would not be the abiding place of Buddhas. The flowers in our Eye are neither non¬ 
existent nor existent, and they are beyond emptiness and reality: they are naturally 
what the Buddhas in the ten quarters are. If you earnestly desire to be acquainted 
with the Buddhas in the ten quarters, They are beyond being just ‘flowers in your 
eyes’, and if you earnestly desire to be acquainted with what the flowers in your 
eyes are, they will seem to be something other than the Buddhas in the ten quarters. 

Because the Matter is like this, both your being clear and your not yet being 
clear are flowers in your Eye and they are also the Buddhas in the ten quarters. 
Your desire to be acquainted with what They are and what They are not is the 
Wondrous manifesting Itself, and It is a great wonder. The main point about the 
flowers of Unbounded Space and the flowers of the earth, of which Buddha after 
Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor have spoken, is Their giving free rein to Their 
elegantly skillful means. Even though academic teachers of Scriptures and scholars 
who produce erudite commentaries thereon are able to hear the words ‘flowers in 
Unbounded Space’, there is no account of anyone, apart from an Ancestor of the 
Buddha, who has ever encountered, or even heard of, the Lifeblood of the flowers 
of the earth. And there are the sayings of the Buddha’s Ancestors who have 
understood what the Lifeblood of the flowers of the earth really is. 


Meditation Master Etetsu of Mount Sekimon in Great Sung China was a 
venerable elder who had trained under Ryozan Enkan. One day a certain monk 
asked him, “What is the Jewel in the Mountain?” The main point of asking this is 
the same as asking, “What is Buddha?” or like asking, “What is the Way?” The 
Master replied, “The flowers of Unbounded Space come forth from the earth, so, 
throughout the country, there is no way to buy them.” 


Buddhas in the ten quarters (their ‘fault’). As used here, the term shravakas refers to those 
who enjoy hearing the Teaching but are not necessarily interested in Its practical application, 
believing that they are already enlightened because they have an intellectual understanding 
of the Teaching, and therefore they jump for joy. On the other hand, pratyekabuddhas are 
those who are seeking enlightenment, but just for their own sake. When they believe that 
they have fully fathomed enlightenment, they wear their understanding as a badge of their 
achievement. 



Shobogenzo: On the Flowering of the Unbounded 


564 


In all earnestness, you must not compare this saying with other expressions. 
Ordinary, mundane teachers, in discussing the flowers of Unbounded Space as 
‘flowers in the empty sky’, speak only of their arising in the empty sky and 
disappearing into the empty sky. Since they have still not understood what 
‘reliance on Unbounded Space’ means, how could they possibly understand what 
‘reliance on the earth’ means? Only Sekimon knew this. ‘Reliance on the earth’ is 
ultimately relying on the earth through and through—beginning, middle, and end. 
His phrase ‘coming forth’ is synonymous with ‘opening up’. That very moment is 
the flowers’ coming forth from the whole of the great earth; it is their opening up 
over the whole of the great earth. 

‘Throughout the country there is no way to buy them’ does not mean that 
there is nothing to buy throughout the country, but that there is no way to buy the 
Truth. There are the flowers of Unbounded Space which are based on coming forth 
from the earth, and there is the whole earth which is based on the opening of 
flowers. So, keep in mind this main point: the flowers of Unbounded Space cause 
both the opening up of the earth and the unfolding of Unbounded Space. 

Given to the assembly on the tenth day of the third lunar month in the first year of the Kangen 
era (March 31, 1243) at Kami on dori in Koshohorin-ji Temple. 

Copied by me on the first day of the first lunar month in the second year of the same era 
(February 10, 1244), while in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant at Kippo-ji Temple in 
Echizen Province. 

Ejo 



45 

On What the Mind of an Old Buddha Is 

(Kobusshin) 


Translator’s Introduction: The Japanese term ‘kobutsu’, rendered herein as ‘an Old Buddha’, 
occurs often in Zen writings. It refers to one who has fully realized his or her True Nature and 
therefore has the Mind of an Old Buddha. 


In the succession of the Dharma in our Ancestral tradition, there were forty 
Ancestors from the Seven Buddhas* down to Daikan Eno, and from Daikan Eno 
back to the Seven Buddhas there were forty Buddhas . 1 Because the Seven Buddhas 
equally had the merit of having realized enlightenment and of having turned back 
to help the world, the inherited Dharma extended forward to Eno and was traceable 
back to the Seven Buddhas. Because Eno had the merit of having realized 
enlightenment and of having turned back to help the world, It has been genuinely 
Transmitted from the Seven Buddhas, and It has been genuinely Transmitted from 
Eno, and It has been genuinely Transmitted to later Buddhas. It is not merely a 
question of who has preceded or has followed whom; the time of Shakyamuni 
Buddha is that of all the Buddhas in the ten quarters. During Seigen’s time there 
was Nangaku, and during Nangaku’s time there was Seigen. And during the time of 
Seigen’s heir Sekito, there was Nangaku’s heir Baso. They did not stand against 
each other, nor was it a matter of their not standing against each other. You need to 
thoroughly explore through your training that there was such meritorious behavior 
as this . 2 


* See Glossary. 

1. Dogen goes only as far as the Sixth Chinese Ancestor, Daikan Eno, because he was the first 
to have two Dharma heirs, Seigen Gyoshi and Nangaku Ejo. Dogen’s Soto lineage derives 
from Seigen, whereas the other Zen lineages, such as the Rinzai, trace their ancestry back to 
Nangaku. 

2. That is, it goes beyond a matter of choosing between the pairs by thinking that one is right 
and the other wrong, or of not choosing between them by not committing oneself to one of 
the two traditions. 


565 



Shobogenzo: On What the Mind of an Old Buddha Is 


566 


Their having passed away long ago and Their not having completely passed 
away are both the meritorious deeds of Old Buddhas. Through our training with 
our Master, we explore the words and ways of Old Buddhas so that we may 
awaken to the Truth of Old Buddhas, for They are Old Buddhas for generation 
after generation. Even though the ‘old’ of ‘Old Buddhas’ is the same as that in 
‘new and old’, such Buddhas have gone beyond what is past and what is present; 
They stand squarely in both the past and the present. 


My late Master once said, “I had an encounter with the Old Buddha 
Wanshi.” 3 Clearly recognize that there was an Old Buddha residing under Tendo’s 
roof, and there was a Tendo residing under the roof of an Old Buddha. 


Meditation Master Engo once said, “1 fully prostrate myself before Daikan 
Eno, a true Old Buddha.” You need to know that you too should do a full 
prostration to Daikan Eno, our Ancestor of the thirty-third generation from 
Shakyamuni Buddha, for he is indeed an Old Buddha. Because Meditation Master 
Engo had the splendorous brightness of an Old Buddha, he had an encounter with 
an Old Buddha, which is why he made such a respectful bow. Accordingly, you 
need to know that when he relied on Eno’s being a Buddha from head-to-toe as 
spiritual ‘fodder’, this was the Old Buddha’s way of getting hold of the water 
buffalo’s nose ring, for anyone who has hold of this nose ring is an Old Buddha. 4 


Sozan once said, 5 “Atop Daiyu Peak there is an Old Buddha. The radiance 
that Ele emits illumines this place of ours.” You need to realize that what Sozan is 


3. Wanshi, who was once the Abbot of Mount Tendo, had died five years before Dogen’s 
Master, Tendo Nyojo, who was also an Abbot of Mount Tendo, was born. ‘To have an 
encounter’ with a Master refers to the mutual recognition between two people that each is 
‘such a person’, that is, someone who has spiritually awakened. 

4. ‘Getting hold of the water buffalo’s nose ring’ is a reference to getting a handle on one’s 
spiritual question, and is an image found in the classic Zen Buddhist Ten Ox-herding 
Pictures. 

5. Sozan Konin, not to be confused with Sozan Honjaku, both of whom were disciples of 
Tozan Ryokai. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Mind of an Old Buddha Is 


567 


saying is that he had already had an encounter with an Old Buddha. He did not 
have to seek elsewhere, for the place where his Old Buddha resided was atop 
Daiyu Peak. Those who are not an Old Buddha cannot recognize the place where 
an Old Buddha resides. Those who know the place where an Old Buddha resides 
will be an Old Buddha themselves. 


Seppo once exclaimed, “Joshu, the Old Buddha!” Keep in mind that even 
though Joshu was an Old Buddha, if Seppo had not also experienced the abilities of 
an Old Buddha for himself, it would have been difficult for him to fully 
comprehend how to pay homage to an Old Buddha. Well, Seppo was an Old 
Buddha himself. In his daily conduct, he depended upon his spiritual abilities as an 
Old Buddha while he did his explorations into ‘an Old Buddha’. And in doing so, 
he did not need to go looking for answers from others nor did he engage in 
conversing about such things. In other words, that old fellow Seppo was just fine! 
The day-to-day customs of an Old Buddha and the everyday behavior of an Old 
Buddha do not resemble those of someone who is not an Old Buddha, for the latter 
are simply not first class. As a consequence, you should explore through your 
training from start to finish just what sort of conduct Joshu found to be good, and 
you should explore through your training what the lifetime of an Old Buddha is. 


The National Teacher Echu of Kotaku-ji Temple in the Western Capital was 
a Dharma heir of Daikan Eno. 6 He was respected and esteemed by both worldly 
and celestial emperors alike. Even in China, to encounter or hear of the likes of 
such a one was truly rare. Not only was he the teacher of four imperial generations, 
but the emperors themselves pulled his carriage to the imperial court with their 
own hands. And what is more, having been invited to the celestial palace of Lord 
Indra, he ascended far into the Trayastrimsha Heavens where he gave voice to the 
Dharma for the sake of the celestial emperor and others of the celestial multitudes. 

The National Teacher was once asked by a monk, “Just what is an Old 
Buddha?” 

He replied, “The tiles* and stones of His walls and fences.” 

In other words, the question is stating, in effect, “I am ‘such a one’ * and you 
are ‘such a one.’” The monk has taken this statement of the Truth and turned it into 


6. Although National Teacher Echu was a Dharma heir of Daikan Eno and had two Dharma 
heirs of his own, his line ultimately died out. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Mind of an Old Buddha Is 


568 


a question. And this question has become an assertion of the Truth far and wide, in 
both the past and present. 7 

Consequently, a response such as, “The myriad trees and the hundreds of 
sproutings are blossomings of the Flower” is an assertion of the Truth by an Old 
Buddha. And the response, “The nine mountains and eight oceans that are the 
arising of our world” is the face of the Sun and the face of the Moon for an Old 
Buddha, just as Bodhidharma’s response, “You have my Skin, Flesh, Bones, and 
Marrow,” is also the countenance of the Sun and Moon for an Old Buddha. 
Moreover, there will be ‘the Mind of Old’, which is a Buddha doing His practice, 
and there will be ‘the Mind of Old’, which is His realizing Buddhahood, and there 
will be the ‘oldness’ of a Buddha, which is what is in His mind. 8 We call it ‘the 
Mind of Old’ because of the ‘oldness’ of the Mind. Because Mind and Buddha are 
positively ‘old’, the Mind of Old is synonymous with a chair, as well as with 
bamboo and trees. 9 It is synonymous with the saying, “It is impossible to find 
anyone who understands one bit of the Buddha Dharma, even though one may 
search the whole of the great earth.” And it is synonymous with a Master calling It 
‘the What’ in response to a monk asking, “What is It?” The causes and conditions 
of this very moment, as well as the various lands and empty space, are nothing 
other than the Mind of Old, for they maintain and depend on the Mind of Old, and 
they maintain and depend on Buddhas of old. They maintain and depend upon two 
heads having one countenance and on having two heads in one picture. 10 

The National Teacher replied to the monk, “The tiles and stones of his walls 
and fences.” 

In other words, his main point is that there is a way of proceeding that is 
expressed as ‘the tiles and stones of one’s walls and fences’, and there is a way of 


7. That is, what the monk said could be understood not merely as a question but also as an 
statement: it is the ‘What’ that is what an Old Buddha is. This double use of the word ‘what’ 
has already occurred in several koan stories that Dogen presented earlier. 

8. What is in the mind of an Old Buddha is His or Her accumulated wisdom based on spiritual 
experience. 

9. In Dogen’s day and even earlier in China, the only chair in a Zen monastery or temple was 
that which served as the Dharma seat from which the Master gave the Teaching. Bamboo 
and various trees are also often used as metaphors for the Buddha Mind. 

10. Two heads having one countenance refers to a picture of Shakyamuni Buddha which depicts 
Him as being seated in meditation with another head appearing atop His own. The second 
head represents That upon which Shakyamuni Buddha is meditating, that is, it represents 
Vairochana Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On What the Mind of an Old Buddha Is 


569 


proceeding that is the tiles and stones of one’s walls and fences. And there will be 
yet another way of putting forth the Truth. And there is a way of pulling back 
whereby the tiles and stones of the walls and fences speak from within the tiles and 
stones of our walls and fences. In the full perfection and completeness from which 
these ways of expressing the Matter* fully manifest before our very eyes, there are 
walls rising up a thousand or ten thousand feet, and there are fences rising up that 
encircle the earth and encircle the heavens, and there is the covering up of the tiles 
all the way or half the way, and there are the sharp edges of the stones, both big 
and small. What exists like this is not only our minds but also our bodies, including 
both our innate tendencies and our external conditions. 

Thus, you should ask, “What, pray, are the tiles and stones of my walls and 
fences?” and you should also state what they are. And if you should enter into a 
colloquy with your Master about this question, the reply should be “The Mind of 
an Old Buddha.” In maintaining and depending on the Matter in this way, you 
should also thoroughly explore through your training with your Master just what 
your walls and fences are, what you acknowledge your walls and fences to be, and 
just what forms and stages they are taking now. The following questions also need 
to be thoroughly explored, and in detail. Do you produce your walls and fences by 
building them up, or do your walls and fences bring forth their own building up? 
Are they deliberately built up or not? Do you treat them as something sentient, or 
as something non-sentient? Do they manifest before your very eyes or not? When 
you make an effort to explore the Matter through training in this way, the Mind of 
the Old Buddha—whether It exists in the celestial worlds above or among 
humankind, or has manifested Itself in this land or in other lands—will be the tiles 
and stones of your walls and fences. Not a single mote of dust has ever yet stuck 
out its head to taint It. 


Great Master Zengen Chuko was once asked by a monk, “Just 
what is the mind of an old Buddha?” 

The Master responded, “His mind’s world has caved in.” 

The monk then asked, “Why has his mind’s world caved in?” 
The Master replied, “Would you prefer that I put the Matter as 
‘he no longer has a self of his own? ’ ” 11 


11. What this koan story and Dogen’s subsequent commentary point to is that becoming an Old 
Buddha means letting the ‘world’ that one’s intellect (lower case ‘mind’) has created 
collapse, which includes letting go of the notion of a separate, unchanging, permanent ‘self’, 



Shobogenzo: On What the Mind of an Old Buddha Is 


570 


As to the ‘world’ of which he spoke, the ten directions all together comprise the 
world of a Buddha. And there has never yet been a world devoid of Buddha. As to 
the form and stages of caving in, you should explore the whole of this world in all 
ten quarters. Do not study ‘the world’s caving in’ as being yourself, because in the 
course of training you do not explore it as your self. 12 

As to the very moment of your caving in, will you experience it as one thing 
or two things, or as three, four, or five things? It is inexhaustible things! Whatever 
these things may be, the Matter will be one that Zengen preferred to put as ‘not 
having a self of one’s own’. A ‘self’ is what an Old Buddha prefers not holding on 
to. Do not selfishly begrudge this very moment and fail to transform your own self 
into the Mind of an Old Buddha. 

Truly, prior to the Seven Buddhas, the Mind of the Old Buddha stood erect 
as a wall; after the Seven Buddhas, the Mind of the Old Buddha put forth sprouts. 
Prior to all the Buddhas, the Mind of the Old Buddha blossomed; after all the 
Buddhas, the Mind of the Old Buddha bore fruit. Prior to the Mind of the Old 
Buddha arising, ‘the mind of an old Buddha’ has dropped off. 

Delivered to the assembly on the twenty-ninth day of the fourth lunar month in the first year of 

13 

the Kangen era (May 19, 1243) at the Temple of the Six Paramitas. 

Copied by me on the twelfth day of the fifth lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era 
(June 18, 1244) in the office of the Abbot’s assistant in the hermitage below Kippo Peak. 

Ejo 


as one lets go of a sense of being separate from one’s Buddha Nature. In the story, the mo nk 
is apparently a novice who has not yet clarified the difference between mind (intellect) and 
Mind (one’s Buddha Nature) or between an old Buddha (a long-dead historical figure) and 
an Old Buddha (one who has realized Truth). 

12. That is, to explore it as your ‘self’ is simply a matter of the intellect exploring the concept of 
a self, a concept which the intellect has created in the first place. 

13. This temple is in Kyoto near the government office of one of Dogen’s chief supporters. 



46 

On the Four Exemplary Acts of a Bodhisattva 

(Bodaisatta Shis hobo) 

Translator’s Introduction: The four exemplary acts are also known as the four wisdoms: 
charity, tenderness, benevolence, and sympathy. 


The first is offering alms. 

The second is using kindly speech. 

The third is showing benevolence. 

The fourth is manifesting sympathy. 

Offering alms means not being covetous. Not being covetous means not being 
greedy. Not being greedy, to put it in worldly terms, includes not currying favors 
by groveling or flattery. If we want to bestow the Teaching of the Genuine Way, 
even if it were upon someone who rules over the four continents, we must do it 
without wanting anything in return. Offering alms, for example, is like bestowing 
upon strangers wealth that we freely part with. Were we to offer to the Tathagata 
flowers from a far-off mountain or give to some sentient being a treasure coming 
from a previous life—be it Dharma or something material—in either case, the act 
would be endowed with the merit that accords with the offering of alms. There is 
the principle that even though such things are not something that we personally 
own, it does not hinder our offering them as alms. 1 And the humbleness of such 
offerings is not to be despised, for it is the sincerity of these meritorious deeds that 
counts. 

When we leave the Way to the Way, we realize the Way. When we realize the 
Way, the Way will invariably continue to be left to the Way. When treasures are left 
to being treasures, such treasures will invariably end up as alms offerings. We 
bestow ‘self’ on ourselves, and we bestow ‘other’ on others. The influence of this 
offering of alms not only penetrates far into the realms of those in lofty positions 
and of those who are ordinary people, but also permeates the realms of the wise 


1. This refers to the giving of something that does not have any owner, such as the Dharma, or 
the grains of sand on a beach which a child once offered. These types of offering are beyond 
the concept of ‘ownership’. 


571 



Shobogenzo: On the Four Exemplary Acts of a Bodhisattva 


572 


and the saintly. This is because when people have become capable of accepting an 
offering of alms, they have therefore already formed a link with the donor. 

The Buddha once remarked, “When a donor comes into a monastic 
assembly, others admire that person right from the start. You should realize that 
they have tacitly understood the heart of that person.” As a consequence, should 
we offer only one sentence or one verse of the Dharma as alms, it will become a 
good seed in this life and in future lives. Should we offer the gift of even a single 
coin or a single blade of grass as alms, it will sprout good roots in this generation 
and in future generations. Dharma can be wealth and wealth can be Dharma— 
which it is depends on our wish and our pleasure. 

Truly, bestowing one’s beard on another once put someone’s mind in order, 
and an offering of a few grains of sand once gained someone the rank of king. 2 
These people did not covet some reward, but simply shared what they had. 
Providing a ferry or building a bridge as an alms offering creates a way to the 
Other Shore. When we have learned well what the offering of alms means, then we 
can see that accepting oneself and letting go of oneself are both offerings of alms. 
Earning a living and doing productive work have never been anything other than 
an offering of alms. Leaving flowers to float upon the wind and leaving birds to 
sing in their season will also be meritorious training in almsgiving. Upon his 
deathbed, the great King Ashoka offered half of a mango to several hundred monks 
as alms. As persons who are capable of accepting alms, we need to explore well the 
principle that this great alms gift points to. Not only should we make physical 
efforts to give alms, but we should also not overlook opportunities to do so. Truly, 
because we have inherited the merit from having given alms in past lives, we have 
obtained the human body that we now have. “Even if you give alms to yourselves, 
there can be merit, and how much more so were you to give alms to your parents, 
spouse, or children!” As a consequence of this statement, I have realized that even 
giving to oneself is a part of almsgiving, and giving to one’s parents, spouse, or 
children will be almsgiving as well. Should we let go of a single dust mote of 
defiling passion as an alms offering, even though it is done for our own sake, we 
will feel a quiet, heartfelt gratitude because we will have had one of the 


2. During the T’ang dynasty, when an officer in the court of Emperor T’ai-tsung fell ill and 
needed the ashes from a beard for medicine, the emperor burnt his own beard and offered 
the ashes to the officer. Once when the Buddha was on an alms round, a child who was 
playing in the sand put a few grains in the Buddha’s alms bowl as an offering, and, due to 
this act, the child was later reborn as King Ashoka. 



Shobogenzo: On the Four Exemplary Acts of a Bodhisattva 


573 


meritorious deeds of Buddhas genuinely Transmitted to us, and because, for the 
first time, we will be practicing one of the methods of bodhisattvas.* 

What is truly hard to turn around is the heart and mind of sentient beings. By 
making one offering, we begin to turn their mental state around, after which we 
hope to keep turning it around until they realize the Way. From this beginning, we 
should by all means continue to assist them by making alms offerings. This is why 
the first of the Six Paramitas is the Almsgiving Paramita. The size of any mind is 
beyond measure: the size of any thing is also beyond measure. Be that as it may, 
there are times when the mind turns things around and there is also the practice of 
almsgiving, whereby things turn the mind around. 


Kindly speech means that when we encounter sentient beings, we first of all 
give rise to feelings of genuine affection for them and offer them words that 
express our pleasure in knowing them. To put it more broadly, we do not use 
language that is harsh or rude. Even in secular society there are respectful customs 
for asking others how they are; in Buddhism there is the Master’s phrase, “May 
you take good care of yourself,” and there is the disciple’s greeting, “I have been 
wondering how you’ve been doing.” To speak with a feeling of genuine affection 
for sentient beings, as if they were still new-bom babes, is what kindly speech is. 
We should praise those who have virtue and pity those who do not. 

Through our having fondness for kindly speech, kindly speech gradually 
increases. Thus, even kindly speech that goes unrecognized or unnoticed will still 
manifest itself right before us. While our present life persists, we should become 
fond of speaking kindly, so that we do not regress or turn away from it for 
generation after generation and for life after life. Kindly speech is the foundation 
for overcoming those who are angry and hostile, as well as for promoting harmony 
among others. When we hear kindly speech that is spoken directly to us, it 
brightens our countenance and delights our heart. When we hear of kind speech 
having been spoken about us in our absence, this makes a deep impression on our 
heart and our spirit. Keep in mind that kindly speech arises from a loving heart, 
and a loving heart makes compassion its seed. You should explore the idea that 


* See Glossary. 

3. A paramita is a practice that Buddhas and bodhisattvas employ to help sentient beings reach 
the Other Shore. The six are almsgiving, observance of the Precepts, patient forbearance, 
diligence, being well-seated in one’s meditation, and wise discernment. 



Shobogenzo: On the Four Exemplary Acts of a Bodhisattva 


574 


kindly speech can have the power to turn the very heavens around, and it is not 
merely a matter of praising someone’s abilities. 


Showing benevolence means working out skillful methods by which to 
benefit sentient beings, be they of high or low station. One may do this, for 
instance, by looking at someone’s future prospects, both immediate and far- 
ranging, and then practicing skillful means to help that person. Someone once took 
pity on a stricken turtle and another once tended to a sick sparrow. 4 Neither of 
these people was seeking a reward; they simply acted from a feeling of 
benevolence. 

Some people may foolishly think that if they were to put the welfare of 
others first, their own benefits would be reduced. This is not so. Benevolence is all- 
encompassing, universally benefiting both self and others. A person long ago 
bound up his hair three times during the course of his taking a single bath, and 
thrice spat out what he had in his mouth during the course of a single meal. And he 
did so solely from a heart that would benefit others. He was not reluctant to 
instruct his son to do so, if his son should encounter guests from a foreign land. 5 
So, we should act to benefit equally both those who are hostile and those who are 
friendly, and act for the benefit of both self and other alike. When we attain such an 
attitude of mind, our showing of benevolence will neither retreat nor turn away 
from anything, and this benevolence will be shown even towards grass and trees, 
wind and water. And, in all humility, we should engage ourselves in helping those 
who are given to foolishness. 


4. There is a classic Chinese story in which a man rescued a trapped turtle. As the turtle swam 
off, it looked back over its shoulder to its benefactor, as if to acknowledge its indebtedness. 
Later, the man rose to a high official position, and, when the seal of his office was cast, it 
miraculously appeared in the form of a turtle looking over its back. No matter how many 
times the seal was recast to remove the fonn, it would nevertheless reappear on the seal. 
Finally, the man realized that somehow the turtle had played a part in his having received his 
appointment, so he kept the strange seal out of gratitude. 

In another classic Chinese story, there was a boy who helped a sick sparrow recover and 
to whom the sparrow gave four silver rings as recompense, which ultimately led to the boy’s 
being appointed to three high government positions. 

5. A Chinese ruler once advised his son that if three guests were to come calling in succession 
while he was bathing, he should bind up his hair each time and go to greet them, and if three 
guests were to come calling in succession while he was dining, he should stop eating each 
time in order to greet them. 



Shobogenzo: On the Four Exemplary Acts of a Bodhisattva 


575 


djb 

Manifesting sympathy means not making differences, not treating yourself 
as different and not treating others as different. For instance, the Tathagata was a 
human being just like other human beings. From His being the same as those in the 
human world, we know that Fie must have been the same as those in any other 
world. When we really understand what manifesting sympathy means, we will see 
that self and other are one and the same. Music, poetry, and wine have been 
companions for ordinary people, companions for those in lofty positions, and 
companions for the hosts of celestial beings. And there is the principle that 
ordinary people have been companions for music, poetry, and wine. And music, 
poetry, and wine have been companions for music, poetry, and wine. And ordinary 
people have been companions for ordinary people. And those in lofty positions 
have been companions for those in lofty positions. And celestial beings have been 
companions for celestial beings. This is what studying ‘manifesting sympathy’ 
means. 

In particular, what the ‘manifesting’ in manifesting sympathy refers to is our 
ways of behaving, our everyday actions, and our attitudes of mind. In this 
manifesting, there will be the principle of letting people identify with us and of 
letting ourselves identify with others. Depending on the occasion, there are no 
boundaries between self and other. 

It says in the Kuan-tsu , 6 “A sea does not reject water, and therefore is able to 
bring about its vastness. A mountain does not reject soil, and therefore can bring 
about its height. An enlightened ruler does not despise ordinary people, and 
therefore can bring about a large populace.” You need to realize that a sea’s not 
rejecting water is its being in sympathy with water. Further, you need to realize that 
the water has the complete virtue of not refusing the sea. For that reason, it is 
possible for waters to come together and form a sea, and for earth to pile up and 
form a mountain. And you certainly know for yourself that because one sea does 
not reject another sea, it forms an ocean, which is something much bigger. And 
because one mountain does not reject another mountain, it forms a larger mountain, 
which is something much higher. And because an enlightened ruler does not 
despise ordinary people, he creates a large populace. A large populace means a 
nation. An enlightened ruler means an emperor. An emperor does not despise 
people. And even though he does not despise people, it does not mean that there 
are no rewards and punishments. And even though there are rewards and 


6. A multi-volumed Chinese Taoist work. 



Shobogenzo: On the Four Exemplary Acts of a Bodhisattva 


576 


punishments, they do not come about because he despises people. Long ago, when 
people were submissive, nations were without rewards or punishments—at least to 
the extent that rewards and punishments then were not the same as those of today. 
Even today, there may be people who seek the Way without expecting any reward, 
but this is beyond what foolish people concern themselves with. Because an 
enlightened ruler is clear-minded, he does not despise people. Although people 
invariably form nations and try to seek out an enlightened leader, nevertheless 
those who completely understand the principle of what makes an enlightened ruler 
‘enlightened’ are rare. As a result, even though they are happy enough about not 
being despised by an enlightened ruler, they do not comprehend that they mutually 
should not despise their enlightened ruler. As a consequence, there is the principle 
of manifesting sympathy which is for both enlightened rulers and unenlightened 
people. This is why bodhisattvas vow to practice manifesting sympathy. And to do 
so, they need but face all things with a gentle demeanor. 

Because each of these four exemplary acts completely encompasses all four 
exemplary acts, there will be, all told, sixteen exemplary acts. 

Written down on the day of the Tango Festival in the fourth year of the Ninji era (May 24, 1243). 

Written by the mendicant monk Dogen 
who entered Sung China and received 
the Transmission of the Dharma 



47 

On the Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace 

(Katto) 


Translator’s Introduction: The term ‘katto’ literally means ‘the kudzu and the wisteria’, and it 
refers to two vines that grow by wrapping themselves around, say, a tree or a post. While the 
tenn serves as a common metaphor in both secular and Buddhist writings with the negative 
connotation of ‘complications’, ‘difficulties’, and ‘that which we get entangled with’, Dogen 
extends its meaning in this discourse to describe, in a positive sense, the complex and 
complicated intertwining of the Master-disciple relationship. 


Shakyamuni Buddha, who experienced the great, unsurpassed 
enlightenment, passed on the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching only 
to Great Master Makakasho from amongst all of the assembly on the Divine 
Vulture Peak. Successor after successor experienced this genuine realization of the 
Truth, and It ultimately came down to the Venerable Bodhidharma in the twenty- 
eight generation. Following the example of the Ancestors, whilst Bodhidharma was 
in China he passed on the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching to our 
Great Ancestor Eka, the fully awakened Great Master of the genuine lineage, 
thereby making him the Second Chinese Ancestor. The Twenty-eighth Ancestor, 
who was the first in China to act in accord with the behavior of the Ancestors, is 
called the First Chinese Ancestor, whereas Eka, as the Ancestor of the twenty-ninth 
generation, is called the Second Chinese Ancestor, as is the custom in the lands 
east of India. 

After Bodhidharma had spiritually awakened, he received the Transmission 
of the very Marrow of the Buddha’s instructions from the Venerable Hannyatara. 
Bodhidharma subsequently came to recognize the roots of his delusions because of 
these very roots, which he had previously used as the foundation for the 
proliferation of his delusions. 

Generally speaking, the saintly all devise some method of training whereby 
they sever the roots of whatever vines are entangling them. But they might not 
explore how to cut off entangling vines by using the very vines themselves, for 
they may not have used these embracing vines as the means to understand their 
being entangled. So how could they possibly understand the inheriting of vines and 
the succession of vines by means of these embracing vines? It is rare for any to 


577 



Shobogenzo: On the Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace 


578 


recognize that the inheritance of the Dharma is synonymous with embracing vines, 
and, since none of them have heard about it, none have yet expressed it this way. 
Surely, there could not possibly be many who have experienced it! 

My former Master, an Old Buddha, once said, “The vines of the bottle gourd 
embrace the bottle gourd itself.” This teaching that he gave to his assembly is 
something that had never been encountered or heard of anywhere in the past or 
present. The vines of the bottle gourd intertwining with the vines of the bottle 
gourd is the Buddhas and Ancestors thoroughly exploring what Buddhas and 
Ancestors are. It is the Buddhas and Ancestors realizing that there is no difference 
between the awakening of a Buddha and the awakening of an Ancestor. It has been 
referred to as the direct Transmission of the Dharma from Mind to Mind. 


In speaking to his disciples, our Twenty-eighth Ancestor 
Bodhidharma said, “It seems that my time is near at hand, so why 
don’t you express what you have realized?” 

His disciple Dofuku then said, “As I now see things, I am not 
attached to words nor have I given up words. I just make use of 
them.” 

The Ancestor replied, “You have realized what my Skin is.” 

The female monk Soji said, “As I now understand things, it is 
like Ananda’s catching sight of Akshobya’s Buddha Land. Once seen, 
it is not seen again.” 

The Ancestor replied, “You have realized what my Flesh is.” 

Doiku said, “The four elements,* from the first, are empty of 
any permanent self-nature, and the five skandhas* lack permanent 
existence. So, from my perspective, there is not one single thing to be 
realized.” 

The Ancestor replied, “You have realized what my Bones are.” 

Finally, Eka respectfully made three prostrations before the 
Ancestor and then silently stood in his place. 

The Ancestor said, “You have realized what my Marrow is.” As 
might be expected, he made Eka the Second Chinese Ancestor, 
Transmitting to him the Dharma and the kesa.* 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace 


579 


What you need to explore through your training is that our First Chinese 
Ancestor’s statement, “You have realized my Skin, Flesh, Bones, and Marrow,” is 
what the Ancestor said. Each of his four disciples, respectively, expressed what 
they had realized; each demonstrated what they had learned. What they all had 
realized is the Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow which sprang forth from their 
own body and mind. It is the Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow of ‘dropping off 
body and mind’. This is beyond anything that someone can gather from an 
Ancestral Master by means of intellectual understanding based on observation, 
which is simply comparable to one move in a game of Go. Likewise, it is not 
something that fully manifests before one’s eyes as subject and object, or as this 
and that. At the same time, folks who have not experienced the genuine 
Transmission fancy that there were relative degrees of intimacy in what each of the 
four disciples comprehended, so that what the Ancestor was saying was that skin, 
flesh, bones, and marrow are not the same in their profundity. They think that skin 
and flesh are coarser than bones and marrow, and they say that the discerning 
thought of the Second Ancestor had surpassed that of the others, so that he alone 
obtained the certification of knowing what the marrow was. Those who talk like 
this have still not explored through their training what the Buddhas and Ancestors 
are, nor have they experienced the genuine Transmission of which the Ancestors 
speak. 

You need to recognize that the Skin, Flesh, Bones, and Marrow of which the 
Ancestor spoke are beyond being characterized as shallow or deep. Even though 
people’s intellectual abilities may be superior or inferior, what the Ancestor said is 
simply a matter of the disciple’s having realized ‘what I truly am’. The 
fundamental principle here is that, in his saying to one disciple “You have realized 
what my Marrow is” while saying to another “You have realized what my Bones 
are,” these statements are both beyond a matter of adequacy or inadequacy when it 
comes to giving spiritual guidance to people, or when ‘pulling up one’s weeds and 
then letting go of them’. For instance, it is like the Buddha’s raising the flower or 
passing on His kesa . 1 What was uttered for the sake of the four disciples was, to 
begin with, essentially one and the same thing. And even though what the Ancestor 
said to each was essentially one and the same thing, this does not necessarily mean 
that their four understandings were essentially one and the same. Even though their 


1. The first reference is to the Transmission of Makakasho, wherein the Buddha raised a flower 
and Makakasho, realizing the deeper meaning behind the gesture, broke into a smile, which 
set the Buddha’s eyes to twinkling in recognition. The second reference is to the Buddha’s 
passing on His kesa to Makakasho when confirming him as His Dhanna heir. 



Shobogenzo: On the Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace 


580 


four understandings were individually distinct, what the Ancestor said is simply 
what the Ancestor said. 

Generally speaking, what is said and what is understood may not necessarily 
be identical. For instance, in expressing the Matter* to his four disciples, the 
Ancestral Master was asserting, “You have realized me as ‘Me in the flesh.’” Even 
if there were a hundred thousand disciples after the Second Ancestor, there would 
be a hundred thousand ways of stating It, for the ways are inexhaustible. Since 
there were only four disciples to hear what he said, there were, for the moment, 
just the four expressions of ‘Skin’, ‘Flesh’, ‘Bones’, and ‘Marrow’, but there 
remain ways that were not yet expressed, for there are many ways to express the 
Matter. 

You need to realize that even though Bodhidharma expressed the Dharma in 
the way he did for the sake of the Second Ancestor, he could also have expressed It 
as “You have realized what my Skin is.” Even if he had said to Eka, “You have 
realized what my Skin is,” the First Ancestor would have been Transmitting the 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching to him as the Second Ancestor, 
since ‘realizing what the Skin is’ and ‘realizing what the Marrow is’ are not based 
on either being superior or inferior. 

Also, in expressing the Dharma in the way he did for the sake of Dofuku, 
Doiku, Soji, or anyone else, he could have stated, “You have realized what my 
Marrow is.” Even though he may say ‘what my Skin is’ to them, he will still be 
Transmitting the Teaching to them. The Body and Mind of the Ancestral Master is 
the Ancestral Master along with his skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. This is beyond 
considering the marrow to be an intimate part of him while viewing the skin as 
something distant from him. 

Now, when someone who has an eye for exploring the Matter through 
training with a Master receives the certification of “You have realized what my 
Skin is,” it is the result of that person’s taking their training to the utmost, which 
‘gets’ him or her the Ancestral Master. There are Ancestral Masters whose whole 
being is Skin, and Ancestral Masters whose whole being is Flesh, and Ancestral 
Masters whose whole being is Bones, and Ancestral Masters whose whole being is 
Marrow. And there are Ancestral Masters whose whole being is Mind, and 
Ancestral Masters whose whole being is Body, and Ancestral Masters whose whole 
mind is Mind, and Ancestral Masters who are Ancestral Masters through and 
through, and Ancestral Masters whose whole being ‘has realized my You’, and so 



Shobogenzo: On the Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace 


581 


on.“ If there were a time when these Ancestral Masters appeared simultaneously 
and expressed the Dharma for the sake of a hundred thousand disciples, they might 
voice It as “You have realized my Skin.” Even if their hundred thousand ways of 
voicing It were ‘Skin, Flesh, Bones, and Marrow’, bystanders and onlookers will 
vainly assume that these Masters are literally talking about skin, flesh, bones, and 
marrow. If an Ancestral Master were to have six or seven disciples within his 
assembly, he might employ some expression such as “You have realized what my 
Mind is” or “You have realized what my Body is.” Or he might employ an 
expression like “You have realized what my Buddha Dharma is,” or “You have 
realized what my Eye is,” or “You have realized what my realization is.” There are 
times when this so-called ‘you’ is the Ancestor and times when it is Eka. 
Thoroughly explore in detail the principle underlying the words ‘you have 
realized’. 

You need to realize that there will be a ‘you having realized Me’, and a ‘me 
having realized You’, and a ‘realizing me being You’, and a ‘realizing you being 
Me’. In delving into the Body and Mind of the Ancestral Master, if you say that 
what lies within him and what lies outside him cannot be all of a oneness or that 
his whole Body cannot be his whole being, you are not in the land where Buddhas 
and Ancestors manifest. To have realized what the Skin is means to have realized 
what Bones, Flesh, and Marrow are. To have realized what Bones, Flesh, and 
Marrow are is to have realized what Skin, Flesh, and Countenance are. How could 
such a state as this be anything other than an understanding, as clear as a full 
dawning, of Master Chosa Keishin’s saying, “The whole universe in all directions 
is our Real, True Body?” Moreover, It is skin and flesh, bones and marrow. 
Consequently, It is ‘realizing what my kesa is’ and ‘your having realized what the 
Dharma is’. Accordingly, even saying the words is a series of instances of 
‘springing out from delusion’: Master and disciple harmonize and are equal. Even 
hearing the words is a series of instances of ‘springing out from delusion’: Master 
and disciple harmonize and are equal. The thorough harmonizing and equalizing of 
Master and disciple is the complicated, embracing kudzu and wisteria vines of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. Shakyamuni’s raising aloft the flower, His eyes atwinkle, 
is none other than the vines of kudzu and wisteria: Makakasho’s breaking out into 
a smile is none other than Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow. 


2. The phrase ‘has realized my You’ expresses the oneness of Master and disciple from the 
perspective of the Master, just as “you have realized what my Skin is” expresses it from the 
perspective of the disciple towards the Master. Both expressions refer to the transcendence 
of‘self and other’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace 


582 


Moreover, you should thoroughly explore through your training that, just as 
the offspring of entangling vines have the capacity to drop off self, so also do 
branches and leaves, flowers and fruit appear, which all follow along with kudzu 
and wisteria vines. And because the offspring may be seen as dependent and, at the 
same time, independent of the vines, Buddhas and Ancestors manifest and our 
spiritual question appears before our very eyes. 


Great Master Joshu Shinsai, in instructing his assembly, once 
said, “Makakasho gave the Transmission to Ananda. Right now, say 
to what person did Bodhidharma give the Transmission?” 

Thereupon, a monk asked him, “Well, what about the Second 
Ancestor, didn’t he get the marrow?” 

The Master replied, “Do not engage in slandering the Second 
Ancestor.” 

The Master said further, “Remember what Bodhidharma also 
said, that someone who is located on the outside realizes what the 
Skin is, whereas someone who is located on the inside realizes what 
the Bones are. Right now, say what someone who is located even 
further within realizes!” 

A monk asked, “What is this ‘realizing what the marrow is’ 
really about anyway?” 

The Master replied, “Just keep your focus on the Skin. For an 
old monk like me, the question of marrow doesn’t even arise.” 

The monk asked, “But what is the marrow?” 

The Master replied, “If that’s the way things are for you, then 
you’re still groping about for the Skin.” 

Accordingly, keep in mind that when you are still groping about for the Skin, you 
are still groping about for the Marrow, and in realizing what the Skin is through 
your groping, you also realize what the Marrow is. You should work diligently on 
the principle of “If that’s the way things are for you, then you’re still groping about 
for the Skin.” In the monk’s skeptically asking, “What is this ‘realizing what the 
marrow is’ really about anyway?” there emerged Joshu’s response of “Just keep 
your focus on the Skin. For an old monk like me, the question of marrow doesn’t 
even arise.” When someone focuses on the Skin, the marrow’s not even coming up 
is what ‘having realized what the Marrow is’ really is. The doubting question of, 
“What about the Second Ancestor, didn’t he realize what the marrow is?” arose 
because the monk was not focusing on the Skin. When we simply look at the 



Shobogenzo: On the Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace 


583 


occasion when Makakasho gave the Transmission to Ananda, it involved Ananda 
‘concealing His Body’ in Makakasho and Makakasho ‘concealing His Body’ in 
Ananda. Even so, at the time when the two ‘see’ each other within the giving of 
Transmission, they do not escape from their everyday behavior, which alters their 
countenance and their skin, flesh, bones, and marrow. This is why Joshu made the 
remark, “Right now, say It! Bodhidharma gave the Transmission to a person of 
What !” 3 4 At the time when Bodhidharma gave the Transmission, he was 
Bodhidharma, and when the Second Chinese Ancestor realized the Marrow, he was 
Bodhidharma. As we thoroughly explore this principle, we see that the Buddha 
Dharma, right up to this very day, is still the Buddha Dharma. If this were not so, 
the Buddha Dharma would not have come down to us today. Through exploring 
this principle carefully and diligently, we should learn how to express it ourselves 
and we should teach others how to express it. 

Joshu also said that Bodhidharma remarked, “Someone who is located on 
the outside realizes what the Skin is, whereas someone who is located on the inside 
realizes what the Bones are. Right now, say what someone who is located even 
further within realizes!” The essential meaning of the ‘outside’ and ‘inside’ spoken 
of here is extremely straightforward. When we discuss ‘outside’, then Skin and 
Flesh, Bones and Marrow have their outside: when we discuss ‘inside’, then Skin 
and Flesh, Bones and Marrow have their inside. Accordingly, his four disciple 
Bodhidharmas, all together, had thoroughly explored, instance by instance, 
hundreds of thousands of myriad spiritually awakened states of Skin, Flesh, Bones, 
and Marrow. Do not imagine that there cannot be states above and beyond that of 
Marrow, for there are three or maybe even five states above and beyond that. 

The Old Buddha Joshu was pointing out to his assembly just precisely what 
the Way of the Buddha is. This is beyond what others like Rinzai, Tokusan, Isan, 
and Ummon attained. It is something that they had never even dreamt of, much 
less expressed. It is something that present-day monastic ‘old-timers’ who are 
given to wild talk do not know even exists, and if we were to explain it to them, 
they would be startled and grow fearful. 


3. ‘To conceal His Body in someone else’ is a Zen Buddhist expression for someone’s 
recognizing the Buddhahood of another. 

4. Joshu’s remark contains a play on words often found in Zen koan stories. The phrase jumo 
no hito, rendered earlier in its conventional meaning as ‘what person’ (thus making Joshu’s 
remark a question), is understood in a Zen context as ‘a person of What’, that is, a person 
whose state is beyond the ability of words to convey. This latter meaning changes Joshu’s 
remark into an assertion for his disciple to respond to. 



Shobogenzo: On the Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace 


584 


Meditation Master Setcho Juken once said, “The two Masters—Joshu and 
Bokushu—are examples of what it means to be an Old Buddha.” Accordingly, the 
words of Old Buddhas are Their awakened experience of Buddha Dharma and 
Their own personal ways of putting the Matter which They uttered in the past. 
Great Master Seppo Shinkaku once exclaimed, “Joshu, the Old Buddha!” A 
previous Ancestor of the Buddha also praised Joshu by eulogizing him as an Old 
Buddha, and a later Ancestor of the Buddha eulogized him as an Old Buddha as 
well. Obviously, they are saying that he is an Old Buddha who has gone beyond 
any spiritually awakened state attained by others of the past or present. 

Consequently, the fundamental principle is that Skin and Flesh, Bones and 
Marrow embrace us like the vines of kudzu and wisteria. This is the standard of the 
statement “You have realized what I truly am,” which Old Buddhas point out to 
Their assembly. Explore this criterion thoroughly and diligently. 

Also, some say that the First Ancestor returned to the West, but through our 
training we learn that is inaccurate. Undoubtedly, what the monk Soun saw could 
not have been literally real . 5 How could Soun possibly have encountered the 
goings and comings of the Ancestral Master? Simply take as the correct study that 
after the parinirvana of the First Chinese Ancestor, his ashes were consigned to 
Bear’s Ear Mountain. 

Delivered to the assembly on the seventh day of the seventh lunar month in the first year of the 
Kangen era (July 25, 1243) at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple, Uji Prefecture, 
Yamashiro Province. 

Copied by me on the third day of the third lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era 
(April 11, 1244) in the office of the Abbot’s chief assistant at Kippo-ji Temple, Yoshida 
Prefecture, Echizen Province. 

Ejo 


5. The monk Soun, upon his return to China from an imperially supported visit to India for the 
purpose of collecting Buddhist writings, claimed to have met Bodhidharma upon the Silk 
Road. This event occurred three years after Bodhidhanna’s death. Crown Prince Shotoku 
spoke of a similar encounter with Bodhidharma in Japan. These encounters may have 
occurred in some sense other than a literal one. 



48 

On ‘The Threefold World Is Simply Your Mind’ 

(Sangai Yuishin) 


Translator’s Introduction: The title of this discourse comes from the first line of a verse 
passage in the Avatamsaka Scripture, which Dogen takes as his theme. The threefold world is 
comprised of three spiritual states, the names of which are often rendered in English translations 
as those of desire, form, and beyond form. The world of desire is associated with the six worlds 
of existence: human, hellish, animal, hungry ghost, fighting spirits, plus the six lowest of the 
celestial realms. The world of form is associated with four higher celestial realms in which carnal 
appetites have dropped off. The world beyond form is associated with the four uppermost 
celestial realms wherein there is only the enjoyment of meditative states. The main theme of this 
discourse is that these three ‘worlds’, all together, comprise the whole of existence, with nothing 
beyond them, and that they are all constructs of our own mind. 


Our Great Master Shakyamuni once said in verse: 

The threefold world is simply our one, whole Mind, 

For there is nothing apart from the Mind. 

Our mind, Buddha, and all sentient beings — 

These three are indistinguishable from each other. 

What He expressed in this single verse is the whole effort of His lifetime, and this 
whole effort of His lifetime was the whole of all His efforts. While these efforts 
were actions that were done deliberately, they must have been actions that were the 
free functioning of His words and deeds. Therefore the statement, “The three 
worlds are simply our one, whole Mind,” which the Tathagata voiced, is the full 
manifestation of the whole Tathagata, and the whole of His lifetime is the whole of 
this one verse. The three worlds constitute our whole world and, at the same time, 
we do not say that the three worlds are what our mind is. That is why the three 
worlds are still a threefold world however much they may resemble the brilliance 
of a crystal jewel which pervades all directions . 1 


1. This particular reference to a jewel-like brilliance occurs in Zen texts to describe the 
penetrating brilliance and clarity of the original state of one’s mind. 


585 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Threefold World Is Simply Your Mind ’ 


586 


Although some may make the mistake of thinking that the mind is beyond 
the three worlds, this is totally impossible. The spaces of inside, outside, and in 
between, as well as the times of beginning, middle, and end—all are encompassed 
by the threefold world. The threefold world is just what is seen as the threefold 
world. And what is viewed as something beyond the threefold world is a 
misperception of the threefold world. The threefold world is viewed by some as 
‘an old nesting place’ whereas others may see it as ‘a new item ’. 2 3 ‘Old nests’ and 
‘new items’ are but different views of the same threefold world. This is why our 
Great Master Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “It is best to see the threefold world 
as the threefold world.” What is looked at in this way is what the threefold world 
really is, and this threefold world is just as we perceive it to be. The threefold 
world is not one’s fundamental being, nor is it our present existence, nor is it 
something that newly arises, nor is it something bom from causes and conditions, 
and it is beyond anything that has a beginning, a middle, or an end. There is the 
threefold world that is left behind and there is the threefold world of the here and 
now. This is the mutual meeting of a marionette with a marionette. It is the 
bringing forth and nurturing of kudzu and wisteria vines . 4 The threefold world of 
the here and now is what we see as the threefold world. ‘What we see’ means our 
seeing the threefold world as a threefold world. ‘Seeing it as a threefold world’ 
refers to the threefold world as it manifests right before us, as we manifest it right 
before us, and as our spiritual question manifests right before our very eyes. We all 
innately have the ability to make the threefold world be the vehicle for the arising 
of our spiritual intention, our practice and training, our realizing enlightenment, 
and our experiencing nirvana. This is why our Great Master Shakyamuni once said 
in verse: 

These three worlds, right now, 

Are what we all innately have, 

And all sentient beings within them, 

Without exception, are My children. 


2. ‘An old nesting place’ is a common Zen metaphor for a habitual, erroneous viewpoint, 
whereas ‘a new item’ refers to seeing things anew with enlightened eyes. 

3. A marionette, or wooden figure, is sometimes used metaphorically in Zen texts to refer to 
someone who has awakened to his True Nature and is no longer ‘pulling the strings’. 

4. ‘Kudzu and wisteria vines’ here refers to the Master-disciple relationship. Dogen explores 
this metaphor in Discourse 47: On the Vines That Entangle: the Vines That Embrace ( Katto). 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Threefold World Is Simply Your Mind ’ 


587 


Because these three worlds here and now are what the Tathagata innately 
had, the whole universe was His threefold world, because the threefold world is the 
whole universe. ‘Here and now’ encompasses the past, present, and future. The 
occurring of past, present, and future does not obstruct the here and now, but the 
occurring of the here and now does obstruct past, present, and future from arising. 

That which ‘we innately have’ refers to the whole universe in all ten 
directions being our real, true Body. It refers to the whole universe in all ten 
directions being a mendicant monk’s Eye. ‘Sentient beings’ are real, true bodies of 
the whole universe in all ten directions. Because each and every sentient being is 
bom sentient, they are called ‘sentient beings’. 

‘Without exception, they are My children’ means that children are also 
manifestations of the ceaseless operation of Buddha Nature. Even so, of necessity, 
children receive their bodies, along with their hair and skin, all unharmed and 
unbroken, from a compassionate parent. Parents regard this as the child’s fully 
manifesting. Yet, at this present moment, since there is no parent who is before and 
no child who is after, nor a child who is before and a parent who is after, nor a 
parent and child being lined up beside each other, we call this the principle of ‘My 
children’. Although the body is not something that is given, we receive it; although 
it is not something that we snatch, we acquire it. It is beyond the characteristics of 
coming and going, beyond the measure of large and small, beyond discussions of 
old and young. We should hold to it like the ‘old’ and ‘young’ of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors. Sometimes there is a parent who is ‘young’ and a child who is ‘old’, or 
a parent who is ‘old’ and a child who is ‘young’, or a parent who is ‘old’ and a 
child who is ‘old’, or a parent who is ‘young’ and a child who is ‘young’. One who 
makes a study of his parent’s ‘agedness’ would not be a child; one who has not 
seen through the ‘youthfulness’ of his child would not be a parent. The ‘age’ and 
‘youth’ of a child, as well as the ‘age’ and ‘youth’ of a parent, must be fully 
explored, in detail, and without haste. 

There are parents and children for whom the parent-child relationship 
emerges at the same time, and there are those for whom the parent-child 
relationship disappears at the same time, and there are those for whom the parent- 
child relationship emerges at different times, and there are those for whom the 
parent-child relationship disappears at different times. Without standing against the 
compassionate parent, one has brought forth ‘my child’, and without standing 
against ‘my child’, one has brought forth the compassionate parent. There are 
sentient beings who are mindful, and there are sentient beings who are not mindful; 
there is my child who is mindful, and there is my child who is not mindful. In this 
manner, my child and I —and I am also a child—are both the true heirs of our 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Threefold World Is Simply Your Mind ’ 


588 


Compassionate Parent Shakyamuni. All beings of the past, present, and future in 
the whole universe—every last one of them—are the Buddhas of past, present, and 
future in the whole universe. The children of all Buddhas are sentient beings, and 
the Compassionate Parents of all sentient beings are Buddhas. Consequently, the 
flowering and fruiting of the hundreds of things that arise are what all Buddhas 
have as Their own, and the rocks and stones, large and small, are what all Buddhas 
have as Their own as well. Their peaceful places are the forests and fields, for 
They are already free of attachment to forests and fields. Be that as it may, the 
main point of what the Tathagata said was simply the phrase ‘My children’. You 
need to thoroughly explore that He never spoke of His being their parent. 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said: 

Even the three Bodies of all Buddhas do not extend beyond the 
threefold world. ? Since no sentient being exists outside the threefold 
world, why would there be some other place where the Buddha would 
transform Himself for their sake? Therefore, I say that the assertion 
that there is another world of sentient beings outside of the threefold 
world is a teaching from the non-Buddhist Scripture on the Greater 
Existence, and it is not what has been voiced by the Seven Buddhas.* 

You should clarify through your thorough exploration with your Master that the 
three Bodies of all Buddhas are these three worlds. Nothing exists outside of these 
three worlds. For example, just as nothing exists outside the Tathagata, so too 
nothing exists outside of our walls and fences. And just as nothing exists outside of 
training, so too nothing exists outside of being a sentient being. Were there no 
sentient beings, who is it that could be converted by a Buddha? What is being 
converted by a Buddha is always a sentient being. Keep in mind that the saying, 
“Outside the threefold world, there is another world of sentient beings,” is a 
product of the non-Buddhist Scripture on the Greater Existence. 


5 These three Bodies of the Buddha (Skt. Trikaya ) are: 1) The Truth Body (Skt. Dharmakaya), 

which represents Absolute Truth or Buddha Mind Itself. 2) The Reward Body (Skt. 
Sambhogakaya), which represents the blissful reward of Buddhist training. 3) The 
Transformation Body (Skt. Nirmanakaya), which is the physical body of the Buddha as It 
appears in the world. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Threefold World Is Simply Your Mind ’ 


589 


The one, whole Mind is beyond being just one or two things. It is beyond the 
threefold world and beyond departing from the threefold world. It is beyond 
‘making mistakes’. It has the knowledge obtained from one’s discriminating and It 
is not bound by that knowledge. It is the tiles* and stones of our walls and fences 
and It is the great earth with its mountains and rivers. Mind is synonymous with 
Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow; Mind is synonymous with holding the flower 
aloft and breaking into a smile . 6 There is the mind of attachment and the mind free 
from attachments. There is the embodied mind and there is the Mind beyond body. 
There is the mind that comes before the body, and there is the mind that comes 
after the body. When a body is bom, it will be from a womb, from an egg, from 
moisture, or from some transformation. When a mind emerges, it will be from a 
womb, from an egg, from moisture, or from some transformation. Blue, yellow, 
red, and white are what the Mind is. Long and short, square and round are what the 
Mind is. Birth and death, coming and going, are what the Mind is. Years, months, 
days, and hours are what the Mind is. Dreams, visions, and flowers in the sky are 
what the Mind is. Water bubbles, foam, and flame are what the Mind is. The spring 
flowers and the autumn moon are what the Mind is. Our day-to-day moments are 
what the Mind is. Even so, It cannot be destroyed. For this reason, the Mind is the 
real appearance of all thoughts and things. The Mind is each Buddha on His own, 
along with all other Buddhas. 

djb 

CX) 


Great Master Gensha Shibi once asked his disciple Jizo 
Keichin, “Just how do you understand the saying ‘The threefold world 
is simply your mind? ’ ” 

Pointing to a chair, Keichin said, “When naming that thing, 
Venerable Monk, what do you take it to be?” 

The Great Master said, “A chair.” 

Keichin then said, “Venerable Monk, you do not understand 

• i 7 

‘The threefold world is simply your mind.’” 


6 This is a reference to the Transmission of the Dhanna from Shakyamuni Buddha, who held 
aloft an udumbara blossom, to his smiling disciple Makakasho. 

7. Despite this remark’s implication that the Master is lacking in some way, it actually has a 
positive meaning, namely, that the Master’s understanding goes beyond a merely intellectual 


one. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Threefold World Is Simply Your Mind ’ 


590 


The Great Master replied, “When giving a name to that thing, I 
see it as bamboo and wood. When you name it, what do you take it to 
be?” 

Keichin responded, “When I name it, I also take it to be 
bamboo and wood.” 

The Great Master then said, “Were we to search the whole of 
the great earth for somebody who understood Buddha Dharma, we 
would not be able to find a single one .” 8 

Now, let us look at the Great Master’s question, “Just how do you understand the 
saying ‘The threefold world is simply your mind?’” Whether one has a way of 
understanding this saying or not, both states are synonymous with the threefold 
world being simply one’s own mind. This is why the threefold world may not yet 
be ‘simply one’s mind ’. 9 And this is why Keichin pointed to a chair and said, 
“When naming that thing, Venerable Monk, what do you take it to be?” You need 
to understand that “What do you take it to be?” means “How do you go about 
naming it?” 

As to the ‘chair’ that the Great Master spoke of, we should also add, “Did he 
understand the term ‘the threefold world’ or not?” and “Is the chair synonymous 
with the term ‘the threefold world’ or does it go beyond it?” and “Was the term 
‘the threefold world’ referring to the word ‘chair’ or to what the Great Master 
said?” You need to thoroughly investigate expressions like this so that you may 
learn to express the Matter yourself. By asking questions like this, you come to 
your own understanding of the Matter. And by investigating the experience of 
others, you can come to have your own experience of the Truth. 

Keichin then said, “Venerable Monk, you do not understand 
‘The threefold world is simply your mind.’” 


8. One of the ways by which a Chinese Zen Master would test the spiritual level of a disciple 
was by asking him or her, “How do you understand such-and-such a saying?” It is evident 
from the context that the discussion centers on the principle of the difference and non- 
difference between component parts, such as bamboo and wood pieces (one’s ‘tiles and 
stones’), and the ordering of those pieces to form a functionally useful object, such as a chair 
(one’s ‘walls and fences’). Dogen, apparently deliberately, does not say how this particular 
koan story is to be understood, but s leaves the reader to decide how he or she would 
respond to Shibi’s question. 

9. That is, because one may not yet understand that the threefold world is simply one’s mind, 
such a person will not recognize that this is so. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Threefold World Is Simply Your Mind ’ 


591 


This statement is, for example, equivalent to ‘the East Gate and the South Gate’ 
whereby Joshu expressed what a Joshu is—and he was also the West Gate and the 
North Gate. And furthermore there is an East Joshu district and a South Joshu 
district in China . 10 Even if you have an understanding of what ‘the threefold world 
is simply your mind’ means, you need to thoroughly explore what Keichin meant 
by his statement, “You do not understand ‘The threefold world is simply your 
mind.’” Moreover, the statement that “The ‘threefold world is simply your mind”’ 
goes beyond ‘understanding’ and ‘not understanding’. 

The Great Master replied, “When giving a name to that thing, I 
see it as bamboo and wood.” 

We certainly need to shed light upon the details of this most excellent expression, 
which goes beyond any discriminative concept. As to the Great Master’s statement, 
“When giving a name to that thing, I see it as be bamboo and wood,” what did he 
call it prior to his naming it as bamboo and wood in the present instance? In its 
jewel-like brilliance up to that moment, had it always been—beginning, middle, 
and end—bamboo and wood? In his calling it bamboo and wood at this time, is he 
saying that this is synonymous with the threefold world simply being one’s mind? 
Or is he not saying that this is synonymous with the threefold world simply being 
one’s mind? Keep in mind that, in his saying of a morning that the threefold world 
is simply one’s mind, he may express it as ‘a chair’, or as ‘simply the mind’, or as 
‘the threefold world’. Even so, in his saying of an evening that the threefold world 
is simply one’s mind, he may express it as, “When giving a name to that thing, I 
see it as bamboo and wood.” 

You need to recognize that Keichin’s saying “When I name it, I also take it 
to be bamboo and wood” may be part of a face-to-face interchange between Master 
and disciple, and then again it may be that they are both right from start to finish in 
exploring the Matter together. Be that as it may, you need to thoroughly explore 
through your training whether the Great Master’s saying, “When giving a name to 
that thing, I see it as bamboo and wood,” and Keichin’s saying, “When I name it, I 
also take it to be bamboo and wood,” are actually both saying the same thing and 
whether or not they are both correct. 

The Great Master then said, “Were we to search the whole of 
the great earth for somebody who understood Buddha Dharma, we 
would not be able to find a single one.” 


10. In other words, the name that we give to something is relative, not absolute. Thus, the East 
Joshu district is east in relationship to the South Joshu district, and vice versa. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Threefold World Is Simply Your Mind ’ 


592 


This expression also needs the closest scrutiny. Keep in mind that the Great 
Master, in naming it, simply took it to be bamboo and wood, as Keichin did also. 
Further, they had not understood “The threefold world is simply one’s mind,” nor 
had they failed to understand “The threefold world is simply one’s mind,” nor had 
they asserted that the threefold world is simply one’s mind, nor had they failed to 
assert that the threefold world is simply one’s mind. Even so, I should like to ask 
Great Master Shibi, “You assert that, were we to search the whole of the great 
earth for somebody who understood Buddha Dharma, we would not be able to find 
a single person, but see if you can answer me this: what do you take ‘the whole 
earth’ to be?” In sum, we need to thoroughly explore the Matter* in this way. 

Given to the assembly on the first day of the seventh intercalary lunar month in the first year of 
the Kangen era (August 17, 1243) on Yamashi Peak in Echizen Province. 

Copied by me on the twenty-fifth day of the same month and year (September 10, 1243) whilst in 
the quarters of the acting Head Monk. 

Ejo 


11. In the Chinese and Japanese lunar calendar, there are twelve months of either twenty-eight 
or thirty days. Since this creates a discrepancy with the 365-day solar calendar, every two or 
three years a thirteenth lunar month is inserted (intercalated) in the calendar at some point. 
In the present instance, it was inserted between the seventh and eighth lunar months. This is 
technically known as an intercalary lunar month. An analogy can be found with our inserting 
the day of February 29 every four years to even out the annual solar calendar, and that day is 
technically called an intercalary day. 



49 

On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 

(Shoho Jisso) 


Translator’s Introduction: The title of this discourse implies that how we perceive things to be 
may not actually be their real form. In such contexts the term ‘form’ means ‘the way things 
appear to us, how they look, and the form they take’. Also, the phrase ‘each and every Buddha’ is 
saying that everyone who has realized Buddhahood is unique in regards to the way in which 
They have fully and directly realized the Truth, and, at the same time, They are exactly like all 
other Buddhas as to what It is that They have realized. Because what is real is That Which is 
Real, wherever the term ‘real form’ occurs, it implies that all thoughts and things are inseparable 
from their True Nature. Hence, where Dogen refers to ‘real form’, he is also referring to ‘Real 
Form’. 


All Buddhas and Ancestors fully manifest Their thorough realization of what 
is real. What is real are all Their thoughts and the things around Them . 1 All Their 
thoughts and the things around Them comprise Their form just as it is, Their True 
Nature just as it is, Their body just as it is, Their mind just as it is, Their world just 
as it is, Their ‘clouds and rain’ just as they are , 2 Their daily activities—walking, 
standing, sitting, and reclining—just as they are, Their moving or being still within 
Their joys and sorrows just as they are, Their traveling staff* and Their ceremonial 
hossu* just as they are, Their flower raised aloft and Their face breaking into a 

'l 

smile just as they are, Their inheriting the Dharma and Their prophesying 
Buddhahood just as they are, Their training under a Master and Their doing the 
practice just as they are, and Their pine-like fidelity and Their bamboo-like 
integrity just as they are. 


1. ‘All Their thoughts and things’ are what They experience directly, whether it be what 
appears to arise from within as ‘thoughts’ or what appears to arise externally as ‘things’. 

2. ‘Clouds and rain’ is a common Chinese metaphor for sexual thoughts and feelings that arise. 
* See Glossary. 

3 This is a reference to the Transmission of the Dhanna from Shakyamuni Buddha, who held 
aloft an udumbara blossom, to his smiling disciple Makakasho. 


593 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


594 


djb 

Shakyamuni Buddha once said: 

Only a Buddha is directly able to fully realize the real form of 
all thoughts and things, just as all Buddhas have done. What is called 
‘all thoughts and things’ is form just as it is, True Nature just as It is, 
physical body just as it is, spiritual abilities just as they are, as well as 
actions just as they are, causes just as they are, conditions just as they 
are, effects just as they are, and consequences just as they are, for all 
things are Ultimate Reality, from beginning to end, just as they are. 

The Tathagata’s phrase ‘Ultimate Reality from beginning to end’ was His own way 
of expressing the reality of all thoughts and things. It is the way our Master 
Shakyamuni personally expressed it. It was His exploring through His training that 
all things are equal, because when we explore the Matter* through our training, all 
things are seen to be equal. 

Each and every Buddha is the real form of the True Dharma, and the real 
form of the True Dharma is each and every Buddha. Each Buddha is ‘the real 
form’, and every Buddha comprises ‘all thoughts and things’. Hearing the phrase 
‘all thoughts and things’, we should not explore it as being the One, nor should we 
explore it as being the many. Upon hearing the phrase ‘the Real Form’, we should 
not understand it as something beyond emptiness, nor should we understand it as 
something beyond one’s True Nature. ‘Real’ refers to each Buddha and ‘form’ 
refers to every Buddha. Being ‘directly able’ refers to each Buddha and ‘fully 
realizing’ refers to every Buddha. ‘All thoughts and things’ refers to what each 
Buddha is, whereas ‘the Real Form’ refers to what every Buddha is. ‘All thoughts 
and things are undoubtedly all thoughts and things’ is realized by each Buddha, and 
‘all thoughts and things are reality’ is realized by every Buddha. 

Hence, there are forms just as they are and there is the True Nature just as It 
is, wherein all thoughts and things exist as thoughts and things of their own accord. 
And forms are, precisely, forms: there are their forms just as they are and there is 
their True Nature just as It is. When Shakyamuni manifested in the world as 
Buddha, He expounded, practiced, and realized the Real Form of all thoughts and 
things just as all Buddhas have done. What He expounded is synonymous with His 
being directly able to realize the Truth to Its fullest. Though we say that what He 
experienced was a full realization, He had to be able to directly realize It. Because 
such a realization was beyond having a beginning, middle, or end, it was His form 
just as it was and His True Nature just as It was. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


595 


His being directly able to fully realize It is synonymous with the Real Form 
of all His thoughts and things. The Real Form of all His thoughts and things is 
synonymous with their forms just as they were. Their forms just as they were is 
synonymous with His being directly able to realize His True Nature just as It was. 
His True Nature just as It was is synonymous with His being directly able to realize 
His True Body just as It was. His True Body just as It was is synonymous with His 
being directly able to realize His spiritual abilities just as they were. His spiritual 
abilities just as they were is synonymous with His being directly able to realize His 
actions just as they were. His actions just as they were is synonymous with His 
being directly able to recognize their causes just as they were. Their causes just as 
they were is synonymous with His being directly able to recognize their conditions 
just as they were. Their conditions just as they were is synonymous with His being 
directly able to recognize their effects just as they were. Their effects just as they 
were is synonymous with His being directly able to recognize their consequences 
just as they were. Their consequences just as they were is synonymous with His 
being directly able to recognize that all things are equally manifestations of 
Ultimate Reality, from beginning to end, just as they are. 

His assertion that all things are equally manifestations of Ultimate Reality, 
from beginning to end, is their being just as they are as they manifest before us. 
Hence, if the effect called ‘nirvana’ is not the result of some cause, then it follows 
that the effect called ‘cause and effect’ must be the result of nirvana. To the extent 
that these effects—namely, those of form, innate nature, physical body, and 
spiritual abilities—mutually limit each other, the forms, innate natures, physical 
bodies, and abilities of all thoughts and things—however immeasurable and 
unbounded they may be—are their real forms. And to the extent that these 
effects—namely, those of form, innate nature, physical body, and spiritual ability— 
do not limit each other, they are their Real Form together with their being such 
things as form, innate nature, physical body, and spiritual ability. When we entrust 
the task of defining form, innate nature, physical body, and spiritual ability to such 
things as effects, consequences, causes, and conditions, there will be an expression 
that is eighty or ninety percent of a full realization. When we do not entrust the 
task of defining form, innate nature, physical body, and spiritual ability to such 
things as effects, consequences, causes, and conditions, there will be an expression 
that is a one hundred percent full realization. 

What has been called ‘form just as it is’ is not one single form nor is it one 
uniform thing just as it is: it is That which is beyond measure and bounds, which is 
inexpressible and unfathomable, and which is just as It is. You should not consider 
a measurement in hundreds or thousands to be Its measure, but you should measure 
It by using the yardstick of ‘all thoughts and things’, by using the yardstick of ‘Its 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


596 


Real Form’. Thus, each and every Buddha is able to fully realize the Real Form 
and the Real Nature of all thoughts and things. And each and every Buddha is 
directly able to fully realize the Real Physical Body and the real potential of all 
thoughts and things. And each and every Buddha is directly able to fully realize the 
real activities and the real causes of all thoughts and things. And each and every 
Buddha is directly able to fully realize the real conditions and the real effects of all 
thoughts and things. And each and every Buddha is directly able to fully realize the 
consequences of all thoughts and things. Each and every Buddha is directly able to 
fully realize that all thoughts and things are equally manifestations of Truth—that 
is, of Ultimate Reality—from beginning to end, just as all Buddha’s have done. 

For reasons like these, the Buddha lands in all ten directions are simply each 
and every Buddha. Further, there is not a single one, not even half a one, that is not 
‘each and every Buddha’. ‘Each and every’ refers to, for example, a Physical Body 
being provided with a physical body, or a form bearing witness to Form. And it is 
also like the innate nature of a physical body retaining its innate Nature. This is 
why the Buddha said, “Only I and all the Buddhas in the ten directions can directly 
know these things.” 

Thus, the very moment of being able to fully realize these things and the 
very moment of being able to know them are, both alike, instances of ‘for the time 
being’ . If we ourselves were different from the Buddhas in the ten directions, how 
could we possibly realize what the Buddhas in all the ten quarters have taught? 
Because right here in this place there are no ‘ten directions’, the ten directions are 
this very place right here . 4 As a result, when Real Form encounters all thoughts 
and things, the Spring dwells within Its flowers, human beings encounter the 
Spring, the Moon illumines the moon, people come face-to-face with their True 
Self and see It reflected in Water, and all of these alike are the principle of a mutual 
encountering . 5 

This is why we learn through our training with a Master what Real Form is 
by means of Ins real form, and why the Buddhas and Ancestors have inherited from 
Buddhas and Ancestors the kesa,* which is the mantle of Truth. This is why 
Buddhahood is predicted for every single thing by means of every single thing. The 
Dharma was Transmitted for the sake of each and every Buddha, and the Dharma 
was inherited for the sake of each and every Buddha. This is why birth-and-death 
and coming-and-going exist. It is why the intention to train, training and practice, 


4. That is, the ten directions are everywhere at every instant and not in just one place at one 
time. 

5. That is, of self encountering Self. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


597 


the attaining of Wisdom, and nirvana exist. By making use of the intention to train, 
training and practice, the attaining of Wisdom, and nirvana, we thoroughly explore 
that the human body really is birth-and-death and coming-and-going, and, in 
protecting what we have received, we now hold firm and we now let go. With this 
as our bloodline, the flower opens and bears its fruit; with this as their bones and 
marrow, Makakasho and Ananda existed . 6 7 8 The forms, just as they are, of wind, 
rain, water, and fire are what Makakasho and Ananda fully realized, and the innate 
natures, just as they are, of blue, yellow, red, and white, are what they fully 
realized as well. By relying upon our physical body and spiritual abilities, we turn 
the mundane into the sacred, and by relying upon their effects and consequences, 
we surpass Buddha and transcend Ancestor. By relying on these causes and 
conditions, we take hold of dirt and transmute it into gold. By relying upon effects 
and consequences, we receive the Transmission of the Dharma along with the robe. 

The Tathagata then said that this gives expression to the real seal* of the 
Ancestors. Let me express this another way. This was His putting into action, 
hearkening to, and bearing witness to the seal of Real Form. We need to truly 
investigate the Matter in this manner. What this is basically pointing to is, for 
instance, like a pearl whirling around in a bowl or a bowl whirling around a pearl. 

djb 


The Buddha Who Is Radiantly Bright as Sun and Moon once said in verse: 

The meaning of ‘all thoughts and things are the Real 
Form ’ 

Has already been voiced both for your sake and for the 

7 

sake of others. 

In exploring this saying through your training with your Master, you should 
thoroughly investigate that the Buddhas and Ancestors have invariably taken the 
meaning of ‘all thoughts and things are the Real Form’ to be synonymous with the 
one great Matter. The Buddhas and Ancestors have proclaimed what the ‘Real 
Form’ of the eighteen realms of the senses actually is. Throughout the time before 


6. Ananda was Makakasho’s Dharma heir, making him the Second Indian Ancestor. 

7. A quote from the Lotus Scripture. All references to ‘this discourse’ that follow in this text 
refer to the Lotus Scripture. 

8. The eighteen realms of the senses are the six sense organs of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, 
and mind, along with the six sense objects of form, sound, smell, taste, sensation, and 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


598 


the existence of Their body and mind, the time after the existence of Their body 
and mind, and the time during the existence of Their body and mind, They gave 
expression to such things as the Real Form, Its Nature, Its physical embodiment, 
and Its spiritual abilities. Those who have not fully realized what Real Form is, 
those who have not given expression to It, those who do not understand It, and 
those who have not gone beyond their present understanding of real form are not 
Ancestors of the Buddha, but rather demons or beasts. 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “The fully perfected enlightenment of all 
bodhisattvas* is encompassed within this discourse of Mine. This discourse of 
Mine opens up the Gate of Skillful Means and points to the genuine Real Form of 
all things.” 

‘All bodhisattvas’ means all Buddhas. Buddhas and bodhisattvas are not 
different species, nor are they different in maturity or in excellence. This 
bodhisattva and that bodhisattva are not two separate persons, nor are they self and 
other, nor are they some person of past, present, or future. Rather, training to 
become Buddha is their means in the Dharma of putting the Bodhisattva Way into 
practice. They became a Buddha with the first arising of their intention to realize 
Buddhahood, and they will become a Buddha in the final stage of 
Bodhisattvahood. And there are bodhisattvas who have become Buddhas countless 
hundreds and thousands and millions of times. There are those who say that after 
bodhisattvas become Buddhas, they discontinue practice because there is nothing 
left for them to do. Such people are mundane persons who have no direct 
knowledge of the Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Those called ‘all bodhisattvas’ are the original Ancestors of all Buddhas, and 
all Buddhas are the original Teachers of all bodhisattvas. Whether all these 
Buddhas did Their practice in the past and awoke to the Truth, do it in the present, 
or will do it in the future, whether They do the practice first with Their body in 
order to awaken to the Truth, or ultimately do the practice with Their mind, all 
these will be in accord with this discourse of the Buddha—beginning, middle, and 
end. Whatever else can be encompassed or included will also be in accord with this 
discourse, and, at this very moment, this discourse of His awakens us to all manner 
of enlightenment. 


thought, and the six sense consciousnesses (that is, the awareness of each organ that allows 
perception to occur.) 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


599 


A Buddha’s discourse is beyond the sentient and the non-sentient; it is 
beyond the relative and the absolute. Even so, when He became aware of 
bodhisattvas, of ordinary humans, of the Real Form of things, and of this discourse, 
He opened the Gate of Skillful Means. The Gate of Skillful Means is the 
unsurpassed meritorious functioning of the fruits of Buddhahood. It is the Dharma 
that resides in the place of Dharma and It is the form of the world as it constantly 
manifests. The Gate of Skillful Means does not refer to some momentary skill. 
Trainees take up the Real Form of all thoughts and things, and explore It 
thoroughly through their training with a Master. Although this Gate of Skillful 
Means manifests Itself in such a way as to cover the whole universe with the whole 
of the universe, those who are not among ‘all bodhisattvas’ are not within Its realm. 


Seppo once said, “The whole of the great earth is the gateway to liberation, 
but people are afraid to enter the gate even if they are dragged through it.” So, keep 
in mind that even though the whole earth and all the worlds are gateways to 
liberation, it will not be easy to go in and out of any of them, and those who have 
tried to pass through one are not many. When people are dragged, they neither get 
in nor get out. If they are not dragged, they neither get in nor get out. The one who 
advances his step will stumble, and the one who retreats will be delayed. So, what 
further is to be said? If we try to force a person either to go in or out of the gate, 
the gate will become more and more distant. If we take the gate and get it to enter a 
person, there will be a chance of their going in or out of it. 

‘To open the Gate of Skillful Means’ means to point to the genuine Real 
Form of things. Even though we chop time up into moments of beginning, middle, 
and end, pointing to the genuine Real Form of things covers the whole of time. The 
underlying principle of momentarily opening the Gate of Skillful Means involves 
opening It by opening the whole universe. At the very moment when you catch 
sight of the opening of the whole universe, it will be something that you have 
never encountered before. By our grasping once or twice at an intellectual concept 
of what opening of whole universe is and then grasping at it for a third or fourth 
time as something real, we cause the Gate of Skillful Means to open. Accordingly, 
it may seem that the whole universe is identical with opening the Gate of Skillful 
Means, but it appears to me that an immeasurable number of whole universes have 
each taken a small piece from the opening of the Gate of Skillful Means and have 
made that small piece into the form that each universe displays. But their grandeur 
is due entirely to their being encompassed within the present discourse. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


600 


‘To point out the authentic Real Form’ means to keep hearing the phrase ‘the 
Real Form of all thoughts and things’ throughout all worlds and to realize 
enlightenment throughout all worlds. It is to help all humanity understand the 
underlying principle that Real Form is what all thoughts and things are and to help 
manifest the whole of the Dharma. 

Accordingly, the unsurpassed, enlightened Wisdom of the forty Buddhas and 
forty Ancestors is completely included within this present discourse ; 9 It is 
encompassed within this discourse, and this discourse is encompassed within It. 
The meditation cushion and the meditation board are Supreme Wisdom and, as 
such, they are encompassed within this discourse . 10 Shakyamuni’s holding the 
udumbara blossom aloft and Makakasho’s breaking into a smile, as well as 
respectful bowing which secures the very marrow of the Way, are all encompassed 
within this discourse . 11 To open the Gate of Skillful Means is to point to the 
authentic Real Form. 

Even so, an untrustworthy bunch in present-day Great Sung China, not 
knowing what to think, do not see where the Treasure is housed and act as if the 
phrase ‘Real Form’ were devoid of meaning. So they study the sayings of Lao-tzu 
and Chuang-tzu, asserting that their teachings are equal to the Great Way of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. They also say that the Three Teachings—Buddhism, 
Taoism, and Confucianism—are in agreement with each other. Or they say that the 
Three Teachings are like the three legs of a tripod that would overturn if even one 
leg were absent. I am completely unable to come up with any simile for their 
excessive foolishness. 

We cannot acknowledge that people who talk like this have ever heard the 
Dharma of the Buddha. And why? Because the Dharma of the Buddha had its 
origin in India where, during the eighty years of His life, the Buddha spent fifty 
years of His prime giving voice to the Dharma in order to transform both ordinary 
people and those in lofty positions. By transforming sentient beings, He helped 
them to enter the Buddha’s Way. After that, twenty-eight Indian Ancestors 
experienced the genuine Transmission, which is considered to be the ultimate, the 


9. The forty Buddhas is an allusion to the Buddhas from the Seven Buddhas down to the 
Thirty-third Chinese Ancestor Daikan Eno. The forty Ancestors refers to the Ancestors from 
Daikan Eno up through the Seven Buddhas. 

10. The meditation board is a plank that was used, particularly by the aged or the infirm, to rest 
one’s chin upon or to lean against while doing long sessions of seated meditation. 

11. Dogen explored this reference to respectful bowing in great detail in Discourse 10: On 
‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure for You the Very Marrow of the Way’ (Raihai Tokuzui). 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


601 


subtlest, the finest, and the most esteemed. All those who were outside the Way or 
who were demons in lofty positions were ultimately defeated. We do not know the 
number of ordinary people and those in lofty positions who realized Buddhahood 
and became Ancestors. Even so, none of them ever said that the Buddha’s Dharma 
was insufficient for them, so they never paid a call on Confucianism or Taoism in 
China. If one were to agree that the Three Teachings were in accord, then at the 
time when the Buddha’s Dharma emerged, such teachings as Confucianism and 
Taoism should have emerged concurrently in India. But the Teaching of the 
Buddha’s Dharma is encapsulated in the saying, “In the heavens above and the 
earth below, I alone am the sole Honored One.” We should think back to the 
events of that time and we should not make a mistake by forgetting them. Talking 
about the Three Teachings being in accord does not equal even the babbling sounds 
of a little baby. It is a statement made by that bunch who are out to destroy the 
Buddha’s Dharma. Folks like that are all too many. It is provoking to see that 
people like these have become guiding teachers for ordinary humans and those in 
lofty places, while others have even become teachers and masters to emperors and 
kings. Alas, the Buddha Dharma is degenerating in present-day Great Sung China! 
My former Master, who was an Old Buddha, strongly cautioned me about this. 

People like these are seeds that produce the two Lesser Courses* and the 
non-Buddhists. They have already wasted two or three centuries without even 
knowing that Real Form exists. They speak only of exploring the True Teaching so 
that they might escape from the continual cycle of birth-and-death. Many are those 
who do not even know what it means to explore the True Teaching of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors, for they fancy that just living in a monastery is what practice is. 
How pitiful that the words and ways of the Ancestral Masters are now dying out! It 
is what the venerable monks of long-standing who hold to the true words and ways 
of the Buddha greatly lament. Do not give ear to the words and phrases that emerge 
from the likes of that bunch spoken of earlier. Rather, we should pity them. 


Meditation Master Engo once said, “Birth-and-death and coming-and-going 
are a person’s true Real Body.” By exploring this expression, we will come to 
know ourselves and we will give our consideration to the Buddha Dharma. 


12. This quotation is attributed to the Buddha. Immediately following His Birth, He is purported 
to have taken seven steps and then pointed up towards the heavens with His right hand and 
down towards the earth with His left, whilst uttering the words quoted above. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


602 


djb 

Chosa once said, “The whole universe in all ten directions is a person’s true 
Real Body. The whole universe in all ten directions lies within the radiant 
brightness of one’s own True Self.” But, in general, even veteran trainees in 
present-day Sung China still do not know that they need to explore a saying like 

i o 

this through their training. Much less do they know how to put it into practice! 
Were we to quote this saying to them, they would simply go red in the face and be 
left speechless. 

djb 

CX) 


My former Master, the Old Buddha, once said: 

Veteran trainees all over Sung China have still not illumined 
either the past or the present. They have not yet grasped the 
underlying principle of the Buddha Dharma. Although the whole 
universe in all ten directions, among other things, is constantly 
presenting itself in this manner, how could they possibly know it? 
Outside of Great Sung China, it is as if they had never even heard of 
it. 

After hearing this, I questioned veteran trainees throughout Sung China about this 
underlying principle, and to tell the truth, few had even heard of it. How sad that 
they dishonor the offices they occupy with such pointless talk! 

djb 

CX) 

Meditation Master Oan Donge once addressed Tokki Daitoku, saying: 

If you wish to understand the Matter easily, then throughout the 
whole twenty-four hours of each day, just keep your focus on the 
arising of mind and the moving of thoughts. As you approach the 
moving thoughts, you may suddenly experience the Ungraspable, That 
Which Is the Here and Now. It will be like vast, unbounded space, and 
there will be no forms or delimitations within that space. Outside and 
inside will be one and the same; self and other will both become 
extinct, and the unfathomable and the clear will both disappear. The 
three periods of time—past, present, and future—will be equal. Those 


13. ‘Veteran trainees’ is a common tenn for monks who have been in monastic life for a long 
time but have made little or no progress spiritually. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


603 


who arrive at this state are called ‘people at ease in the Way who are 

unattached to anything and have nothing more to accomplish. ’ 

These are the words spoken by the elder Oan who used his full strength to express 
the essence of the Dharma. But this is simply his chasing after shadows, as if he 
did not know how to stop pursuing words. Can the Buddha Dharma not exist when 
inside and outside are not one and the same? What is this ‘inside and outside’? 
Also, the assertion of the Buddhas and Ancestors is that there are forms and 
delimitations within space. And what does he mean by ‘space’? When we think 
about it, Oan did not yet know what space is, nor had he seen what space is, nor 
had he taken hold of space, nor had he struck space. 

Oan speaks of mind arising and thoughts moving, and yet there is the 
fundamental principle that the Mind never moves, so how could there possibly be 
an arising of mind within the twenty-four hours of a day? No mind can come and 
enter into the twenty-four hours of a day, nor can the twenty-four hours of the day 
come into the twenty-four hours of the Mind. Much less can there be an arising of 
Mind! And what, pray, is the moving of one’s thoughts? Do thoughts move or do 
they not move? Or are they beyond moving and not moving? What is this ‘moving’ 
of his? Moreover, what is ‘not moving’? What is he calling ‘thoughts’? Do 
thoughts occur within the twenty-four hours of a day? Or do the twenty-four hours 
of a day occur within one’s thoughts? Or can there be a time beyond these two? 

He says that if you wish to understand the Matter easily, then throughout the 
whole twenty-four hours of each day, just keep your focus on the arising of mind 
and the moving of thoughts. But what is this Matter that can be understood easily? 
Is ‘easily understood’ something he is saying about the Teaching of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors? If so, then he needs to know that the Buddha’s Teaching is beyond 
easy to understand or difficult to understand, which is why Nangaku and Baso 
followed their respective Masters for ever so long in their practice of the Way . 14 

Oan speaks of suddenly experiencing the Ungraspable, That Which Is the 
Here and Now. But he has never encountered the Way of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors even in his dreams. How can one of such limited ability as his possibly 
be up to ‘wishing to understand easily’? Understand clearly that he had not yet 
thoroughly explored the Great Teaching of the Buddhas and Ancestors. If the 
Buddha’s Dharma was like what he said, how could It possibly have come down to 
us today? 


14. Nangaku’s Master was Eno and Baso’s Master was Nangaku. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


604 


Now, this is the case with Oan himself. Yet, were we to seek for ever so long 
among the veteran monks in mountain monasteries of the present day for someone 
who was like Oan, we would not encounter him. And were we to search until our 
eyes grew dim, we would not encounter a veteran monk who was the equal of Oan. 
There are many in recent times who acknowledge Oan, but even so, it would be 
difficult for me to acknowledge that he had realized the Buddha Dharma. I would 
simply say that he deserves a seat among the juniors in a monastery and that he is 
of average experience. And why? Because Oan did at least have enough spirit to 
spot ‘such a person’.* Folks today cannot recognize ‘such a person’ because they 
do not even know themselves. Although I say that Oan had not yet fully arrived, he 
did have experience of the Way, experience that such folks as the veteran monks of 
today do not have. Though I would say that Oan had heard good words, they had 
not penetrated his ears, much less had he ‘seen them’ with his ears. They had not 
penetrated his eyes, much less had he ‘heard them’ with his eyes. Though this is the 
way that Oan was, today he would naturally have awakened to something. Veteran 
monks in the mountain monasteries of Great Sung China today have not even 
caught a glimpse of what Can’s ‘inside and outside’ means; nothing that comes out 
of their mouths or that shows on their faces are in the same realm as him. Folks 
like this cannot tell whether the Real Form that the Buddhas and Ancestors have 
expressed is embodied within the words and ways of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 
This is why, for the past two or three centuries, none of the folks who speak wildly, 
like these old veteran monks, have been able to speak of or to see Real Form. 


In giving informal instruction in the Abbot’s private quarters, my late 
Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, said in verse one night: 

Tonight, Tendo Mountain is blessed with calves, 

And a golden-faced Gautama holds aloft the Real Form. 

“If buying is your wish, how will you afford Its priceless 

• o yy 

pricer 

So cries the night bird from above the solitary cloud on 
high. 

When the situation is as described above, venerable senior monks who are 
accomplished in the Buddha’s Way speak of Real Form. Those who do not know 
the Buddha Dharma and who do not explore the Buddha’s Way do not speak of 
Real Form. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


605 


The preceding poem came about in the following manner. It was nearing the 
fourth watch of a night in the third lunar month in the spring of the second year of 
the great Sung era of Hokyo (1226), when three beats from the summoning drum 
sounded from above. 15 Putting on my kesa and taking my bowing mat, 1 left the 
Cloud Hall through the front entrance. The sign to go enter the Master’s room for a 
spiritual interview had been hung up. First off, 1 followed the crowd of monks up 
to the Dharma Hall. Going past the west wall of the Dharma Hall, I climbed the 
west stairway to the Ancestral Shrine. Passing by the west wall of the Ancestral 
Shrine, I climbed the west stairway of the Hall of Great Brightness. The Hall of 
Great Brightness is where the Abbot’s quarters are. Going by the southern end of a 
screen along the west side, I reached the incense stand and, after offering incense, I 
did my prostrations. I had expected that lines would have formed here for entry 
into the Master’s room, but I did not see even one monk. The Abbot’s main room 
had been screened off from me by bamboo blinds. I could hear, but barely, the 
sound of the Teaching being given by this Great Monk who was the Head of our 
temple. 

At that moment, the monk who was Precentor, Sokon by name, from 
Szechwan Province, arrived. After he too had offered incense and made his 
prostrations, we quietly approached the main room, which was packed with monks 
who were seated regardless of east or west. 16 The Abbot’s informal talk was in 
progress, so we quietly entered behind the assembly and listened to it while 
continuing to stand. 

He was giving an account of Meditation Master Daibai Hojo’s living in the 
mountains. At the part where he described Hojo’s wearing clothes made from lotus 
leaves and harvesting pine trees for food, many in the community began to weep. 17 
During his detailed recounting of the story of Shakyamuni Buddha’s retreat on 
Vulture Peak, again, many who heard it were moved to tears. 

The Master ended his Dharma talk by saying, “The retreat on Mount Tendo 
draws near. Since it is springlike now, it is neither cold nor hot. It will be a fine 
time to do seated meditation, so why would any junior or senior not wish to sit in 
meditation?” He then recited his poem quoted above. 


15. The Abbot’s quarters were in the highest building on the mountain. 

16. That is, the monks were mixed together regardless of whether they were juniors or seniors. 

17. There are various accounts of Chinese hennit monks living off of or supplementing their diet 
with parts of pine trees. Sprigs of new growth were eaten, as well as pine nuts. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


606 


When the poem was finished, he struck the right arm of his meditation seat 
with his right hand and said, “Enter my room for your spiritual interview.” His 
topic for the spiritual interview was “The night bird cries out and the bamboo on 
the mountain splits open.” These were his very words for the spiritual interview. 
He offered no commentary. Even though our monastic family was large, many had 
no response, as they were simply overawed. 

This method of conducting a spiritual interview was not done anywhere else; 
only my late Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, used it. During such informal 
teaching, my Master’s seat was surrounded by screens which the community 
crowded around. While the monks remained standing, the interviews took place 
with whichever monk was prepared to enter the Abbot’s presence. When a monk 
had finished his interview, he departed through the door of the Abbot’s quarters in 
the customary manner. Those who remained, still standing as they were before, 
could see and hear everything, not only the dignified manner of stepping forward 
and then halting by the one entering for his interview, but also the deportment of 
the Abbot and his command for the next monk to enter. This ceremony never 
existed in other places, and it may be that other veteran Abbots were unable to do 
it. During interviews with other Masters, monks wanted to enter the Abbot’s 
interview room before the others did, whereas in entering my Master’s room, the 
monks wished to enter after the others. We should not forget that there are 
differences in people’s minds and ways of behaving. 

From that time until this first year of the Japanese Kangen era (1243), 
eighteen years have passed quickly within the changing scenery. I cannot 
remember how many mountains and bodies of water there have been between 
Mount Tendo and this mountain, but the Real Form of those beautiful words and 
wondrous phrases of my Master has been engraved on my body and mind, on my 
bones and marrow. I believe it would be difficult for monks in that monastic 
assembly to ever forget hearing the Dharma talk and entering for a spiritual 
interview on that occasion. On that night, the light of the new moon shone from 
behind the temple buildings and though, from time to time, a night bird would sing 
out, it was a night tranquil and still. 


Great Master Gensha Shibi was once giving an informal talk 
when, upon hearing the chirping of some swallow chicks, he said, 
“How profoundly they discuss Real Form! How skillfully they 
expound the essence of the Dharma!” Thereupon, he stepped down 
from his Dharma seat. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


607 


Then, a novice monk who was behind him, chasing after 
instruction, said, “I don’t get it.” 

The Master said, “Oh, be off with you! There’s no one who’d 
believe you.” 

Having heard Shibi’s statement, “How profoundly they discuss Real Form,” one 
might well take it to mean that swallow chicks alone profoundly discuss Real 
Form, but this is not so. During his informal talk, Shibi heard the chirping of some 
swallow chicks. It was not that the swallow chicks were profoundly discussing 
Real Form, and it was not that Shibi was profoundly discussing Real Form, and it 
was not a cross between the two, but it was that at that very moment itself, there 
was a profound discussion of Real Form. 

We should take a moment to thoroughly explore this story. There is the 
informal instruction, hearing the swallow chicks’ chirping, and the assertion, “How 
profoundly they discuss Real Form! How skillfully they expound the essence of 
the Dharma!” And there is Shibi’s stepping down from his Dharma seat, the novice 
monk chasing behind him for instruction saying, “1 don’t get it,” and the Master’s 
response, “Oh, be off with you! There’s no one who’d believe you.” Although the 
statement, “I don’t get it,” need not necessarily be a request for instruction on Real 
Form, it is nevertheless the lifeblood of the Buddhas and Ancestors, and the very 
Bones and Marrow of the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. 

You need to comprehend that even if this monk, in seeking instruction, 
asserted either that he did or that he did not understand, Shibi should say to him, 
“Oh, be off with you! There’s no one who’d believe you.” Shibi said what he did 
not because the novice monk had said that he did not understand, but because the 
monk had already understood. 19 Truly, even though it could have been someone 
other than this monk, say, any third son of Mr. Chang or fourth son of Mr. Li, and 
even though all thoughts and things are Real Form, at the time and place when one 
penetrates directly into the Lifeblood of the Buddhas and Ancestors, one’s 
exploring Real Form through one’s training manifests just like this. This had 
already manifested by the time of Seigen’s assembly. 20 


18. That is, the remark is customarily understood by Buddhas and Ancestors to mean “I don’t 
get It.” 

19. That is, the monk was trying to inveigle Shibi into discussing and intellectualizing what he 
had said. 

20. That is, the exploration of Real Form had already begun generations earlier in the assembly 
of Seigen Gyoshi. Shibi was in Seigen’s lineage, as was Dogen. 



Shobogenzo: On the Real Form of All Thoughts and Things 


608 


Keep in mind that Real Form is the genuine Lifeblood which has been 
passed on from rightful heir to rightful heir, that all thoughts and things are what 
each and every Buddha has completely and thoroughly explored, and that each and 
every Buddha manifests His characteristic marks, just as they are. 21 

Given to the assembly during a day in the ninth lunar month of the first year of the Kangen era 
(October or November, 1243) at Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province, Japan. 


21. That is, all Buddhas exhibit the characteristic marks and distinguishing signs of a Buddha, 
no matter how unique each Buddha may be. 



50 

On Buddhist Scriptures 

(Bukkyd) 

Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen uses the word ‘Scripture’ to refer not only 
to the Scriptural writings of Buddhism but also to individual persons, as well as to all things in 
the universe, since each in its own way embodies the Dharma. 

Dogen proceeds to launch a highly charged attack on the founding Ancestors of two of the 
five traditions of Chinese Zen Buddhism, namely, those founded by Rinzai and Ummon, though 
he spares the tradition established by Obaku, who was Rinzai’s Master. One can only speculate 
that the emotional tone of this attack arose from his desire to keep his disciples from trying to 
incorporate the practices of those traditions into their own practice and training. 

Dogen then extends his attack by taking on the so-called Chinese tripod theory, which was 
current in his day. According to this theory, Chinese culture and civilization are like a sacred 
vessel which gains its stability by being supported by three ‘legs’, namely, Taoism, 
Confucianism, and Buddhism. The theory was originally put forth by some Buddhists in an 
attempt to counter the argument that only Taoism and Confucianism were truly Chinese since 
these teachings were indigenous to China, whereas Buddhism was a foreign religion and 
therefore something superimposed on the Chinese culture. Dogen argues against this by saying 
that if Taoism and Confucianism needed Buddhism to maintain cultural stability, then it would 
follow that Chinese Buddhism would also need Taoism and Confucianism because it likewise 
could not stand on its own. Therefore, those Buddhists who wanted to introduce Taoist or 
Confucianist elements into their training were not strengthening it, but diluting it with elements 
irrelevant to Buddhist practice. 


Within the Buddhist Scriptures, there are methods for teaching bodhisattvas* 
and there are methods for teaching Buddhas. Both of these methods are tools of the 
Great Truth. These tools comply with their Owner, and the Owner uses His tools. 
Accordingly, the Buddhas and Ancestors in both the western land of India and in 
the eastern land of China were persons who, of necessity, followed some good 
spiritual friend or followed what the Scriptures taught, with never a gap in Their 
giving rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood, Their doing Their training and 
practice, and Their realizing the fruits thereof. In giving rise to Their intention to 
realize Buddhahood, They relied on Scriptural texts and spiritual friends, and in 


* See Glossary. 


609 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


610 


Their doing the training and practice, They relied on Scriptural texts and spiritual 
friends, and in Their realizing the fruits of Their practice, They also relied on 
Scriptural texts and spiritual friends. Our giving rise to our first spiritual intention 
and then later encountering the words of the Scriptures is likewise in harmony with 
Scriptural texts and spiritual friends. And if, amidst our giving rise to our intention, 
Scriptural verses arise within us, this too is in harmony with Scriptural texts and 
spiritual friends. 

Spiritual friends, of necessity, have thoroughly penetrated the Scriptural 
texts. ‘Thoroughly penetrated’ means that they have made the Scriptures their 
homeland, and they have made Them their body and mind. They have set up the 
Scriptures for the sake of others and have made the Scriptures their parents and 
their offspring. Because spiritual friends have made the Scriptures into what they 
practice and understand, they have thoroughly explored Them. And a spiritual 
friend’s washing his face and drinking his tea is also an ancient Scripture. And the 
saying, “Scriptures give birth to spiritual friends,” describes, for instance, Obaku’s 
bringing about the birth of a monastic offspring by giving him thirty blows with his 
staff. It also describes the three strikes that Daiman Konin gave which brought 
about the Transmission of the kesa* along with the Dharma. 1 And these two are not 
the only cases. There is the monk who awoke to the Truth upon seeing peach 
blossoms, and the monk who awoke to the Truth upon hearkening to bamboo being 
struck by a stone, and the One who awoke upon seeing the morning star—all are 
good examples of Scriptures giving birth to spiritual friends. And there have been 
‘skin bags and fisted ones’ who, having first opened their Eye, benefited much 
from Scriptural texts. And there are also ‘wooden ladles and jet-black buckets’ 
who, having learned a great deal from Scriptural texts, then opened their Eye. 2 

What we call Scriptures is precisely the whole universe in all directions. 
There is no time or place that is not a Scripture. Some Scriptures make use of the 
language of Ultimate Reality, whereas others make use of the language of secular 
reality. Some make use of the language of celestial beings, whereas others make 
use of the language of human beings. Some make use of the language that animals 


1. The most notable Dharma heir of Obaku was Rinzai, the ‘monastic offspring’ referred to 
here. Daiman Konin Transmitted to Daikan Eno the bowl and kesa believed to have 
belonged to Shakyamuni Buddha. 

2. ‘Skin bags’ is a metaphor for ordinary human beings. ‘Fisted ones’ is a metaphor for trainees 
whose Master raises a fist to show that the Ultimate is beyond words or concepts. ‘Wooden 
ladles’ refers to those who are trying to awaken to the Truth, and ‘jet-black buckets’ is a 
metaphor for monks who are ignorant of the essence of Buddhism. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


611 


speak, whereas others make use of the language that asuras* speak. Some make use 
of the words that sprout up like hundreds of grasses in a field, whereas others make 
use of the words that flourish like the thousands of trees in a woodland. Thus it is 
that what is long or short, square or round, as well as what is blue, yellow, red, or 
white, all of which are arrayed throughout the whole universe like ever so many 
trees in a forest, are the words of a Scripture; they are what appears on the surface 
of a Scriptural text. They serve as the tools of the Great Truth, which comprise 
what a Scripture is in Buddhist traditions. Such a Scripture can spread out and 
cover the whole of time, and It can flow out and cover all lands. It opens the 
gateway to teaching human beings without forsaking anyone anywhere. It opens 
the gateway to Scriptural matters and rescues all manner of beings everywhere. In 
teaching Buddhas and bodhisattvas, it becomes the whole of the earth, indeed, the 
whole of the universe. It opens the gateway to skillful means and the gateway to 
abiding in one’s True Place. And, without forsaking a single person, or even half a 
one, It points to the true Real Form. The great intention of each Buddha and 
bodhisattva right now is to obtain much benefit from these Scriptures, even though 
this may not be something done intentionally by means of one’s discriminative 
thinking and conscious endeavor, or by means of one’s going beyond 
discriminative thinking and conscious endeavor. 

The time of positively procuring a Scripture is beyond ‘past and present’, 
because past and present are simply moments in the time of ‘procuring a 
Scripture’. What is manifesting right now before our very eyes is the whole 
universe in all ten directions. This is what ‘procuring a Scripture’ really means. In 
that such a Scripture has already been read, recited, and thoroughly penetrated, the 
Wisdom of Buddha, along with our natural innate wisdom and the wisdom 
acquired without a teacher, have already fully manifested before the arising of our 
own mind and body. At the moment when we encounter a Scripture, we do not 
doubt that we have entered a special state that is new to us. When this Scripture has 
been accepted by us and then passed on to others by our reading or reciting It, we 
can say that the Scripture has made full contact with us. This state of affairs 
quickly becomes a scattering of flowers and a making of garlands. At first we see 
only the words embedded within phrases, but there is ‘something indescribable’ to 
be found between the lines. 

We call such Scriptures ‘the Dharma’. They contain an accumulation of 
eighty-four thousand expressions of the Dharma. Within these Scriptures are such 
words as ‘the Buddhas who have fully realized Universal Truth’, ‘the Buddhas who 
have appeared and are residing in the world right now,’ and ‘the Buddhas who have 
arrived and entered nirvana’. ‘The One Who Comes in This Way’ and ‘The One 
Who Goes in That Way’—that is, the Tathagata—are both terms that appear in 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


612 


these Scriptures and are expressions of the Dharma within the Dharma. ‘Raising 
aloft the flower, with eyes atwinkle’ and ‘his face breaking into a smile’ are old 
Scriptures that have been accurately Transmitted from the Seven Buddhas.* And 
‘standing in the snow and severing one’s arm’ as well as ‘respectfully bowing and 
securing the very Marrow of the Way’ are expressions which encapsulate old 
Scriptures about Master and disciple truly hearing each other. 3 4 Ultimately, the 
Transmitting of the Dharma and the kesa to Daikan Eno was nothing other than the 
arrival of the moment when all the Scriptures were spread out and entrusted to him. 
The three strikes on the mortar by Daiman Konin and the response of three siftings 
of rice in the winnowing basket by Daikan Eno brought about a Scripture holding 
out Elis hand to a Scripture, whereby a Scripture made a Scripture His legitimate 
heir. 

In addition, Eno’s saying, “Who is this One that comes thus?” is a thousand 
Scriptures for teaching Buddhas and tens of thousands of Scriptures for teaching 
bodhisattvas. And Nangaku’s reply, “For me to explain what even one thing is 
would not hit the mark,” does well to account for the accumulation of the eighty- 
four thousand expressions of the Dharma, as well as the twelve divisions of the 
Mahayana* canon. And even more, a Master’s fist and heel, his traveling staff* and 
ceremonial hossu,* are ancient Scriptures and new Scriptures, as well as Scriptures 
on what has limits and Scriptures on That which is without limits. From the first, 
doing one’s utmost in training within the Sangha and diligently doing seated 
meditation are Buddhist Scriptures, and they are Buddhist Scriptures right to the 
end. They are Scriptures written on leaves from the Bodhi tree; they are Scriptures 
written upon the vast expanse of sky. 

In short, the one moment of movement and the two moments of stillness 
which the Buddhas and Ancestors have exhibited, as well as Their holding on and 
Their letting go are, naturally enough, the unrolling of Buddhist Scriptures. 
Because They have explored through Their training that the ultimate standard is 
that there is no absolute ultimate, They have inhaled and expelled the Scriptures 
through Their nostrils and They have absorbed and expelled the Scriptures through 


3. This is a reference to Shakyamuni Buddha’s Transmitting the Dhanna to His smiling 
disciple Makakasho by holding an udumbara flower aloft. 

4. The reference to cutting off one’s arm is to the Second Chinese Ancestor, Taiso Eka, who is 
said to have cut off his arm in order to find the Truth. This ‘severing’ may refer to giving up 
one’s attachments rather than to a literal, physical act. Dogen fully explores the reference to 
respectful bowing in Discourse 10: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure for You the Very 
Marrow of the Way’ (Raihai Tokuzui). 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


613 


Their toes. ‘Before “father” and “mother” had yet been born’,* there was a taking 
in and expelling of Scriptures, and before the Lords of Awe-inspiring Voices 
appeared, there was a taking in and expelling of Scriptures. We receive Scriptures 
and give expression to Scriptures by means of the whole earth with its mountains 
and rivers, and we receive Scriptures and give expression to Scriptures by means 
of the sun, moon, and stars. Some Buddhas and Ancestors have held to the 
Scriptures by means of the Self that existed before the kalpa* of emptiness, and 
Some have held onto the Scriptures by means of the body and mind that They had 
before They had a countenance. Scriptures like these were brought into view by 
Their breaking open a dust mote or by Their breaking open the whole universe. 


Our great Twenty-seventh Ancestor, the Venerable Hannyatara, 5 once said: 

In my humble way, what I breathe out does not conform itself 
to external conditions and events, and what I breathe in does not take 
up residence in the realm of my skandhas.* The Scriptures that I recite 
are always like this, for they are comprised of hundreds of thousands 
of millions of billions of scrolls, not just one or two scrolls. 

Hearing what our Ancestral Master said in this way, we should explore through our 
training that she caused the Scriptures to revolve with her every exhalation and 
inhalation. To understand ‘revolving the Scriptures’ in this way is to know wherein 
the Scriptures reside. Because she could revolve Them and there was something to 
revolve, which was her revolving the Scriptures and the Scriptures revolving her, 
she must have totally understood and recognized what They are. 6 


My late Master was constantly saying: 

Here in my temple, you should simply sit in meditation without 
having recourse to burning incense, making bows, reciting the name 
of Buddha, confessing your shortcomings, or reciting Scriptures. Just 
do your utmost to practice the Way and drop off body and mind. 


5. There is a long-standing Indian tradition which holds that Hannyatara was a female monk 
renowned for her extraordinary spiritual prowess. 

6. Dogen has an extensive commentary on Hannyatara’s remarks in Discourse 20: On Reading 
Scriptures (Kankin). 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


614 


Few are the folks who understand a remark like this. And why? Because if 
they were to take the phrase ‘reciting Scriptures’ literally, they would be violating 
its intention, and if they were not to take the phrase ‘reciting Scriptures’ literally, 
they would be turning their back on his words. We cannot have words for It and we 
do not lack words for It. So, quick, quick! Speak, speak! You must explore this 
fundamental principle through your training! Because this principle exists, a 
Master of long ago said, “To read Scriptures, you will need to be equipped with an 
Eye for reading Scriptures.” By all means you need to realize that if there had not 
been Scriptures in the past and in the present, there could not be such a statement 
as this. You need to explore through your training that there is the reading of a 
Scripture called ‘dropping off’ and there is the reading of a Scripture called 
‘without having recourse’. Since this is so, each person—or even half a person— 
who does the training will, without question, receive the Transmission and become 
a child of the Buddha, so do not foolishly study the false views of non-Buddhists. 
Because the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, which is now fully 
manifesting before your very eyes, is what the Buddhist Scriptures are, every 
Buddhist Scripture is the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. They are 
beyond being the same or different, beyond being self or other. Keep in mind that 
because the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching is ever so abundant, 
none of you will be able to illumine It completely. 7 And even so, you will be able 
to expound upon the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching without ever 
failing to trust in It. And so it will be with the Buddhist Scriptures. Though the 
Scriptures are ever so many, you need but trust and accept Them, and put into 
practice a single verse or phrase from Them. You need not fully comprehend all 
eighty-four thousand of Them. Just because you cannot be expert in all the 
Buddhist Scriptures, do not be rash and say that the Buddhist Scriptures are not the 
Buddha Dharma. Even though you may hear others call themselves the very bones 
and marrow of the Buddhas and Ancestors, when we look with straightforward 
eyes at those who speak this way, we see that they are simply present-day trainees 
who are stuck on words. While some of them may be as good as those who accept 
and keep to a single phrase or a single verse, there may also be those who do not 
measure up to them. Do not insult the Buddha’s True Teaching by relying on this 
superficial understanding of theirs. Nothing in the world of sound and form is more 
spiritually meritorious than the Buddhist Scriptures. Sounds and forms may delude 
you if you are still greedily chasing after them. However, the Buddhist Scriptures 
will never delude you, so do not mistrust or slander Them. 


7. That is, realizing enlightenment does not mean becoming omniscient. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


615 


Even so, over the last couple of centuries or so in Great Sung China, certain 
mistaken, smelly skin bags have said, “There’s no need for you to keep the sayings 
of the Ancestral Masters in mind, much less is there any need for long study of 
Scriptural Teachings or for your trying to make use of Them. Simply, make your 
body and mind like a dead tree or cold ashes, like a broken wooden ladle or a 
bottomless tub.” Folks like these have become a type of non-Buddhist or celestial 
demon, and to no good purpose. They seek to make use of things that are useless, 
and accordingly, they twist the Teachings of the Buddhas and Ancestors into wild 
and perverted teaching. What a pity! How terribly sad! Even ‘broken ladles’ and 
‘bottomless tubs’ have been ancient Scriptures for some Ancestors of the Buddha. 
Rare has been the Ancestor of the Buddha who has completely tallied the number 
of texts of these Scriptures. Those who say that the Buddhist Scriptures are not the 
Buddha Dharma have not studied the occasions when Ancestors of the Buddha 
have made use of Scriptures, nor have they explored through their training the 
occasions when Ancestors of the Buddha have revealed their True Nature through 
their reliance on Scriptures, nor do they know how to gauge the level of intimacy 
between the Buddha’s Ancestors and the Buddhist Scriptures. Careless folks like 
these are as common as rice and flax seeds, bamboo canes and reeds. They ascend 
the Lion Throne* and establish monasteries everywhere, passing themselves off as 
teachers of gods and humans. Because the inaccurate have studied with the 
inaccurate, their principles are likewise inaccurate, and because they are ignorant, 
they fail to seek what is reliable, but simply pass from darkness into darkness. How 
pitiful! And because they have not realized the Body and Mind of Buddha Dharma, 
they do not know what the deportment of body and the behavior of mind should 
be. Since they have not clarified what lies at the heart of either existence or 
emptiness, if someone should ask them a question about this, they may arbitrarily 
raise a fist, but they are really in the dark as to what it means to make such a 
gesture. Since they have not clarified which paths are genuine and which are false, 
if someone should ask them a question about this, they hold up a ceremonial hossu, 
but they are not clear as to the significance of holding it up. Or, in a misguided 
attempt to offer a helping hand for someone’s sake, they may cite Rinzai’s Four 
Perspectives or his Four Relations Between Reflecting and Acting, or quote 
Ummon’s Three Phrases or Tozan’s Three Paths or his Five Relative Positions as 
standards for study of the Way. 8 


8. Dogen’s apparently negative view of Tozan’s two treatises in the present context is clarified 
later in this discourse. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


616 


My late Master, the monk of Tendo, was always laughing at this and would 

say: 

How could ‘learning what Buddha is’ possibly be like that? We 
have clothed both our body and our mind with the Great Truth that the 
Buddhas and Ancestors have authentically Transmitted. In exploring 
this through our training and in aiming at mastering it through and 
through, we have no time to spare. What free time do we have for 
including the dubious remarks of modern-day trainees? Truly, you 
need to realize that old senior monks all over Great Sung China are 
lacking in the Truth, and it is clear that they are not exploring through 
their training what the Body and Mind of the Buddha Dharma is. 

This is how my late Master pointed out the Matter* to his assembly. 


To tell the truth, in the case of Rinzai, he was a newcomer in Obaku’s 
assembly. Obaku had already used his staff to inflict sixty blows on Rinzai before 
the latter left to make a formal call on Daigu, with whom he had a meeting to 
discuss the mind of a certain old woman. This Dharma conversation helped to 
illumine matters in his daily conduct and, as a consequence, he returned to Obaku. 
Because those who heard this account were deeply impressed by it, they believed 
that Rinzai and he alone had received Obaku’s Buddha Dharma, and, moreover, 
they even fancied that Rinzai had surpassed Obaku. But this is simply not so. 

Although it must be said that Rinzai had barely entered Obaku’s assembly 
and was as yet the juniormost monk at the time, nevertheless, when the venerable 
senior monk Chin prompted him to ask his spiritual question, Rinzai did not know 
what to say. 9 Even though someone has not yet clarified what the Great Matter is, 
how could anyone who is committed to exploring It through their training fail to 
rise to the occasion while listening to the Dharma and simply be dumbstruck like 
that? You should realize that such a one is not foremost in ability. Further, Rinzai 
never had the ardor of his celebrated Master, and we have yet to hear of any 


9. Chin was one of Obaku’s Dharma heirs and succeeded him as Abbot upon Obaku’s death. 
The situation described here probably refers to the question asked by the Abbot or a senior 
monk of someone who has come to a temple for the first time. It is usually ambiguous, 
thereby inviting the potential trainee to respond in a socially conventional way or to see the 
deeper, spiritual meaning embedded in the question, which calls for a spiritually focused 
response. Apparently, Rinzai was totally nonplussed and could not come up with a reply on 
either side, much less with a question. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


617 


sayings of his that surpass those of his Master. Obaku, though, did have ways of 
putting things which evinced a greater wisdom than that of his own Master. And he 
could put into words Teachings that even the Buddha had not yet uttered, and he 
had an understanding of the Dharma that even the Ancestors had not yet fathomed. 
Obaku was an Old Buddha who transcended both past and present. He was more 
highly esteemed than Hyakujo and was of even greater genius than Baso. Rinzai 
lacked such an eminent spirit. And why? Because he never made any remark, not 
even in his dreams, which had not already been expressed in the past or present. It 
is as if he merely understood the many and overlooked the One, or grasped the One 
and overlooked the many. How can we possibly think that his Four Perspectives 
partake of the flavor of the Dharma or that it serves as a compass that points the 
correct way to explore the Teaching? 

Ummon was a member of Seppo’s community. Even though he functioned 
as a great teacher for all manner of people, it must be said that he was still one of 
those who are stuck on erudition. Should you attempt to find the Source by relying 
on people like him, you would simply end up on some paltry tributary. In the times 
before Rinzai arrived and Ummon appeared, what, pray, did the Buddhas and 
Ancestors rely upon as Their standard for exploring the Way? Hence, you need to 
understand that within the houses of Rinzai and Ummon, the proper training of the 
Buddha’s tradition was not passed on. Because they had nothing authoritative to 
rely upon, they recklessly put forth their own questionable teachings. Such fellows 
irresponsibly slandered the Buddhist Scriptures, so you people should not follow 
them in that. If the Scriptures are to be cast aside, then the teachings of Rinzai and 
Ummon should also be cast aside. If we cannot make use of the Scriptures, then we 
will have no water to drink, much less a ladle to scoop it up with. 

Further, our founding Ancestor Tozan’s Three Paths and Five Relative 
Positions , which detail the Matter, are frankly beyond anything that the careless 
and inaccurate are able to understand. The underlying principle was accurately 
Transmitted to him and he forthwith pointed out what proper Buddhist conduct is. 
We should not presume to liken his teaching to that of other traditions. 

Also, there are irresponsible people who say, “Although they are different to 
begin with, the teachings of Taoism, the teachings of Confucianism, and the 
Scriptures of Shakyamuni ultimately have the same goal. They are just different 
ways for entering the gate to Truth.” Or they may say, “They are like the three legs 
of a tripod.” This is at the heart of a hot debate among present-day monks in Great 
Sung China. When people speak like this, the Buddha Dharma has already been 
banished from the earth and perished for them. And we should also say that not 
even a smidgen of the Buddha’s Teaching has ever come to them. People like this 
rashly attempt to express what Buddha Dharma is even though they are blocked 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


618 


from penetrating It. They erroneously say that the Buddhist Scriptures are of no use 
because there is a separate Transmission in the tradition of our ancestral Master 
Bodhidharma. 10 They are small-minded people who have not inquired into what 
the boundaries really are in the Way of the Buddhas. They say that one need not 
make use of Buddhist Scriptures, but what about our Master Bodhidharma’s poem? 
Do they make use of it or do they feel that they do not need it? There are many 
instances of Teaching in what our Ancestor said that are just like what is in 
Buddhist Scriptures. Would they have us use his Teaching or discard It? Were they 
to say that our Ancestor’s Truth is not the Buddha’s Truth, who then would trust 
our Ancestor’s Truth? Our Ancestral Master is an Ancestral Master because the 
Buddha’s Truth was authentically Transmitted to him. If there were someone who 
had not received the authentic Transmission of the Buddha’s Truth, who, pray, 
would call him ‘my Ancestral Master’? 

We venerate Bodhidharma as our First Chinese Ancestor because he was our 
Twenty-eighth Indian Ancestor. If we say that what our Ancestor said was apart 
from what the Buddha said, it would be difficult indeed to establish who our Tenth 
or our Twentieth Ancestor was! The reason that we revere our Ancestral Teachers 
who have received the Transmission in turn, heir after heir, is due to the 
importance of the Buddha’s Truth. If there were one of our Ancestral Masters who 
had not had the Buddha’s Truth authentically Transmitted to him, how would he be 
able to face either ordinary people or those in higher realms? And what would be 
more difficult still would be to turn aside from our most profound intention to 
realize Buddhahood in order to follow some teacher who had no connection with 
the Buddha’s Way! 

Untrustworthy crazies today vainly sneer at the Buddha’s Truth because they 
are unable to determine which teaching is the Buddha’s Truth. For them to 
compare, even for a moment, Taoist or Confucian doctrines with the Buddha’s 
Teaching is not only pitiable folly, it is also the karmic* consequence of their 
wrongful deeds in past lives and signals the decline of their nation, because it 
belittles the Three Treasures of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. The paths of 


10. This view, which Dogen considered to be erroneous, derives from a misinterpretation of a 
poem attributed to Bodhidharma, which has been interpreted by some as a rejection of 
Scriptural texts. Dogen’s view is that the Scriptural texts and the pointing to the heart are 
two aspects of what is Transmitted. Bodhidharma’s poem is as follows: 

The separate Transmission that is outside the Teachings 
Does not depend on the written word; 

It directly poin ts us to our human heart, 

So that we may see our True Nature and thereby become Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


619 


Confucius and Lao-tzu are in no way the same as the path of an arhat,* to say 
nothing of the paths of those in the two highest states of bodhisattvahood! 
Confucius and Lao-tzu were barely able to read the great wonders of heaven and 
earth and see in them what the saintly saw and heard. It would have been hard for 
them to clarify in one lifetime, or even in many lifetimes, just what our Great 
Saintly Shakyamuni’s law of causality is. They could just barely discern the sitting 
place of body and mind that is found within the activity of ‘non-activity’, but they 
were unable to clarify what the Universal Truth within the limitlessness of every 
moment truly is. In short, the Confucian and Taoist teachings are so inferior to the 
Teachings of the Buddha that the differences cannot even begin to be described by 
terms like ‘the separation between heaven and earth’. To recklessly discuss them as 
all having one and the same principle is to slander the Buddha Dharma and to 
slander Confucianism and Taoism. Even though there are some accurate points in 
the teachings of those two, our present day veteran monks have not even clarified a 
fraction of those points, much less have they grabbed hold of the Great Handle 
even once in ten thousand tries! Although instruction and training can be found in 
the works of both of these, ordinary, run-of-the-mill scholars today cannot readily 
follow it. There is none in that bunch who could even try to do that training. They 
cannot even connect one bit of teaching with another. How much less could these 
present-day veteran monks possibly realize the profound subtleties of Buddhist 
Scriptures! Not having clarified what the other two are actually about, they just 
irresponsibly put forth their own questionable teachings. 

In Great Sung China today, such fellows ascribe the title of master to 
themselves as proof that they are entitled to take up the profession. Without shame 
for past or present, and with a befuddled mind, they make a mishmash of what the 
Buddha said. It is difficult to acknowledge that they have received the Buddha 
Dharma. Monks like these all say, “The Buddhist Scriptures do not contain the 
original intention behind what the Buddha said. The Ancestral Transmission 
contains what His original intention was. In the Ancestral Transmission alone, that 
which is mysterious, unique, profound, and wondrous has been passed on.” 

Saying things like this is the extreme in silliness. It is what the deranged say. 
In the authentic Transmission of our Ancestral Masters, there is nothing mysterious 
or special that in any way differs in even one remark or half a verse from what is in 
the Buddhist Scriptures. The Buddhist Scriptures and the sayings of our Ancestors 
are both alike as to what has been authentically Transmitted, which has flowed out 
from Shakyamuni Buddha. But the Ancestral Transmission has been Transmitted 
only from heir to heir. Given that, how could such heirs possibly not know 
Buddhist Scriptures, or fail to clarify them, or fail to recite them? An ancient 
worthy once said, “You are deluding yourself with the Scriptures: the Scriptures 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


620 


are not deluding you.” There are many stories about ancient worthies reading 
Scriptures. 

What I would like to say to those who are inaccurate is the following: “If it 
were as you say, then if you throw out Buddhist Scriptures, you will be throwing 
out the Buddha’s Mind, as well as His Body. If you throw out His Body and Mind, 
then you will be throwing out His disciples. If you throw out His disciples, you 
will be throwing out the Way of the Buddhas. If you throw out the Way of the 
Buddhas, will you not be throwing out the Way of the Ancestors? Were you to 
throw out both the Way of the Buddhas and the Way of the Ancestors, you would 
be just one more shaven head among a hundred others. Who could then say that 
you did not deserve a good thwack! Not only would you be at the beck and call of 
every lord and his retainers, you will also be called to account by Old Yama, Lord 
of the Dead.” 

Old veteran monks in present-day China no sooner receive a note from some 
lord or retainer than they proclaim themselves to be the Abbot of a temple and, on 
that basis, go around mouthing wild words like those alluded to above. And there is 
no one to distinguish right from wrong. Only my late Master, and he alone, would 
break out into laughter over that bunch. None of the senior monks from other 
monasteries recognized what was going on. 

As a rule, we should not think that just because monks come from foreign 
parts they must have a clearer understanding of the Way, or that because they are 
teachers of some emperor of a great nation they must invariably have penetrated 
the Matter. All foreigners do not necessarily have the makings of a monk: good 
people are good and wicked people are wicked. Within the three worlds of the 
universe, the potential of people will be the same. 

Likewise, those who have realized the Truth are not necessarily the ones 
who are chosen to be teachers to emperors of great nations, since emperors also 
have difficulty in knowing who has realized the Way. They simply make their 
appointments on the basis of the advice they hear from their retainers. In past and 
present, there have been imperial teachers who have realized the Truth and 
imperial teachers who have not realized the Truth. It is the unenlightened person 
who gets appointed in corrupt times, just as it is the enlightened person who does 
not get appointed in those times. And why is that? Because there are times when 
‘such a person’* is recognized and times when ‘such a person’ is not recognized. 
We should not forget the age-old example of Jinshu. 11 Jinshu became an imperial 


11. Jinshu was the most outstanding monk in Daiman Konin’s huge assembly on Mount Obai. 
Only Daikan Eno, who was a lay laborer in the monastery at that time, was able to 



Shobogenzo: On Buddhist Scriptures 


621 


teacher. He lectured on the Dharma while seated before the bamboo curtain of the 
emperor and he gave voice to the Dharma while seated before the gilded screen of 
the empress. And what is more, he held the highest seat among the seven hundred 
high-ranking monks of Konin’s assembly. And at the same time, long ago on 
Mount Obai there was the temple laborer named Ro. 12 By changing his occupation 
from woodcutter to temple laborer, he freed himself from hauling firewood. Even 
so, he took up the occupation of pounding the temple’s rice. Though some may feel 
sorry that he was of humble birth, he nevertheless left secular life behind him and 
even transcended monkhood, for he had realized the Dharma and had had the 
sacred robe passed on to him while still a lay person. This is something that was 
unheard of in the past, not even in India to the west, and it constitutes a remarkable 
precedent set in the eastern land of China. It is as if even the seven hundred high- 
ranking monks did not compare with him nor could the dragon elephants* of his 
whole nation follow in his footsteps. He is truly an heir of the Buddha who has 
taken his position as our Ancestor of the thirty-third generation after Shakyamuni. 
If our Fifth Chinese Ancestor Daiman Konin had not been a true spiritual friend 
and guide who was able to recognize ‘such a person’, how, pray, could this 
possibly have come about as it did? Quietly reflect on this principle and do not be 
hasty. We should desire to develop the ability to recognize ‘such a one’. To fail to 
do so is a great sorrow for both oneself and others, a great sorrow for our whole 
nation. Broad knowledge and a superior view of things are not necessary. You need 
only to seek the Eye that recognizes ‘such a person’ and quickly develop your 
abilities to do so. Should you lack the ability to recognize ‘such a one’, you will 
sink into ages of darkness. 

Hence, you need to realize that, beyond doubt, there are Buddhist Scriptures 
within the Way of the Buddha. You need to explore the extensive texts and the 
profound meaning of Their mountains and rivers, and you should make these 
Scriptures your standard for doing your utmost to train in the Way. 13 

Given to the assembly during the ninth lunar month of the first year of the Kangen era (October 

1243) while residing at Kippo-ji Temple in the Yoshida district of Echizen Province. 


demonstrate a deeper understanding of the Dharma, and he thereby became Konin’s Dharma 
heir and the recipient of the bowl and robe of Bodhidhanna. 

12. Ro was the family name of Daikan Eno. 

13. In this context, ‘mountains and rivers’ can be seen as aspects of movement and stillness 
within meditation practice. It can also describe obstructions that are encountered in our daily 
experience, and hence to the Scriptures’ Teachings on how to overcome those obstructions. 



51 

On the Buddha’s Way 

(Butsudd) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen takes to task the common view that there 
are five Chinese Zen sects—namely, Soto, Rinzai, Hogen, Igyo, and Uinmon—which are 
different and have unique ways of training and teaching. Dogen argues that there is only one 
way, the Buddha’s Way, and that this Way is the same for all authentic expressions of Buddhism 
and is encapsulated in the phrase, ‘the Transmission of the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching, which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana’. He does, however, recognize that there are 
various lineages within Buddhism, but states that they all share the same underlying Truth of the 
Buddha’s Way and do not constitute unrelated or unique ways of training. 


The Old Buddha Eno once addressed his assembly, saying, “From me back 
to the Seven Buddhas,* there have been forty Ancestors.” When we thoroughly 
explore this statement, we see that he means there are forty Buddhas coming down 
from the Seven Buddhas to Daikan Eno. When we count Buddha after Buddha and 
Ancestor after Ancestor, this is how we count Them. When we count Them like 
this, the Seven Buddhas are seven Ancestors and the thirty-three Ancestors are 
thirty-three Buddhas. This is the thrust of what Daikan Eno is saying. This is the 
Buddha’s instruction for genuine Dharma heirs; only the inheritors of the genuine 
Transmission have had passed on to them the genuine method of counting. 

From Shakyamuni Buddha down to Daikan Eno, there have been thirty-four 
Ancestors. This Transmission from Buddha to Ancestor—Buddha after Buddha 
and Ancestor after Ancestor—has been just like Makakasho’s having a mutual 
encounter with the Tathagata and the Tathagata bringing out a smile from 
Makakasho. 1 

Just as Shakyamuni Buddha explored the Matter through His training with 
Kashyapa Buddha, 2 so it is with Master and disciple today. As a result, the 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching has been personally Transmitted 


* See Glossary. 

1. Makakasho was Shakyamuni Buddha’s Dharma heir. 

2. During a previous life. 


622 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


623 


from Dharma heir to Dharma heir. The true life of the Buddha Dharma is nothing 
other than this authentic Transmission. Because the Buddha Dharma has been 
authentically Transmitted in this manner, it has been passed along by Dharma heir 
after Dharma heir. 

Hence, the meritorious behavior and the essential operation of the Way of 
the Buddhas have been inherent within each of them, without exception. The Way 
of the Buddhas has been passed on from India in the west to China in the east, a 
distance of some hundred and eight thousand miles, and It has been passed on from 
the time when the Buddha was in the world down to this very day, a span of some 
two thousand years. Those folks who have not explored this fundamental principle 
through training with a Master arbitrarily say such wild and mistaken things as 
calling the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, which is the Wondrous 
Heart of Nirvana, ‘the Zen sect,’ or they call our Ancestral Masters ‘Zen 
Patriarchs’, or they declare academic teachers to be Zen Masters, or call them ‘Zen 
monks’, or call themselves ‘devotees of Zen’. These are all branches and leaves 
who take warped views to be the root. In India and China from ancient times down 
to the present day, no one has ever spoken of ‘the Zen sect’, which is the term by 
which these people arbitrarily refer to themselves. Such people are demons out to 
destroy the Buddha’s Way. They are a malicious group who are enemies to the 
Ancestors of the Buddha. 


It says in the Forest Records : 3 

Bodhidharma first went from the kingdom of Liang to the 
kingdom of Wei. He traveled to the foot of Mount Suzan and rested 
his traveling staff at Shorin-ji Temple. He simply sat in stillness, 
facing a wall: he was not engaged in learning how to meditate. For a 
long time no one could figure out why he was doing that and, 
consequently, interpreted it as his learning how to meditate. 

Now, meditation in its narrow sense is simply one among 
various practices, so how could it suffice to say that this was all there 
was to the Saintly One? Yet, people of his time did just that. Those 
engaged in making chronicles followed suit and reported him as being 
among the ranks of those learning how to meditate and grouped him 


3. Sekimon, a twelfth-century work by Kakuhan Eko, a Rinzai monk, which he compiled while 
he was staying at Sekimon Temple. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


624 


with people who are as dead trees or cold ashes. 4 5 Even so, the Saintly 
One’s practice did not simply stop at doing meditation; he also did not 
act contrary to meditation. And even with the yin and yang described 
in the Book of Changes, he did not act contrary to yin and yang. 

Bodhidharma’s being called the Twenty-eighth Ancestor is based on the virtuous 
monk Makakasho’s being called the First Ancestor. He is the Thirty-fifth Ancestor 
when counting from Bibashi Buddha. ^ And not all of the Seven Buddhas and those 
of the twenty-eight generations who followed Them were able to awaken to the 
Truth just by means of formal meditation practice. This is why the old Master of 
Sekimon said, “Meditation in its narrow sense is simply one among various 
practices, so how could it suffice to say that this was all there was to the Saintly 
One?” 

This old Master had come to see a bit of what people are really like and had 
entered the inner meaning of the doctrines of our Ancestral tradition. This was why 
he spoke as he did. In recent times throughout Great Sung China, it would be 
difficult to find such a one as he, and we should be thankful to meet such a one. 
And even if formal meditation were the central practice, we should not name it ‘the 
Zen sect’. 6 And what is more, formal meditation practice is not the whole essence 
of what the Buddha taught. 7 

Even so, folks who willfully call the great Way that has been genuinely 
Transmitted from Buddha to Buddha ‘the Zen sect’ have not yet encountered the 
Way of the Buddhas even in their dreams, nor heard of It in their dreams, nor had It 
Transmitted to them in their dreams. Do not even suggest that the Buddha Dharma 
may exist among that bunch who identify themselves as belonging to ‘the Zen 
sect’. Who was it that invented the name ‘the Zen sect’? Surely it was not called 
the Zen sect by any of the Buddhas, Ancestors, and Masters in our lineage. Keep in 
mind that the name ‘the Zen sect’ is one used by Mara, the lord of demons, and it is 


4. ‘Dead trees and cold ashes’ is a common Zen Buddhist figure of speech for someone who 
has dropped off self. In the present context, it implies that Bodhidharma had gone just so far 
in his practice, but no further. 

5. Bibashi Buddha is the first of the Seven Buddhas, the last of whom is Shakyamuni Buddha. 

6. Dogen’s term zenshu can be rendered not only as the Zen sect but also as the Zen school, the 
Zen Church, the Meditation School, etc. 

7. That is, there is also living in accord with the Precepts and, for monastics, the monastic rules 
and procedures, as well as the Bodhisattva Vows. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


625 


his band of devils that customarily use Mara’s term: it is not the descendants of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. 


Once when the World-honored One held up an udumbara blossom before an 
assembly of millions on Vulture Peak, His eyes atwinkle, the whole assembly fell 
silent. Only the face of the honorable Makakasho broke into a smile. Thereupon, 
the World-honored One said, “I confer upon Makakasho my Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching, which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana, along with my 
sanghati robe .” 8 

What the World-honored One conferred upon the virtuous monk Makakasho 
was His Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, which is the Wondrous 
Heart of Nirvana. He did not add, “I confer upon Makakasho my Zen sect.” He 
said, “along with my sanghati robe.” He did not say, “along with the Zen sect.” 
Accordingly, the name ‘Zen sect’ was never heard whilst the World-honored One 
was in the world. 


Our First Chinese Ancestor, Bodhidharma, in pointing out the 
matter to our Second Ancestor, Eka, said, “The unsurpassed and 
wondrous Way of the Buddhas requires difficult and painful training, 
as well as the ability to bear what is difficult to bear, and all this over 
innumerable periods of time. Why would anyone desire the True 
Vehicle whilst having only little virtue and less wise discernment, or 
whilst having a belittling mind and a slothful attitude?” He also said, 

“The Dharma seal of the Buddhas is not something to be obtained 
from worldly folk.” And he also said, “The Tathagata conferred the 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching upon the virtuous 
monk Makakasho by means of the Treasure House of the Eye of the 
True Teaching.” 

What is now being pointed to is the unsurpassed and wondrous Way of the 
Buddhas, along with the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching and the 
Buddha seal of the Buddhas. At that time there was no mention whatsoever of a 
‘Zen sect’, nor was there any cause or condition for calling anything ‘the Zen sect’. 


8. The sanghati robe is one of the three types of robe that were allowed to Buddhist monks at 
that time. Dogen gives a detailed explanation of each type of robe in Discourse 84: On the 
Spiritual Merits of the Kesa (Kesa Kudoku). 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


626 


Now, the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching had come to be 
Transmitted face-to-face by the raising of eyebrows and the twinkling of eyes. It 
has come to be bestowed with body and mind, bones and marrow. It has come to be 
accepted with body and mind, bones and marrow. It has been Transmitted and 
accepted from a previous Self to a later Self; it has been Transmitted and accepted 
above and beyond the ordinary mind. Within the assembly of the World-honored 
One and Makakasho the term ‘Zen sect’ was not heard; within the assemblies of 
our First and Second Chinese Ancestors, the term ‘Zen sect’ was not heard; within 
the assembly of our Fifth and Sixth Ancestors, the term ‘Zen sect’ was not heard; 
within the assembly of Seigen and Nangaku, the term ‘Zen sect’ was not heard. 
There is no indication of who it was that came to use the term or when it came 
about. Perhaps those scholars who should not be counted as real scholars, those 
whose ulterior motive was to destroy the Dharma or to plagiarize It, may have 
come to use the term. If present-day students of the Way carelessly use a term that 
the Buddhas and Ancestors had not permitted, they may well miss the gateway to 
our tradition. 

Further, it makes it seem as if there is another method of training called ‘the 
Zen sect’, a method that is different from the one used by Buddha after Buddha and 
Ancestor after Ancestor. If there is a method that is different from the Way of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, it will be a method of non-Buddhists. Since you are 
already the offspring of the Buddhas and Ancestors, you should explore through 
your training the Bones and Marrow, as well as the appearance, of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors. You have already embarked on the Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors, 
so do not depart from It and explore non-Buddhist ways. It is rare for us to have 
the opportunity to obtain and preserve the body and mind of a human being, and 
this present opportunity is due to the supporting merit from our doing our utmost to 
practice the Way in the past. Should you mistakenly support non-Buddhist ways 
after having received this benevolent gift, you will not be repaying your 
indebtedness to the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

During recent generations in Great Sung China, there have been many 
common folk throughout the land who have heard this erroneous name of ‘the Zen 
sect’ and therefore speak of ‘the Zen sect’, or speak of ‘the Bodhidharma sect’, or 
speak of ‘the Buddha Mind sect’. These wrong names are bruited about, competing 
with each other and corrupting the Buddha’s Way. These names are the wild 
rantings of people who do not know the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors 
and who have never encountered, or even heard about, the Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching. Much less do they believe that It exists! How could 
anyone who knows the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching call the 
Buddha’s Way by a wrong name? 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


627 


djb 

This is why Sekito Kisen, in ascending to the Dharma seat, addressed his 
great assembly saying, “The Dharma Gate that I have accepted has been 
Transmitted to me by a previous Buddha. It has been done without getting 
involved in discussions of contemplative meditation or of diligence in practice. It 
was given solely that I might master the wise perception of a Buddha.” 

You need to know that Ancestors of the Buddha who have received the 
authentic Transmission from the Seven Buddhas, as well as from all other 
Buddhas, express Themselves like this. The only words they speak are “The 
Dharma Gate that I have accepted has been Transmitted to me by a previous 
Buddha.” Sekito did not say, “The Zen sect that I have accepted has been 
Transmitted to me by a previous Buddha.” He did not get into arguments about 
such topics as contemplative meditation or diligence in practice. What was given to 
him was given solely for the purpose that he might master the wise perception of a 
Buddha. It was solely the wise perception of a Buddha which he was to master— 
and without being averse to contemplative meditation and diligence in practice. 
This is equivalent to the statement, “I confer my Treasure House of the Eye of the 
True Teaching.” ‘My’ means ‘what I possess’. ‘The Dharma Gate’ means ‘the True 
Teaching’. ‘My’, ‘what I possess’, and ‘my Marrow’ are what you receive through 
Transmission. 

Great Master Sekito Kisen was the sole Dharma heir of the Founding 
Ancestor Seigen Gyoshi and was the only one permitted to enter his Master’s 
private quarters. And Seigen was a Dharma offspring of the Old Buddha Daikan 
Eno, who shaved his head . 9 Thus, the Old Buddha Daikan Eno was Seigen’s 
Ancestor, as well as his monastic father, and the Founding Ancestor Seigen was 
Sekito’s elder brother in the Sangha, as well as his Master. As a hero in the 
Buddha’s Way and in the stream of the Ancestors, Great Master Sekito Kisen 
stands alone. Only Sekito, and he alone, mastered the authentic Transmission in the 
Way of the Buddhas. All the instances of his bringing the Teaching to fruition 
which he manifested through words were the timeless acts of an Old Buddha 
manifesting His eternal presence. We should regard Sekito as possessing the Eye of 
the Treasure House of the True Teaching; he is not to be compared with self or 
other. Ignorant people are wrong to compare him with Baso . 10 


9. That is, he ordained Seigen as a monk. 

10. Better known as Baso Doitsu, a contemporaneous monk in Rinzai’s lineage. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


628 


So, you need to keep in mind that the Buddha’s Way, which was Transmitted 
and received from a previous Buddha, was not called ‘contemplative meditation’, 
much less was it ever called, or discussed as, ‘the Zen sect’! Clearly, you need to 
realize that calling It ‘the Zen sect’ is a mistake of enormous proportions. By 
thinking that religious practice must be part of either a concrete sect or an abstract 
sect, the inexperienced defame the Way, as if It were something not worth 
exploring if It were not called ‘a sect’. The Buddha’s Way cannot be like that, so be 
certain that It has never been called ‘the Zen sect’. 

At the same time, the mainstream of people in recent generations are 
befuddled and do not know the old customs. That bunch who have not received 
Transmission from a past Buddha mistakenly say, “Within the Buddha Dharma, 
there are the methods and customs of the five sects.” This is the natural progression 
of a decline in the Teaching. There has not yet been one person, or even half a 
person, who is able to halt It . 11 My late Master Tendo, an Old Buddha, was the first 
to show concern for this situation, due to his mastery of the Dharma, and to our 
good fortune. 

djb 

(Xj 


My late Master, an Old Buddha, once ascended the Dharma seat and 
addressed his assembly, saying, “People nowadays just talk of there being separate 
traditions and customs, such as those of Ummon, Hogen, Igyo, Rinzai, and Soto, 
but this is not the Buddha’s Teaching, nor is it what Ancestors and Masters say.” 
The opportunity to hear someone addressing the assembly in this way has been 
difficult to encounter even in a thousand years. My late Master alone expressed it 
like this. It is hard to hear such Teaching anywhere throughout the ten quarters, and 
only those in his assembly were able to hear it. Even so, among a thousand monks, 
many are those whose ears do not truly hear and whose eyes do not truly see. Even 
less do they hear with their hearts, and less still do they hear with their whole 
being! Even if someone had listened with the whole of his own body and mind for 
millions of myriad eons, he could never have made use of my late Master’s 
awakened body and mind to listen to it, or awaken to it, or develop faith in it, or to 
drop body and mind off. Sad to say, everyone within the ten directions of Great 
Sung China considered the old veteran monks of other monasteries to be on a par 
with my late Master. Should we consider folks who thought like this to be 


11. ‘Person’, here, refers to one who is fully enlightened, whereas ‘half a person’ is someone 
who is partially enlightened. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


629 


equipped with eyes, or should we consider that they were not yet equipped with the 
Eye? 

Further, there were some who viewed my late Master as standing shoulder- 
to-shoulder with Rinzai and Tokusan. We can surely say that these folks had 
likewise never encountered my late Master nor had they ever met up with Rinzai. 
Before I had done my respectful bows to my late Master , 12 an Old Buddha, I had 
already aimed at thoroughly exploring the so-called ‘deeper principles of the five 
sects’. After I had done my respectful bows to my late Master, the Old Buddha, I 
clearly understood that ‘the five sects’ was just an arbitrary name. 

Because this is so, there was no such term as ‘the five sects’ at the time 
when the Buddha’s Teaching was flourishing in Great Sung China, nor did anyone 
of even more ancient times put forth the term ‘the five sects’. Now that the 
Buddha’s Teaching is beginning to decay, the term ‘the five sects’ emerges from 
time to time. This is because people are confused in their explorations of the 
Matter and are not committed to their pursuit of the Way. To all of you trainees 
who are sincerely seeking to thoroughly explore the Matter through your training, I 
loathe having to warn you that you must not hold onto these arbitrary terms for five 
sects. Do not take such terms to be representative of the traditions and customs of 
five separate families. How much less should you hold onto terms such as ‘the 
three profundities and the three necessities’ and ‘the four perspectives and the four 
modes of reflection and action’ associated with Rinzai’s lineage, to say nothing of 
‘the three phrases’ attributed to Rinzai, ‘the five levels’ of Tozan and Sozan, and 
‘the ten types of Truth, which are the same for all Masters’ that is associated with 
Fun’yo! 

What our Master Shakyamuni Buddha said was not as narrow in perspective 
as all this, and He did not value this type of thinking highly. This was not the sort 
of thing that was taught at Shorin-ji Monastery or upon Mount Sokei . 13 Sad to say, 
it is what the shaven-headed trainees of these degenerate days of the Dharma say, 
those who do not really hear the Teaching and whose body, mind, and eyes are still 
in the dark. 

We who are the living children and potential heirs of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors must not speak in this manner. Among Masters who abide in, and keep 
to, the Teaching of the Buddhas and Ancestors, wild words such as these are never 
to be heard. Second-rate teachers of recent times, who have never heard the whole 

12. That is, before Dogen had committed himself to being Nyojo’s disciple. 

13. Shorin-ji Monastery is associated with Bodhidharma and Mount Sokei is associated with 
Daikan Eno. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


630 


of what the Buddha Dharma is expressing, who are not totally devoted to what the 
Ancestors have said, and who are in the dark about their own Original Nature, have 
given rise to sectarian names like those mentioned earlier out of pride in their small 
bits of learning. Once these sectarian names became established, those who were 
young in their training did not learn the proper way to search for the Source and, as 
a consequence, vainly pursued superficialities. They did not have the spirit that 
venerates the old ways, but rather engaged in conduct that was mixed with secular 
customs. However, even the worldly-minded warn people that following worldly 
ways is ignoble. 

djb 

CX) 


Emperor Wen of the Chou dynasty asked his wise minister 
Taikung, “Why is it that our society is in ever-increasing turmoil, 
putting the nation in peril? Even though, as a ruler, I endeavor to 
employ wise counselors, I am not gaining any benefit from them.” 

Taikung responded, “You may hire the wise, but you will not 
benefit from them because you have only appeared to have received 
their sage advice, and therefore you gain nothing from getting their 
wise counsel.” 

Emperor Wen then asked, “Wherein does such a fault lie?” 

Taikung replied, “The fault lies in being fond of those who are 
praised by the worldly instead of finding those who are truly 
sagacious.” 

Emperor Wen then asked, “What do you mean by having a 
fondness for those who are praised by the worldly?” 

Taikung said, “When people are fond of listening to what the 
worldly praise, some may take the unwise to be wise; some may take 
the slow-witted to be intelligent; some may take the disloyal to be 
loyal; some may take the untrustworthy to be trustworthy. If, on the 
basis of what the worldly praise, your lordship were to consider 
someone to be wise and intelligent, or consider someone to be 
incompetent, then the one who has many henchmen will be advanced, 
but the one who has few supporters will not. Thus, when a crowd of 
wicked ones band together and try to conceal the one who is wise, 
loyal retainers may be put to death on false charges, while false 
counselors skirmish for prestige and court rank. Thereby, society is in 
ever-increasing turmoil, and, as a consequence, the nation cannot 
avoid being put in peril.” 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


631 


Even the worldly grieve when their nation and their customs are in peril. When the 
Buddha Dharma and the Way of the Buddha are in peril, the disciples of the 
Buddha will inevitably feel grief. The reason for this peril is the irresponsible 
following of worldly ways. When people hearken to what is praised by the worldly, 
they do not find those who are genuinely wise. If you wish to find one who is 
genuinely wise, you will need to have the resourcefulness that illumines the past 
and looks forward to what lies ahead. What the worldly praise is not invariably 
wise, nor is it invariably saintly, and what the worldly slander is likewise not 
invariably wise, nor is it invariably saintly. Even so, by considering the matter 
three times over, you may avoid confusing the times when someone who is wise 
has invited censure with times when someone who is a fraud is being praised. If 
rulers should fail to make use of the truly wise, it will be a loss for their country, 
and if they should employ the slow-witted, it will be a source of national regret. 


Now, the arising of the term ‘the five sects’ is an aberration of the secular 
world. Those who follow these worldly ways are many, but those who can 
recognize them as being worldly are few. You should regard those who mistake 
worldly ways for saintly ways, as well as those who follow them, to have reached 
the height of folly. How could those folks who follow worldly ways possibly 
recognize the Buddha’s True Teaching? How could they possibly become Buddhas 
and Ancestors? The Dharma has been Transmitted to heir after heir of the Seven 
Buddhas. Those folks whose understanding is based merely on words and who 
speak of ‘the five sects’ do not realize that five different versions of the Vinaya 
were never established in India . 14 

So, you should recognize that our Ancestral Masters turned the true life of 
the Buddha’s Teaching into their own true life. None of them ever said that there 
were five sects, each with their own traditions and practices. To leam that there are 
five Zen sects within the Buddha’s Way is not the true inheritance from the Seven 
Buddhas. 


My late Master once addressed his assembly, saying, “In recent years, the 
Way of our Ancestral Masters has degenerated. Bands of demons and beasts are 
many. They often go on about ‘the traditions and practices of the five sects’. How 


14. The Vinaya is a section of the Buddhist canon that contains rules of monastic discipline. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


632 


distressing! How truly distressing!” Hence, we know all too well that none of the 
twenty-eight generations in India or the twenty-two Ancestors in China ever taught 
about any traditions or customs of five Zen sects. Our Ancestral Masters, who were 
all worthy of the title of Ancestral Master, have all been the same in this. Those 
who go about proclaiming that there are five Zen sects, each with its own unique 
tenets, are folks who are deceiving the public. They are a bunch who have heard 
little and whose understanding is shallow. If everyone in the Buddha’s Way set up 
his own unique way, how could the Buddha’s Way possibly have come down to us 
today? Makakasho would have set up his own way and Ananda would have set up 
his. If the principle of setting up one’s own way was the authentic Way, the Buddha 
Dharma would have disappeared in India long ago. Who would honor principles 
that individual people had set up on their own? If each person sets up his own 
principles, who could determine which were true and which were false? What was 
true and what was false could never be determined. If the true and the false cannot 
be determined, who could recognize what was actually the Buddha Dharma? If its 
principles cannot be clarified, it would be difficult to call anything ‘the Way of the 
Buddha’. The names of the so-called ‘five Zen sects’ did not arise during the 
lifetime of any of the five Ancestral Masters. After those who were called ‘the 
Ancestral Masters of the five Zen sects’ had entered nirvana, mediocre trainees 
within their families, those whose Eye had not yet become clear and whose feet did 
not know how to step forth, established these names without asking their Master’s 
permission and contrary to the Teaching of the Ancestors. This is so evident that 
anyone can recognize it. 

djb 

CX) 


Meditation Master Isan Reiyu was a Dharma heir of Hyakujo Daichi. He 
lived as Abbot on Mount Isan while Hyakujo was still alive. He never said that the 
Buddha Dharma should be called the Igyo sect . 15 And Hyakujo never said, “From 
your time onwards, you should dwell on Mount Isan and call your sect the Igyo 
sect.” Neither Master Isan nor his Ancestor Hyakujo ever used such a name, so you 
need to keep in mind that it is a fraudulent name. And even though people use his 
name as part of their name for a sect, we should not single out Kyozan in this 
way . 16 If it were appropriate for Isan and Kyozan to have used their own names, 
they would have used them, but because it is not appropriate to use one’s own 

15. The name Igyo derives from the first syllable of Isan’s name and the first syllable of Kyozan 
Ejaku’s name. Kyozan was one of Isan’s Dharma heirs. 

16. Since Isan had four other Dharma heirs. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


633 


name, they did not use their personal names in the past and we should not use them 
in the present. People do not speak of an Eno sect, or of a Nangaku sect, or of a 
Baso sect, or of a Hyakujo sect. It is impossible that the Dharma of Isan could 
differ from that of Eno, or could surpass It, or could ever be a rival to It. 

The words that Isan and Kyozan spoke were undoubtedly not like one pole 
being carried by two men. If people wanted to establish a name for a sect, they 
should have called it the Isan sect or the Daii sect, since there is no reason for 
calling it the Igyo sect. If ‘the Igyo sect’ were an appropriate name, it would have 
been called this when the two venerable elders were still alive. What was there to 
prevent them from using a name that they could have used while they were still 
alive? To go counter to what their parental Ancestors said and use the name ‘the 
Igyo sect’, which neither used while they were alive, is to be children who are 
devoid of filial piety. This name does not represent the basic intention of 
Meditation Master Isan or the original purpose of our esteemed teacher Kyozan. It 
has not been genuinely Transmitted by an authentic Master. It is clear that it is a 
fraudulent name used by fraudulent people. Do not let it be spread abroad 
anywhere in the whole universe. 

djb 

CX) 


After abandoning his position as an academic lecturer on Buddhist 
Scriptures, Rinzai became a disciple of Obaku. On three occasions he tasted 
Obaku’s staff, for a total of sixty strokes, and he awoke to his Original Nature 
whilst exploring the Matter with Daigu. Even though he had not yet fully 
penetrated Obaku’s Mind, he took up residence at Rinzai-in Monastery in 
Chenchou Province. Nevertheless, he never spoke a single sentence to the effect 
that the Buddha Dharma that had been Transmitted to him should be called the 
Rinzai sect, nor did he even speak one phrase to that effect, nor did he ever express 
such a thing by raising a fist or by picking up a ceremonial hossu.* Even so, 
mediocre trainees within his monastic family failed to preserve their monastic 
parent’s conduct, as well as the Buddha Dharma, and, soon afterwards, mistakenly 
gave rise to the name ‘the Rin z ai sect’. If this name had been contrived whilst 
Great Master Rinzai was still alive, he certainly would have had something to say 
about the matter, since it is counter to the Teachings of our First Chinese Ancestor. 


17. His awakening was aided by Daigu’s helping him to realize why Obaku had beaten him. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


634 


djb 

As Rinzai was dying and was about to pass on the Dharma to 
Meditation Master Sansho Enen, he said, “After my departure, do not 
let my Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching perish.” 

Enen replied, “My Venerable Monk, how would I dare to let 
your Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching perish?” 

Rinzai then said, “If there were someone who questioned you 
about It in a peremptory manner, how would you respond?” 

Enen immediately gave out with a loud yell that sounded like a 
donkey’s braying. 

Rinzai said, “Who would not believe that my Treasure House of 
the Eye of the True Teaching, which I am passing on to this blind 
jackass, would perish?” 

The words spoken by Master and disciple were just like this . 18 

Rinzai never said, “Do not let my Zen sect perish,” nor did he say, “Do not 
let my Rinzai sect perish,” nor did he say, “Do not let my sect perish.” What he did 
say, quite simply, was, “Do not let my Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching perish.” Be very clear about this, for you should not call the Great Way 
that is authentically Transmitted by the Ancestors of the Buddha ‘the Zen sect’ or 
call it ‘the Rinzai sect’. Indeed, you should not even dream of calling It ‘the Zen 
sect’. Even though his term ‘letting It perish’ refers to that thread which runs 
through the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, as well as to the way 
in which It manifests, It is Transmitted in just the way that Rinzai did it. His 
‘letting It perish’ by passing It on to this blind donkey is truly the ‘Who knows’ of 
Transmission . 19 In Rinzai’s lineage, it was only Enen who received the 
Transmission in this way. You should not compare him to or equate him with any 
of his younger or older brothers in the Dharma . 20 Naturally, he was placed near a 


18. Rinzai’s response is intended ironically and has the effect of adding some light-hearted 
humor to what was actually a very serious moment. This display of humor is demonstrative 
of the deep trust that existed between Master and disciple. 

19. The phrase ‘Who knows’ has a double meaning in Zen texts. It can be taken as a question, 
meaning, “Who can possibly see what is passed on at Transmission?” and it can also be 
taken as an assertion, meaning “It is ‘the Who’—that is, the Buddha Nature—that knows 
what is Transmitted.” 

20. Enen was one of Rinzai’s seven Dharma heirs. The Rinzai lineage, however, passed on 
through another of Rinzai’s heirs. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


635 


21 

bright window. “ The story of Rinzai and Enen is that of Buddha and Ancestor. 
Today, a Rin z ai Transmission is just as the Vulture Peak Transmission of ancient 
times. So, the principle is clear that one should not speak of a Rinzai sect. 


Great Master Ummon Bun’en first trained under the venerable elder Chin 
and may have been one of Obaku’s offspring. He later became a Dharma heir of 
Seppo. This Master never said that one should refer to the Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching as ‘the Ummon sect’. But later, some members of his 
monastic family, not realizing that the false names ‘the Igyo sect’ and ‘the Rinzai 
sect’ were inappropriate titles, set up the new name of ‘the Ummon sect’. If it had 
been Great Master Ummon’s underlying intention to give his name to a sect, it 
would be difficult to affirm that he possessed the Body and Mind of the Buddha 
Dharma. When people nowadays give his name to the name of a sect, it is as if 
they were calling an emperor the lowliest of commoners. 


Meditation Master Hogen of Seiryo-in Monastery was the authentic Dharma 
heir of Great Master Jizo Keichin. He was the Dharma grandchild of Gensha Shibi. 
He grasped the fundamental meaning without any error. Daihogen was the 
Master’s title bestowed upon him by the emperor and the name that he used for his 
signature. There is not a single word among his thousands of words, not one 
sentence among his thousands of sentences, by which he established the title of 
‘the Hogen sect’ by using his title as a name for the Treasure House of the Eye of 
the True Teaching. Even so, those in his lineage have given rise to the name ‘the 
Hogen sect’. If Hogen were alive today to spiritually lead others, he would not lead 
them down the path of using the term ‘the Hogen sect’. Since Meditation Master 
Hogen has already passed away, there is no one to save us from this sickness. Even 
after thousands of myriad years, people who would be loyal to Meditation Master 
Hogen must not take ‘the Hogen sect’ for their name if they wish to remain faithful 
to his Teaching. 


21. This is said of someone whose spiritual ripeness is so apparent upon his arrival at a 
monastery that he is given a place in the Trainees’ Hall—traditionally described as ‘a well-lit 
place’—where the Master can keep an eye on him. 

22. The Hogen sect is better known by its Chinese name of the Fayen sect. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


636 


In summary, both Ummon and Hogen were distant offspring of our Great 
Ancestor Seigen. The Bones of the Way were passed on to each of them, along 
with the Marrow of the Dharma. 


Our Founding Ancestor, Great Master Tozan Ryokai, inherited the Dharma 
from Ungan. Ungan was the direct heir of Great Master Yakusan. Yakusan was the 
direct heir of Great Master Sekito. Great Master Sekito was the sole disciple of our 
Founding Ancestor Seigen. There were no others who stood head-and-shoulders 
with Seigen, so the conduct of the Way was authentically Transmitted to him and to 
him alone. That the true life of the Buddha’s Way has still survived in China is due 
to Great Master Sekito’s having been authentically Transmitted in full. 

Our Founding Ancestor Seigen lived at the same time as the Old Buddha 
Daikan Eno and he trained his disciples on Mount Seigen in the same way as 
Daikan Eno trained his. In that Master Eno helped Seigen to emerge as an 
enlightened Abbot within the world and that both of them served as Abbots during 
the same period of time, Seigen must have been a genuine Dharma heir above 
other genuine Dharma heirs, a Founding Ancestor among Founding Ancestors. It is 
not the case that exploring the Matter with one’s Master is preferable to 
functioning as an Abbot. As students of the Way, you should know that a monk 
who stood shoulder-to-shoulder with Daikan Eno during that time would be 
preeminent today. 

On the occasion when the Old Buddha Daikan Eno was giving instruction on 
how one should enter parinirvana, Sekito, who was seated in the back row, came 
forward and asked the Master whom he should depend on once the Master had 
passed on . 23 The Old Buddha Eno told him to pay a visit to Seigen Gyoshi; he did 
not tell him to pay a visit to Nangaku Ejo. Thus it is clear that the Old Buddha’s 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching was authentically Transmitted to 
our Founding Ancestor Seigen and to him alone . 24 Even though we acknowledge 
that both Seigen and Nangaku were leading disciples who had realized the Way, 
only our Founding Ancestor Seigen walked on genuinely spiritual footsteps. The 
Old Buddha Daikan Eno had thus made his own offspring the offspring of Seigen, 
who, as the spiritual parent of the great-grandparent of Tozan, was clearly someone 


23. Sekito was a teenager at the time. His sitting in the back row implies that he was a relatively 
new novice. 

24. Daikan Eno had two preeminent disciples, Seigen and Nangaku. Dogen’s Soto lineage 
comes via Seigen, whereas all other extant lineages come via Nangaku. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


637 


who had realized Daikan Eno’s Marrow and who was a genuine heir in the 
Ancestor’s lineage. 2 '^ 

Great Master Tozan, as the fourth generation Dharma heir of S eigen, 
received the genuine Transmission of the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching, which opened his Eye to the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana. There is no 
separate Transmission, no separate sect, in addition to this. Our Great Master never 
showed his Fist or his twinkling Eye to his assembly, calling either ‘the Soto sect’. 
Further, since there were no mediocre trainees mixed in with his family, how could 
there possibly be any in his family who spoke of a ‘Soto sect’! 

The name ‘Soto sect’ may have derived from someone adding Sozan’s name 
to Tozan’s. If this is so, then Ungo and Doan should also have been included . 26 
Ungo was a guiding Master among ordinary people, as well as among those in 
loftier positions, and was even more revered than Sozan. When it comes to this 
name ‘Soto’, clearly some stinking skin bag* in an offshoot lineage who fancied 
himself the equal of Tozan devised the name ‘Soto sect’. Truly, even though the 
situation is as clear as the sun in broad daylight, it is as if the sun were being 
obscured by floating clouds. 

djb 

CX) 


My late Master once said, “Nowadays there are many who have ascended a 
Lion’s Seat* and who act as though they were teachers of ordinary people and 
those in lofty positions. Even so, none of them has an understanding of the 
underlying principles of the Buddha Dharma.” From this perspective, those who 
are striving to uphold one of the so-called ‘five sects’ and make the mistake of 
getting stuck on the words in some Master’s saying are truly enemies of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. And some, regarding themselves as belonging to a branch 
of followers of Meditation Master Oryu Enan, are in the habit of calling 
themselves ‘the Oryu sect’. Perhaps their branch will not go on very far before they 
recognize their error. Speaking generally, while the World-honored One was in the 
world, he never spoke of ‘the Buddha sect’ or of ‘the Vulture Peak sect’. He did not 
speak of ‘the Jetavana sect’, or of a ‘My Mind sect’, or of a ‘Buddha Mind sect’, so 


25. That is, Sekito was originally one of Daikan Eno’s disciples. Because he was not yet named 
as a Dharma heir, he became Seigen’s disciple and, subsequently, his Dhanna heir. In turn, 
Sekito became the spiritual parent to Yakusan, who became the spiritual parent of Ungo, 
who became the spiritual parent of Tozan. 

26. Ungo and Sozan were both Dharma heirs of Tozan. Sozan’s line ultimately died out, 
whereas Ungo’s continued on with Doan as his Dharma heir. 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


638 


from what words of the Buddha did the name ‘Buddha Mind sect’ come? Why do 
people today speak of a ‘Buddha Mind sect’? Why would the World-honored One 
feel the need to call His mind a sect? And why should a sect ever be connected to a 
mind? If there is to be a Buddha Mind sect, then there ought to be a Buddha Body 
sect. And we should have a Buddha Eye sect, and a Buddha Ear sect, or even a 
Buddha Nose and Tongue sect. There would have to be such things as a Buddha’s 
Marrow Sect, a Buddha’s Bones sect, a Buddha’s Legs sect, or a Buddha Nation 
sect. No such sects exist at present. Keep in mind that the name ‘the Buddha Mind 
sect’ is a phony name. 

When Shakyamuni Buddha gave expression to the True Form of all thoughts 
and things throughout all Buddha lands and when He gave voice to all the Buddha 
lands throughout the universe, He did not speak of having set up some sect within 
any of these Buddha lands. If it were the practice of Buddhas and Ancestors to 
name sects, it would have been done in one of the Buddha lands, and if these 
names existed in one of the Buddha lands, it would have been something that a 
Buddha would have spoken of. The Buddha did not speak of it, so you should 
know for certain that it did not exist in the Buddha lands. It is not practiced in the 
Way of the Ancestors, so you should know for certain that it is not something that 
the Ancestors found useful. It is not only something that other people would laugh 
at, but it is also something that would be held in check by Buddhas. Therefore, it is 
something that you yourselves should laugh at. So, I beg you, do not create 
sectarian names, and do not say that there are five sects within the Buddha 
Dharma. 


In more recent times, there was a childlike person named Chiso who 
collected a small spattering of sayings of Ancestral Masters along with what he 
called ‘the sectarian lineages of the five families’. He named his work the Eyes of 
Human and Celestial Beings. People have not understood what this work really is. 
Bunches of novices and present-day trainees have fancied that it is accurate, and 
some of them even go about carrying a copy of it tucked within their robes. This 
work is not the eyes of human and celestial beings, but rather something that blinds 
the eyes of human and celestial beings. How could anyone possibly accrue any 
merit by disregarding the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching? 

This Eyes of Human and Celestial Beings was compiled and edited by a 
senior monk named Chiso in Mannen Temple on Mount Tendai around the twelfth 
lunar month in the sixth year of the Shunhsi era (1188). Even though it was 
compiled in more recent times, if its statements were accurate we could approve of 
it. But this work of his is utter madness and blind folly, for he lacked the Eye for 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


639 


exploring the Matter, nor did he have the Eye of one who has journeyed far in 
search of a Master, to say nothing of having the Eye for recognizing Buddhas and 
Ancestors! We should not use this work. He shouldn’t have been called Chiso, 
which means ‘He Who is Wise and Knowing’, but Gumo, which means ‘He Who 
is Blinded by Ignorance’. He is someone who does not know what ‘such a 
person’* means and who has never met ‘such a person’, and, because of this, he 
has arbitrarily compiled sayings without picking out just the sayings of those who 
are ‘such a person’. It is obvious that he does not know what ‘such a person’ is. 


The reason why those folks who study Scriptures in China assign sectarian 
names to them is because they wish to compare the opinions of the various 
teachers of this and that. Now, the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching 
of the Buddhas and Ancestors has been Transmitted from Dharma heir to Dharma 
heir. These heirs are incomparable, for they have no ‘this or that’ which can 
confuse others. Be that as it may, there are some trainees of long standing who are 
inaccurate and who employ sectarian names to no purpose. Because they are 
engaged in the hot pursuit of personal gain, they do not stand in proper awe of the 
Buddha’s Way. 

The Buddha’s Way is not someone’s personal ‘Buddha’s Way’. It is the 
Buddha’s Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors. It is the Buddha’s Way of the 
Buddha’s Way. As Minister Taikung once said when talking with Emperor Wen, 
“The whole nation is not the nation of one person. It is the whole nation’s whole 
nation.” Thus, even an ordinary layman had wisely discerned this and had put it 
this way. 

As children of the Buddhas and Ancestors, you must not permit those within 
the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors to recklessly follow along with the 
foolish and the blind by setting up sects and giving them personal names. That is a 
great impropriety, and one who acts like this is not a person of the Buddha’s Way. 
If it was right for us to go around naming sects, the World-honored One would 
have done so Himself. In that the World-honored One had not already given His 
name to a sect, why should His children use such names after His parinirvana? 
Who could be more spiritually skillful than the World-honored One? If someone 
lacks skill, no good can come of it. Again, if the Buddhas and the Ancestors have 
not acted contrary to the Way in the past by setting up sects in Their own names, 
who of His children would name a sect after themselves? 

You need to explore the Matter through your training by studying the past 
and examining the present, and do not be arbitrary about it. When Shakyamuni 



Shobogenzo: On the Buddha s Way 


640 


Buddha was in the world, His disciples were apprehensive lest they should differ 
from Him by even a hair, or lest they should miss even one jot within the hundreds 
of thousands of myriad points of His Teaching, for they wished to experience the 
joy of realizing the Truth which they had chosen as their inheritance, and they 
would not go against It. Thus, we should vow to seek and serve the Buddha and 
hear His Dharma over the course of many lives. Those who would deliberately go 
against the transforming Teaching that the World-honored One gave while He was 
in the world and give rise to sectarian names are not disciples of the Tathagata nor 
are they offspring of the Ancestral Masters. Their breaking of Precepts is more 
serious than the transgressions of others. They have rashly disregarded the 
importance of the unsurpassed wisdom of the Tathagata, and, by selfishly fostering 
their own sect, they have made light of or disregarded those who preceded them to 
such an extent that we can say they do not even know who their predecessors were. 
They did not trust in the meritorious behavior of the World-honored One during 
His time. The Buddha Dharma cannot exist within the dwelling places of such 
people. 

So, if you wish to receive the authentic Transmission of the conduct of the 
Way, you must not look for or hearken to sectarian names. That which Buddha 
after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor has received and authentically 
Transmitted is the unsurpassed wisdom of the Treasure House of the Eye of the 
True Teaching. The Dharma that is possessed by the Buddhas and Ancestors has 
been wholly Transmitted by the Buddhas and Ancestors, and there is nothing new 
to be added to the Dharma. This principle is the very Bones of the Dharma and the 
very Marrow of the Way. 

Given to the assembly at Kippo-ji Temple in the Yoshida district of Fukui Prefecture on the 
sixteenth day of the ninth lunar month in the first year of the Kangen era (October 30, 
1243). 

Copied by me during the third watch of the night on the twenty-third day of the tenth lunar month 
in the same year (November 6, 1243). 

Ejo 



52 

On the Heart-to-Heart Language of Intimacy 

(Mitsugo) 


Translator’s Introduction: The term ‘mitsugo ’ has a variety of meanings which come into play 
throughout this discourse. In its conventional, mundane sense, it refers to using a secret 
language. That is, someone is using language to conceal something, to hide its meaning from the 
uninitiated. It also refers to some unique or personal way in which a Buddha or Ancestor puts the 
Great Matter, a way that has a sense of immediacy in contrast to something discursive. And it 
refers to the way that Master and disciple communicate, which has inherent in it an element of 
intimacy or closeness that arises from their being of one Mind and of one Heart. 


When your spiritual question fully breaks open and manifests the Great 
Truth that all Buddhas preserve within Their hearts, the sayings “You too are like 
this and I too am like this” and “We must guard well” express this awakening to 
Shakyamuni’s prediction of Buddhahood. 


One time when Great Master Ungo Doyo was being offered 
alms by a high government official, he was asked, “They say that the 
World-honored One had a secret way of communicating and that 
Makakasho did not conceal it. What was the World-honored One’s 
secret way of communicating?” 

The Great Master called out to him, “O Minister!” 

The man acknowledged the call with a “Yes?” 

The Great Master said, “Do you get It?” 

The official replied, “No, I don’t get it.” 

The Great Master then said, “Were you not to get It, it would be 
because it is the World-honored One’s ‘secret’ way of putting It. If 
you were to get It, it would be because Makakasho did not keep It to 
himself.” 


The Great Master was making fully apparent that he was a fifth-generation 
descendant of Seigen and a teacher of those in lofty positions, as well as of 
ordinary people, and that he was an excellent spiritual friend to those throughout 
the whole universe in all ten directions, who gave guidance to both the sentient and 


641 



Shobogenzo: On the Heart-to-Heart Language of Intimacy 


642 


the nonsentient. 1 As the Forty-sixth Buddha among the Buddha’s heirs, he voiced 
the Dharma for the sake of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Whilst residing in his 
hermitage on Three-peak Mountain, he was sent food from celestial kitchens as 
alms. At the time when the Dharma was transmitted to him and he realized the 
Truth, he transcended the realm of being sent such alms. 2 

What is quoted here now as “The World-honored One had a secret way of 
putting It and Makakasho did not conceal It” is what the Forty-sixth Buddha 
passed on to us as the Original Face of forty-six generations. It is not a matter of 
chasing after someone who has realized It, nor is It something that comes from 
outside oneself, nor is It something that Makakasho and he alone was originally 
endowed with, nor has It ever been some prize newly awarded to someone. It is the 
manifesting of an intimate and personal way of putting It; it is not a matter of the 
World-honored Shakyamuni having some secret language of His own. All Buddhas 
and Ancestors have Their own intimate way of putting It. Whoever has already 
become a World-honored One, without doubt, has an intimate way of putting It. 
And when someone has an intimate way of putting It, there is no doubt that there 
will be a Makakasho who will not conceal It. We must not forget to explore 
through our training the principle that when there are a hundred thousand World- 
honored Ones, there will be a hundred thousand Makakasho’s. ‘Exploring through 
our training’ means not intentionally trying to understand everything all at once, 
but taking great pains in striving a hundred or even a thousand times, as if you 
were trying to cut through something hard. Do not fancy that when someone has 
something to relate to you, you should immediately understand what is being said. 

In that he of Mount Ungo had already become a World-honored One, he was 
equipped with an intimate and personal way of putting It and he had Makakasho’s 
way of not concealing It. In your explorations, do not pursue the idea that the 
calling out of “O Minister!” and the Minister’s replying “Yes?” are some secret 
way of communicating. 


1. The sentient are those who are sensitive to the Dharma and the nonsentient are those who 
have not yet learned how to listen to It. 

2. While someone is seriously pursuing the path to enlightenment, that person receives celestial 
sustenance, and when someone realizes the Truth, the offering of celestial sustenance ceases, 
since there is no longer any need for it. 



Shobogenzo: On the Heart-to-Heart Language of Intimacy 


643 


djb 

In the narrative, the Great Master pointed out the Matter* to the high 
government official, saying, “Were you not to get It, it would be because it is the 
World-honored One’s ‘secret’ way of putting It. If you were to get It, it would be 
because Makakasho did not keep It to himself.” You should be determined to do 
your utmost for as many eons as it takes to pursue what is being said here. What he 
is saying is, “When you are in a state of not getting It, that is the World-honored 
One’s intimate way of putting It.” He is not saying that not getting It was due to the 
official’s being dull-headed. This was his way of giving his support for the official 
to really listen to what is going on by calmly exploring the principle of ‘were you 
not to get If. The official needed to do his utmost in pursuing the Way. Also, his 
saying, “If you were to get It,” goes beyond saying, “You have already 
comprehended it.” 3 

There are many different ways to go in exploring the Buddha Dharma 
through one’s training. Among them lies the essential matter of grasping what the 
Buddha Dharma is or of not grasping what the Buddha Dharma is. Those who have 
not yet encountered an authentic Master do not even know that such an essential 
matter exists. In wild confusion, they misunderstand, thinking that there is some 
kind of secret language, and thereby they recklessly shut off their eyes and ears 
from seeing and hearing. This goes beyond saying that your understanding is the 
condition upon which Its ‘not being concealed’ is based, for It is still not concealed 
even when you do not understand It. Do not pursue through your training that not 
concealing It means that anybody can see or hear It. It is already in plain view right 
here and now. And when can we say for certain that nothing is hidden? At this very 
moment, we need to try to make a thorough examination of this point, since we are 
not to explore through our training that matters which are unknown to us are what 
is meant by ‘intimate ways of putting It’. The very moment of not understanding 
the Buddha Dharma is one part of an intimate way of putting It. That part is what 
invariably belongs to the World-honored One; it is the World-honored One’s 
existence. 

Even so, people who have not heard the instructive teaching of a genuine 
Master may take to sitting upon the Buddha’s Lion Seat,* but they have not yet 


* See Glossary. 

3. That is, grasping the significance of what the Great Master is pointing to goes far beyond 
having a purely intellectual or speculative understanding. 



Shobogenzo: On the Heart-to-Heart Language of Intimacy 


644 


encountered this underlying principle even in their dreams. They arbitrarily say 
such things as the following: 

The statement, “The World-honored One had a secret way of 
communicating,” refers to His raising up a flower, His eyes atwinkle, 
whilst He stood before an assembly of hundreds of thousands upon 
Vulture Peak. And He did so because the words used in the Buddha’s 
preaching are superficial, being concerned only with names and 
forms, whereas giving expression to It without recourse to words by 
His holding aloft a flower and twinkling His eyes is the occasion 
which established this secret way of communicating. The hundreds of 
thousands in the assembly did not comprehend this, because this was 
His secret way of communicating for the sake of that assembly. The 
statement, “Makakasho did not conceal It,” refers to Makakasho’s 
face breaking into a smile as if he already knew that the World- 
honored One would raise the flower and His eyes would twinkle. This 
is the true secret key to practicing the Way, and it is what has been 
passed on in case after case. 

The folks who, hearing this, think it to be true are as common as rice and hemp 
seeds, bamboo canes and reeds. They are the sort of folks who populate 
monasteries in all nine divisions of China. How sad that this way of thinking has 
sent the Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors into a decline! Someone whose eyes 
are bright and clear can surely get to the bottom of what is really going on here, 
point by point. 

If the words the World-honored One used were really something superficial, 
then His holding the flower aloft, with His eyes atwinkle, would also be something 
superficial. Were anyone to consider what He said to be merely name and form, 
that person is not ‘such a one’* who has learned what the Buddha Dharma really 
is. Those who consider what is spoken to be no more than names and forms have 
not yet comprehended that the World-honored One was beyond the use of language 
as merely ‘names and forms’. They have not yet let go of the confused, emotional 
attitudes of ordinary, worldly people. What permeates the Body and Mind of 
Buddhas and Ancestors is the dropping off of self, Their giving expression to the 
Dharma, and Their using language to voice It, that is, Their turning the Wheel of 
the Dharma. There have been many indeed who, having witnessed and listened to 
It, have greatly profited from It. Those whose practice is based on faith, as well as 
those whose practice is based on understanding the Teaching, are cloaked in Its 
influence in places where there is an Ancestor of the Buddha, or partake of Its 
influence even in places where there is no Ancestor of the Buddha. How could any 



Shobogenzo: On the Heart-to-Heart Language of Intimacy 


645 


of the hundreds of thousands in that assembly possibly fail to have witnessed that 
His holding the flower aloft, His eyes atwinkle, was a holding aloft of a Flower, 
with His Eye atwinkle? Anyone in the assembly might have been shoulder-to- 
shoulder with Makakasho, or might have been living in the same way as the World- 
honored One. And anyone in the assembly might have been exploring the Matter in 
the same way as hundreds of thousands of others in the assembly were doing, or 
might, at the same time, have been giving rise to the intention to realize 
Buddhahood, for they were walking the same spiritual path in the same country. By 
relying on the wise discernment gained from direct experience, they may see the 
Buddha and hear His Teaching, or by relying on the wisdom gained from not 
knowing, they may see the Buddha and hear His Teaching. After having 
encountered a Buddha for the first time, one will subsequently recognize Buddhas 
as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges. In any particular assembly of a 
Buddha, there may be people numbering in the hundreds of thousands of millions, 
and we may see each Buddha in all the assemblies holding aloft the Flower, Eye 
atwinkle, at the same time. No observing eye is dim; every listening ear is keen. 
And there is the Eye of the Heart, and there are the eyes of the body. There is the 
Ear of the Heart, and there are the ears of the body. 

How does that other bunch understand ‘Makakasho’s face breaking into a 
smile’? Let them try to put that into words. If it were as those folks say, they would 
have called that smile ‘a secret communication’. But to call it ‘his not concealing 
anything’ would be piling foolishness atop foolishness. Later, the World-honored 
One said, “I have the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, which is the 
Wondrous Heart of Nirvana, and I have transmitted It to Makakasho.” Is His 
speaking in this way using speech or not using speech? If the World-honored One 
had a dislike for spoken language and preferred holding a flower aloft, He surely 
would have also held up a flower on this occasion. And then, how could 
Makakasho fail to understand and how could the assembly fail to hear? Do not rely 
on the tales of those folks who talk this way. 

To summarize, the World-honored One had His own way of talking, His own 
way of acting, and His own way of awakening to the Truth. Foolish people fancy 
that having one’s own way of putting the Matter—that is, His having a ‘secret’ 
way—means that other people did not know what He Himself knew. Hence, there 
were those who were ‘in on it’ and those who were not ‘in on it’. Those who had 
been voicing their opinions about a ‘secret way’ in India or the eastern lands from 
remote antiquity to the present day have not explored the Buddha’s Way through 
their training. Among the uneducated in both secular life and in those who left 
secular life behind, secrets were many, whereas, among the educated, secrets have 



Shobogenzo: On the Heart-to-Heart Language of Intimacy 


646 


been few indeed. How could those of broad experience possibly have secrets? And 
how much less can there be secret talk or secret intentions when one is wholly 
equipped with sharp eyes and sharp ears, or with the Eye of wisdom and the Ear of 
wisdom, or with a Buddha’s Eye and a Buddha’s Ear? Associating such things as a 
secret language, secret intentions, or secret actions with the Buddha’s Teaching is 
not in accord with this principle. When we encounter ‘such a person’, of course we 
hear his way of putting It, and we express our way of putting It. When we know 
our True Self, we know what another’s way of demonstrating It is pointing to. 
Moreover, an Ancestor of the Buddha is capable of understanding the previously 
mentioned ‘secret’ intentions and ‘secret’ language. Keep in mind that, at the very 
moment of being an Ancestor of the Buddha, secret ways of saying It and secret 
ways of enacting It vie with each other to manifest. What we mean by ‘secret’ is 
the principle of intimacy, of closeness. It means that there is no gap. It embraces 
Buddha and Ancestor. It embraces you and it embraces me. It embraces our 
practice. It embraces those of our generation. It embraces our meritorious deeds. It 
embraces what is most intimate. Even when the Eye of a Buddha espies ‘such a 
person’ encountering intimate talk and intimate talk encountering ‘such a person’, 
He may not see it, even though He may try. The practice of intimacy is beyond 
anything known by self or other. Only the Intimate Self can know it, for it is 
beyond the ken of any other intimate person. Because Intimacy resides all around 
you, everything relies on Intimacy; each thing or even half a thing relies on 
Intimacy. You need to explore this principle, doing your utmost to clarify what it is. 

In conclusion, whenever and wherever we are practicing the Way, it 
invariably involves an intimate way of expressing the Matter for the benefit of 
‘such a one’. This is the legitimate succession of Buddha after Buddha and 
Ancestor after Ancestor. Because this very moment of Now is such an occasion, we 
are intimate with our self, with the self of others, with the Buddhas and Ancestors, 
and with all the different species. As a result, it is an intimacy atop intimacy, ever 
anew. Because such Teaching, practice, and awakening are what a Buddha or 
Ancestor is, they comprise what Buddhas and Ancestors intimately pass on. 


My Master’s Master, Setcho, once said to his assembly in verse: 

The World-honored One had an intimate way of 
speaking, 

Which Makakasho could not conceal, 

For in the night, flowers had rained down, 

Bathing the citadel in their perfume. 



Shobogenzo: On the Heart-to-Heart Language of Intimacy 


647 


Here and now, Setcho’s expression, “For in the night, flowers had rained down, 
bathing the citadel in their perfume,” is the very essence of what Intimacy is. 
Because Setcho proclaimed this, you should scrutinize the Eye and Nose of our 
Buddhist Ancestor. It was a place that neither Rinzai nor Tokusan were able to 
reach. You need to open up and explore the Nostrils that are in your Eye, and let 
the tip of your Nose sharpen up your Ear. And what is more, you need not go all 
that deeply into your Ear, Nose, or Eye to make Them your whole body and mind, 
and without making Them over again. We take this as the principle of “the raining 
down of flowers gives rise to the world.” 4 

Setcho’s expression, “Bathing the citadel in their perfume,” is synonymous 
with the True Self being concealed while the outer form becomes ever more like a 
hermit training in his hut. Therefore, thoroughly explore and pass on to others that 
within the everyday life of the family of the Buddhas and Ancestors, the World- 
honored One will have His intimate words and Makakasho will not conceal them 
from us. Each of the Seven World-honored Buddhas,* in turn, explored the Matter 
through Their training just as you do now. Makakasho and Shakyamuni likewise 
probed deeply into the Matter so that They might understand It. I pray that you are 
now doing the same. 

Given to the assembly on the twentieth day of the ninth lunar month in the first year of the 
Kangen era (November 3, 1243) at the old monastery ofKippo-ji in the Yoshida district of 
Echizen Province. 

Copied while staying in the office of the Abbot of the same monastery on the sixteenth day of the 
tenth lunar month in the same year (November 29, 1243). 

Ejo 


4. This quote is a line from a poem by Bodhidhanna’s Master, the Venerable Hannyatara. 
Dogen modified it slightly to fit in the context of his discourse by substituting the words 
‘raining down of flowers’ for Hannyatara’s ‘opening of a blossom’. 



53 

On the True Nature of All Things 

(Hossho) 


Translator’s Introduction: ‘The True Nature of all things’ ( hossho ) refers not only to the way 
things are just as they are, but also to our Buddha Nature and to That Which Is. 


If you are really doing your exploring through your training, whether by 
following the Scriptures or by following your spiritual friend, you will ultimately 
realize the Truth by yourself, independent of your Master. Realizing the Truth by 
oneself independent of one’s Master is the functioning of one’s True Nature. And 
even so, if you are inherently keen, you will still need to call upon a Master and 
inquire of the Way. And even if you are not inherently keen, you will still need to 
do your utmost in practicing the Way. But who among you is not inherently keen? 
Each one of you follows both the Scriptures and the advice of a good friend in 
order to arrive at the enlightenment which is the fruit of Buddhahood. Keep in 
mind that inherent keenness means that when you encounter the Scriptures or come 
face-to-face with a spiritual friend, you are encountering the meditative state of 
your True Nature, and that when you encounter the meditative state of your True 
Nature, you attain the meditative state of the True Nature of all things. 1 It is our 
tapping into the wisdom from our previous lives, attaining the three illuminations, 
and awakening to fully perfected enlightenment. 2 Coming face-to-face with our 
inherent keenness, we study it; coming face-to-face with the wisdom that goes 
beyond having a Master and that is inherent within us, we straightforwardly 
Transmit it. If we had no inherent keenness, then even though we came face-to- 
face with the Scriptures and a spiritual friend, we could not hear what the True 
Nature of all things is, nor could we realize It. The Great Truth is not a principle 


1. The ‘meditative state of one’s True Nature’ refers to entering the realm where we can see the 
True Nature of all things. 

2. The three illuminations are seeing what conditions result from the past lives of oneself and 
others, seeing what conditions are likely to arise for oneself and others in future times, and 
seeing what the miseries of present life conditions are in oneself and others, along with how 
to remove their root causes. 


648 



Shobogenzo: On the True Nature of All Things 


649 


like that of someone drinking water to know for himself whether it is warm or 
cool. 3 

All Buddhas, along with all Bodhisattvas* and all sentient beings, by the 
power of their inherent keenness, clarify what the Great Truth of the True Nature 
of all things is. They clarify what the Great Truth of this True Nature is by 
following the Scriptures and by following their spiritual friend. In this way, they 
come to understand their own True Nature. The Scriptures are what True Nature is: 
they are our true Self. And because True Nature is our true Self, It is not the self 
that non-Buddhists and devilish beings misunderstand It to be. Within True Nature 
there is no ‘non-Buddhist’ or ‘devilish being’; it is simply a matter of “Come to 
breakfast! Come to dinner! Come to supper!” 4 Even so, when those who call 
themselves long-time trainees of twenty or thirty years encounter talk about the 
True Nature of all things, they stagger on through their lives in a daze. Styling 
themselves as being both long-disciplined and enlightened, they climb up upon a 
Master’s wooden Dharma seat. Then, when they hear the Voice of their True 
Nature, or catch sight of the Form of their True Nature, their body and mind, and 
everything around them, simply bob up and down in a pit of confusion. In this 
unpleasant state of affairs, they mistakenly imagine that after the universe has 
fallen away, the True Nature will appear, and that this True Nature will no longer 
be comprised of the myriad forms that exist in the world. The principle of the True 
Nature of all things can never be like that. The myriad forms of all that exists in the 
world and the True Nature of all things lie far beyond discussions of being the 
same or being different, and they transcend any talk of being separate or being 
united. Because they are beyond past, present, and future, beyond being 
discontinuous or continuous, beyond physical form, sensation, thoughts, actions, 
and consciousness, they are what the True Nature of all things is. 


Meditation Master Baso Doitsu from Chiang-hsi in Hungchou Province once 

said: 

All sentient beings from countless eons past have never 
departed from the meditative state of the True Nature of all things, but 


3. That is, the Great Truth is absolute, whereas the testing of the temperature of water through 
direct experience is relative. 

* See Glossary. 

4. That is, all beings are invited, for they are already included within this True Nature. 



Shobogenzo: On the True Nature of All Things 


650 


rather they have always resided within It. Putting on clothes and 
eating meals, conversing and making respectful replies, using one’s 
six sense organs: all such activities are totally what True Nature is. 

The True Nature of all things that Baso spoke of is the True Nature expressed by 
True Nature. It harmonized with Baso and he harmonized with It. Once he had 
heard It, how could he have failed to speak out? The True Nature of all things rode 
astride Baso . 5 

Now, people absorb meals and meals absorb people. The True Nature of 
both of these, from the start, has never left the meditative state of the True Nature 
of all things. Their True Nature, after manifesting Itself, has never left the True 
Nature of all things. Their True Nature, before manifesting Itself, has never left the 
True Nature of all things. The True Nature of all things over countless eons of time 
is simply the meditative state of the True Nature of all things. So we describe this 
True Nature as being eons beyond measure. Accordingly, whatever is here at this 
very moment is the True Nature of all things, and the True Nature of all things is 
what exists at this very moment. When we put on our clothes and eat our meal, it is 
the meditative state of the True Nature of all things that is putting on the clothes 
and eating the meal. The True Nature of clothing is fully manifested; the True 
Nature of food is fully manifested. The True Nature of eating is fully manifested; 
the True Nature of dressing is fully manifested. If we did not put on clothes and eat 
food, if we did not converse and make respectful replies, if we did not use our six 
sense organs, if we were not performing all our actions, then we would not be in 
the meditative state of the True Nature of all things, nor would we have entered 
into our own True Nature. What was just quoted here and now from Baso is what 
the Buddhas fully conferred to Shakyamuni Buddha, and it is what the Ancestors 
have accurately Transmitted to Baso. Authentically Transmitted and handed on by 
Buddha after Buddha and by Ancestor after Ancestor, It was authentically 
Transmitted through the meditative state of the True Nature of all things. Buddha 
after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor, without having to enter this meditative 
state, have set Their True Nature frolicking like a fish leaping about in the water. 
Even though teachers of doctrine who rely on the written word speak of ‘true 
nature’, it is not the True Nature of which Baso spoke. Now, there may be some 
merit in human beings, who have never yet departed from their True Nature, 
thinking that they must certainly be devoid of a True Nature, but this will just be a 


5. There is a play on words here. Baso’s name literally means ‘our Ancestor who is a horse’, 
the horse being a common Zen metaphor for someone who goes traveling near and far to 
help all sentient beings. 



Shobogenzo: On the True Nature of All Things 


651 


fresh instance of their True Nature manifesting Itself. Even were we to talk or 
converse as if we lacked True Nature, or were to work or act as if we lacked True 
Nature, this too would only be True Nature manifesting Itself. 

The passing of days and months of immeasurable eons past has been the 
passing of the True Nature of all things. And it is just the same for the present and 
the future. 

We may take the measure of our body and mind to be just the measure of 
our body and mind, not recognizing them as an aspect of our True Nature, but this 
way of thinking about them is also a function of our True Nature. Or we may take 
the measure of our body and mind not to be a true measure of our body and mind, 
while still not recognizing them as an aspect of our True Nature, but this way of 
thinking about them is likewise a function of our True Nature. Whatever we may 
consider or not consider them to be, in either case they are an aspect of our True 
Nature. To think that the ‘Nature’ in ‘True Nature’ means that water does not flow 
and that trees do not flourish and then wither away is a non-Buddhist view . 6 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “The appearance of each thought and thing 
is just as it is, and the nature of each thought and thing is likewise just as it is.” 
Accordingly, flowers blooming and leaves falling are just True Nature as it is. 
Even so, foolish people fancy that within the realm of True Nature flowers do not 
bloom and leaves do not fall. Right now, without questioning anyone else, 
articulate your own doubts by forming a concept or image of them. Go over them 
thoroughly three times as if they were being expounded by someone else, and 
chances are that you will have already extricated yourself from them. It is not that 
these doubts are wicked thoughts, but they are simply thoughts arising at a time 
before you have clarified your doubts. When you are clarifying your doubts, do not 
think that you need to get rid of them. The blooming of flowers and the falling of 
leaves are, quite naturally, the blooming of flowers and the falling of leaves. The 
thinking which gives rise to the idea that there can be no blooming flowers or 
falling leaves within True Nature is True Nature Itself. True Nature manifests Itself 
when our thinking is freed from concepts or images, and is therefore in accord with 
the way that True Nature ‘thinks’. The totality of Its thinking resembles a 
contemplation on the True Nature of all things. 


6. That is, it is non-Buddhist to think that because something has True Nature, it is absolutely 
unchanging. 



Shobogenzo: On the True Nature of All Things 


652 


djb 

Baso’s phrase, ‘totally what this True Nature is,’ is truly eighty or ninety 
percent of expressing the Matter .* 7 And yet there are many things that Baso did 
not expound. He did not say that all true natures never depart from their True 
Nature. Nor did he say that all True Natures are totally what True Nature is. Nor 
did he say that no True Nature ever departs from being a sentient being. Nor did he 
say that the True Nature of all sentient beings is but a small bit of the True Nature 
of all things. Nor did he say that all sentient beings comprise the whole of the True 
Nature of all things. Nor did he say that the totality of True Nature is just a small 
bit of a sentient being. Nor did he say that half of a sentient being is half of 
someone’s True Nature. Nor did he say that the absence of sentient beings is what 
the True Nature of all things is. Nor did he say that True Nature is not a sentient 
being. Nor did he say that the True Nature of all things frees Itself from ‘being 
True Nature’. Nor did he say that sentient beings drop off ‘being a sentient being’. 
He simply said that sentient beings do not depart from the meditative state of the 
True Nature of all things. He did not say that this True Nature cannot depart from 
the meditative state of sentient beings. Nor did he assert that the meditative state of 
True Nature departs from or enters the meditative state of sentient beings. Much 
less can we hear him say that the True Nature of all things is synonymous with 
realizing Buddhahood, or that sentient beings’ awakening to their True Nature is 
their True Nature’s awakening to True Nature. Nowhere does he assert that non- 
sentient beings do not depart from the True Nature of all things. 

At this moment I would like to ask Baso, “What is it that you call ‘sentient 
beings’? If what you call ‘True Nature’ refers to ‘sentient beings’, then It is That 
Which Comes in This Way. If what you call ‘sentient beings’ refers to beings that 
are sentient, then what you say resembles Nangaku Ejo’s saying, “Were I to put It 
in words, they would not hit the bull’s-eye.” So, YOU! NOW! SAY WHAT IT IS! 
RIGHT RIGHT NOW! 

Given to the assembly at the beginning of winter in the first year of the Kangen era (November 

14, 1243) at Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province. 


7. In Zen, to say that someone is expressing eighty or ninety percent of the Matter is a 
complimentary way of saying that someone has had a full realization that goes beyond 
anyone’s ability to completely express. 



54 

On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 

(Mujo Seppo) 

Translator’s Introduction: As Dogen’s discourse makes clear, he understands ‘sentient’ and 
‘nonsentient’ in a specific way. Sentient beings are those who are still wedded to their senses, 
which give rise to the duality of self and other, that is, they are those who are ordinary, worldly 
human beings. ‘Nonsentient beings’ refers to whatever exists just as it is, which includes not only 
such things in nature as trees, rivers, mountains, and stones, but also those beings who have 
dropped off the false self, who have escaped from the tyranny of their greeds, hatreds, and 
delusions, and who have freed themselves from slavery to their senses; that is, they have become 
‘such a person’. 


Expressing the Dharma within the Dharma’s ever-present expression is the 
manifest spiritual conundrum that Ancestors of the Buddha entrust to Ancestors of 
the Buddha. This expressing of the Dharma is the Dharma expressing Itself. It is 
beyond being sentient or nonsentient. It is beyond something intentional, beyond 
something unintentional, and beyond karmic* causes producing something 
intentional or unintentional. And it is beyond the methods of those who pursue 
causal conditions. Even so, it does not travel in the paths of birds . 1 When the Great 
Way is fully realized, the expressing of the Dharma is fully realized. And when the 
Treasure House of the Dharma is entrusted to an heir, the expressing of the Dharma 
is entrusted to that person as well. When the flower was held aloft, an expressing 
of the Dharma was held aloft . 2 And when the kesa* was Transmitted, an expressing 
of the Dharma was Transmitted. This is why, since before the time of the Lords of 
Awe-inspiring Voices, Buddhas and Ancestors alike have paid homage to the 
expressing of the Dharma, and, since before the time of the Buddhas, They have 
customarily made expressing the Dharma Their fundamental practice. Do not 


* See Glossary. 

1. That is, unlike birds in flight, the Dharma leaves traces. 

2. This refers to the Transmission of the Dharma from Shakyamuni Buddha to His disciple 
Makakasho. This occurred when the Buddha held a flower aloft and Makakasho, 
recognizing its significance, smiled in response. 


653 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


654 


explore through your training that expressing the Dharma is something that the 
Buddhas and Ancestors have customarily regulated, for it is They who have been 
regulated by the expressing of the Dharma. This expressing of the Dharma is not 
limited to the expounding of the eighty-four thousand gates that make up the whole 
of the Dharma; there are immeasurable, limitless gates that make up the whole of 
the expressions of the Dharma. So, do not explore through your training that 
expressions of Dharma by former Buddhas are what constitute expressions of 
Dharma by later Buddhas. Just as former Buddhas do not return to be later 
Buddhas, so it is with expressing the Dharma. The ways of expressing It that were 
used in the past are not the ways by which It is expressed later on. This is why 
Shakyamuni Buddha said, “In the same manner that any Buddha of past, present, 
or future expressed the Dharma, I too, likewise, give voice to a Dharma that is in 
no way separate from Theirs.” 

Thus, just as They made use of the expressions of Dharma of other Buddhas, 
so He made use of the expressions of Dharma of those other Buddhas. And just as 
He authentically Transmitted the expressing of Dharma, so those Buddhas 
authentically Transmitted the expressing of Dharma. There is the authentic 
Transmitting from my late Master back to the Seven Buddhas,* and there is the 
authentic Transmitting from the Seven Buddhas down to the present—and there is 
the Dharma that nonsentient beings express. And within this Dharma that 
nonsentient beings express there are Buddhas and there are Ancestors. Do not fix 
in your mind that the saying, “I am now expressing the Dharma,” is something new 
that is not part of the authentic Transmission. And do not use it in an attempt to 
substantiate that the true Transmission of past and present is just an old nesting 
place in some demon’s cave/’ 

djb 


National Teacher Echu of Kotaku-ji Temple in the Western 
Capital of Great T’ang China was once asked by a monk, “Do even 
nonsentient beings voice the Dharma?” 

The National Teacher replied, “They are always expressing It 
with ardor, and there is no interruption in their voicing of It.” 

The monk said, “Why then do I not hear It?” 

The National Teacher replied, “Though you yourself do not 
hear It, that won’t stand in the way of others hearing It.” 


3. An ‘old nesting place’ refers to habitual ways of thinking that are no longer valid. ‘Some 
demon’s cave’ is a synonym for delusion. 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


655 


The monk asked, “I’m still unclear. What kind of people could 
possibly hear It?” 

The National Teacher said, “Saintly ones can hear It.” 

The monk then asked, “Venerable Monk, do you also hear It?” 

The National Teacher answered, “I do not hear It.” 

The monk then asked, “Since you, Venerable Monk, do not 
hear It, how do you know that nonsentient beings voice the Dharma?” 

The National Teacher replied, “Fortunately for you, I do not 
hear It. If I heard It, I would be on the level of the saints, and then you 
could not hear my voicing of the Dharma.” 

The monk then said, “If that is the case, then sentient beings 
play no part in the Dharma.” 

The National Teacher responded, “I express the Dharma for the 
sake of sentient beings, but I do not express It for the sake of saints.” 

The monk then asked, “What are sentient beings like after they 
hear It?” 

The National Teacher answered, “They are beyond being 
‘sentient beings.’” 

Novices, as well as those long in the practice, who may be exploring through their 
training what the statement “The nonsentient give expression to the Dharma” 
means, should straightaway be diligent in their study of this story of the National 
Teacher. “They are always expressing It with ardor, and there is no interruption in 
their voicing of It” is how he put it. ‘Always’ is one instant of time within all times. 
“There is no interruption in their voicing of It” implies that expressing It is already 
coming forth, and without interruption. 

Do not explore the matter of ‘the nonsentient’ giving expression to the 
Dharma as if it were necessarily like that of sentient beings who are making vocal 
sounds to express the Dharma. To take voicings in the realm of sentient beings out 
of their context and then liken them to voicings in the realm of the nonsentient is 
not the Way of the Buddha. When the nonsentient give expression to the Dharma, 
it may not necessarily be with audible sounds, just as, for instance, a sentient 
being’s giving expression to the Dharma may not involve audible sounds. 

For the time being, you should diligently explore this through your training 
by asking yourself and others, “Just what is a sentient being? Just what is a 
nonsentient being?” Accordingly, you should pay the utmost attention to details in 
order to explore through your training just what this matter of nonsentient beings 
expressing the Dharma is about. According to the opinions of foolish people, the 
rustling of trees in the forest, the opening of flowers, and the falling of leaves are 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


656 


believed to be nonsentient things expressing the Dharma, but such people are not 
persons who have learned what the Buddha taught. If it were so, then who could 
not hear the Dharma that is expressed by the nonsentient? For the moment, you 
should reflect on whether or not there are grasses and trees and forests in the realm 
of the nonsentient, and whether or not the realm of the nonsentient is intersecting, 
or mingling with, that of the sentient. At the same time, to take such things as 
grasses and trees or tiles and stones to be nonsentient is to be less than fully 
educated. And to believe that being nonsentient means being grass and trees or tiles 
and stones is to tire of exploring the Matter.* Even if you were to believe that 
human beings view such things as grass and trees to be patterned after the 
nonsentient, such things as grass and trees are not something that the mental efforts 
of ordinary, worldly people actually take measure of. And the reason for this is that 
there are great differences between the celestial forests of those in lofty positions 
and the forests of ordinary human beings, and that what is produced in China is not 
equivalent to what is produced in its bordering lands, and that the vegetation which 
grows in the oceans and that which grows amidst the mountains are not the same. 
And what is more, there are forests that grow in the open sky and forests that grow 
in the clouds. And there are hundreds of grasses and thousands of trees that sprout 
up in wind and fire. In sum, there are those things that need to be explored as being 
sentient and there are those things that need to be explored as being nonsentient. 
And there are grasses and trees that resemble humans and animals when the 
differences between the sentient and the nonsentient have not yet been made clear. 
And what is more, when we see a Taoist mountain hermit’s trees and rocks, flowers 
and fruits, and hot and cool springs with our own eyes, they are beyond doubting, 
but explaining them is difficult indeed! Having barely even seen the grasses and 
trees from a great country like China and observing only the grasses and trees of a 
small, single nation like Japan, do not imagine that they must be like those found 
throughout the whole universe. 

djb 


The National Teacher said, “Saintly ones can hear It.” 

That is to say, in the assembly where a nonsentient one expresses the Dharma, all 
saintly ones stand up to listen. The saintly ones and the nonsentient ones bring 
about listening and they bring about expressing . 4 The nonsentient one is already 


4. That is, their response encourages others in the assembly to listen, and their attention to what 
they are hearing encourages the one who is speaking to give voice to the Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


657 


expressing the Dharma for the sake of the saintly ones, but is It put in a saintly way 
or in an ordinary, everyday way? In other words, when you have completely 
clarified the manner in which the nonsentient express the Dharma, you will realize 
that what you hear is no different from what the saintly hear. When you have been 
able to realize this, you will clearly understand the realm of a saintly one. In 
addition, you should continue to explore through your training the daily conduct 
that traverses the path through the heavens, transcending both the mundane and the 
saintly. 

djb 

CX) 

The National Teacher said, “I do not hear It.” 

Do not presume that these words are easy to understand. Does he not hear It 
because he has gone beyond the mundane and transcended the saintly? Or does he 
not hear It because he has torn asunder the old nest of ‘the worldly versus the 
saintly’? By your making a diligent effort, you can realize what he is saying. 


The National Teacher said, “Fortunately for you, I do not hear 

It. If I heard It, I would be on the level of the saints.” 

This statement is beyond being the best way of putting it and beyond being just 
another way of putting it. His saying “Fortunately for you, I...” is beyond the 
mundane and the saintly. Might his “Fortunately for you, I...” be that of an 
Ancestor of the Buddha? Because an Ancestor of the Buddha is beyond the 
mundane and has transcended the saintly, what he hears may not be the same as 
what the saintly hear. 

Pursuing the chain of reasoning behind the National Teacher’s statement 
“Then you could not hear my voicing of the Dharma,” you should stew on what the 
enlightened state of Buddhas and saintly ones is. The National Teacher’s 
underlying principle is, namely, “When the nonsentient express the Dharma, the 
saintly can hear It, and when the National Teacher expressed the Dharma, the monk 
could hear It.” You should, day after day, deeply and at length, do your utmost to 
explore this chain of reasoning through your training. Now I would like to put it to 
the National Teacher—and I am not asking about sentient beings after they hear the 
Dharma—how is it with sentient beings at the very moment when they hear the 
Dharma being expressed? 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


658 


djb 

Our Founding Ancestor, Great Master Tozan Ryokai, while 
training under the great monk, Abbot Ungan Donjo, once asked the 
Abbot, “What person can hear the Dharma expressed by a nonsentient 
being?” 

Abbot Ungan answered, “The nonsentient can hear It.” 

Tozan then asked, “O Venerable Monk, can you hear It or not?” 

The Abbot replied, “If I heard It, you would be unable to hear 
my expressing of the Dharma.” 

Tozan then said, “If that is the way things are, then Venerable 
Monk, I have not heard your expressing of the Dharma.” 

The Abbot responded, “Since you have not heard even what I 
have given voice to, how could you possibly hear the expressing of 
the Dharma by nonsentient beings!” 

Thereupon, Tozan composed the following verse, which he 
presented to the Abbot. 

How wondrous! Oh, how wondrous! 

The Dharma voiced by the nonsentient boggles the mind. 

When we hear It with our ears, in the end It is hard to 
comprehend. 

When we hear It with our Eye, we can, by all means, 
understand It. 

You will need to do your utmost, not only in this life but also in many later 
ones, to examine in detail the principle underlying Tozan’s saying, “What person 
can hear the Dharma expressed by a nonsentient being?” This question is certainly 
equipped with the merit of also being a statement . 5 This remark of his has Skin and 
Flesh, Bones and Marrow. Not only is it a Transmitting of Mind by means of 
Mind, but it is also a transmitting of Mind by means of mind so that both new 
monks and novices who have been training for a long time may affirm It. It takes 
its place among the keys which unlock the doors to genuinely Transmitting both 
the kesa and the Dharma. How could anyone today possibly expect to realize It 


5. That is, Tozan’s remark can be construed not only as a question but also as a statement: A 
‘person of What’ can hear the Dharma expressed by a nonsentient being. ‘A person of 
What’, like ‘such a person,’ is a common way in Chinese Zen Buddhism to refer to one who 
has fully realized the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


659 


after an effort of three seasons or four months? Even though Tozan had seen and 
heard the underlying principle that the National Teacher expressed as, “The 
Dharma that the nonsentient express can be heard by the saintly,” nevertheless he 
now, once again, asked, “What person can hear the Dharma that the nonsentient 
express?” Does this confirm what the National Teacher said? Should we see what 
Tozan said as a question or should we see it as a statement? If he was not agreeing 
with the National Teacher in general, how could he possibly have spoken as he 
did? If he was agreeing with the National Teacher in general, how could he 
possibly have failed to understand what the National Teacher was saying? 


Abbot Ungan said, in effect, “The nonsentient can hear the 

Dharma that the nonsentient express.” 

In authentically Transmitting this bloodline of ours, we need to explore through our 
training the dropping off of body and mind. Saying that the nonsentient can hear 
the Dharma that the nonsentient express will be equivalent, in sum and substance, 
to saying that when Buddhas give voice to the Dharma, Buddhas can hear It. An 
assembly that is listening to the Dharma that the nonsentient express may be 
nonsentient, even though it is comprised of the sentient and the nonsentient, or of 
the worldly along with the wise and saintly. By relying on this Teaching in sum and 
substance, we can distinguish the true ones from the false in both the past and the 
present. Even though there are those who have come from India, if they are not 
true Ancestral Masters whose Transmission is authentic, you must not follow them. 
Even though they may have been part of a continuous succession who have studied 
for a thousand myriad years, if they are not in the succession of heir after heir who 
have received the genuine Transmission, we could hardly accept from them the 
mantle of the Dharma—that is, the kesa. 

Now that the authentic Transmission has spread to Eastern lands, it should 
be easy to distinguish the functioning of the true from the false. Even if someone 
hears only the statement, “When a human being gives voice to the Dharma, human 
beings can hear It,” that person may attain the Bones and Marrow of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors. If you make it a matter of life and death when you listen to what 
Abbot Ungan and National Teacher Echu are saying, you will understand that ‘the 
saintly’ spoken of in “The saintly can hear It” means ‘the nonsentient’, and ‘the 
nonsentient’ spoken of in “The nonsentient can hear It” means ‘the saintly’. It is to 
say, “What is expressed by the nonsentient is the Nonsentient” because the Dharma 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


660 


expressed by the nonsentient is what the Nonsentient is. Hence, it is the Dharma 
that the Nonsentient expresses. It is the Nonsentient that expresses the Dharma . 6 7 


Our Founding Ancestor Tozan said, “If that is the way things 
are, then Venerable Monk, I have not heard your expressing of the 
Dharma.” 

Here and now, his saying, “If that is the way things are...” takes up the principle 
underlying the statement, “When the nonsentient express the Dharma, the 
nonsentient can hear It.” In accord with the principle behind “When the 
nonsentient express the Dharma, the nonsentient can hear It” is “Then Venerable 
Monk, I do not hear your expressing of the Dharma.” At this time, Tozan is not 
only taking a back seat to the nonsentient’s expressing of the Dharma, but he was 
also showing his eagerness to voice the Dharma for the sake of nonsentient beings 
with an ardor that pierced the very heavens. Not only had he thoroughly penetrated 
the nonsentient’s expressing of the Dharma, but he had also thoroughly mastered, 
and gone beyond, ‘hearing’ versus ‘not hearing’ the nonsentient express the 
Dharma. And, pushing on, in the matter of the sentient giving voice to the Dharma, 
he had gone beyond ‘expressing’ versus ‘not expressing,’ and he had thoroughly 
penetrated ‘expressing by those in the past’, ‘expressing by those in the present’, 
and ‘expressing by those in the future’. And moreover, in expressions of the 
Dharma that go beyond being heard or not being heard, he had completely clarified 
the principle of ‘this is sentient’ and ‘this is nonsentient’. 

To generalize, hearing the Dharma is not limited merely to the sphere of the 
ear as a sense organ or to someone’s being conscious of sounds. We hear the 
Dharma with our whole vitality, with our whole mind, with our whole body, with 
our whole being. We hear It from ‘before the time when “father” and “mother” 
were bom’ * and from before the time of the Lords of Awe-inspiring Voices until 
the limits of our future and throughout the limitless future. The Dharma is heard 
before the body and after the mind. There is much to be gained from these 
instances of hearing the Dharma, so do not think that unless our mental 


6. That is, when the word ‘nonsentient’ is capitalized, it refers to Buddha Nature Itself. 

7. This statement was Tozan’s way of asserting that his True Self has not become enlightened 
because he recognized that this True Self (the T here) is already enlightened and has always 
been so. At the same time, it is an expression of Tozan’s humility and his assertion that his 
Master’s expression of the Dhanna is within the realm of ‘the saintly’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


661 


consciousness is involved, there is nothing to be gained from hearing the Dharma. 
Someone whose mind has gone astray or whose body is sunk in a torpor can still 
profit from hearing the Dharma, just as someone who is unaware of their body and 
mind can also profit from hearing the Dharma. All Buddhas and all Ancestors 
invariably live through moments like these when They are becoming a Buddha or 
an Ancestor. How can the intellectual efforts of ordinary, worldly people possibly 
catch sight of how the mighty force of one’s practice comes to behold Body and 
Mind? They cannot fully clarify for themselves even what the bounds of body and 
mind are. Once the meritorious seeds of hearing the Dharma have been sown 
within the fertile fields of body and mind, they will know no season of decay. 
Ultimately, they will sprout, and, with the passing of time, they will surely bear 
fruit. 

Foolish people think: 

Though people may not be remiss in listening to the Dharma, if 
they do not progress along the path to understanding and if they do 
not have good enough memories, they will not be able to acquire any 
benefits. What is vitally important—be it with the body and mind of 
an ordinary person or of someone in a lofty position—is to devote 
oneself to memorizing the Dharma extensively by listening to It many 
times. If people forget what they have heard while attending a Dharma 
talk and go blank once they have left their seat, what benefit do you 
think there would be in that? What learning could possibly be gained 
by that? 

They speak this way because they do not have a genuine Master and have never 
encountered ‘such a person’.* It is understood that someone who has not received 
the genuine Face-to-Face Transmission is not a genuine teacher, whereas someone 
who has received the genuine Transmission of Buddha after Buddha is a genuine 
teacher. Foolish people speak of their holding the Dharma consciously in mind 
and, at least temporarily, not forgetting It. Actually, the merit of hearing the 
Dharma envelops both the mind and the conscious memory. At this very moment, 
there is the meritorious functioning of the Dharma which envelops our body and 
which even envelops us prior to the body’s arising, which envelops our mind and 
even envelops us prior to the mind’s arising, which envelops us after the mind has 
arisen, which envelops our causes, conditions, results, actions, forms, True Nature, 
and physical substance, which envelops the Buddhas and envelops the Ancestors, 
which envelops self and envelops others, and which envelops our skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow, among other things. Its meritorious functioning fully 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


662 


manifests, enveloping the words and ways of expressing It, and enveloping our 
everyday actions, such as sitting and reclining, as It heals and fills the universe. 

Truly, the merit derived from hearing the Dharma is not easily recognized, 
but should you encounter the great assembly of an Ancestor of the Buddha and 
thoroughly explore Its Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow through training with 
him or her, there will be no time when the meritorious strength of their expressing 
the Dharma will not guide you, and there will be no place where you will not 
receive the strength derived from hearing the Dharma. In this fashion, by letting 
the waves of time pass either quickly or slowly in a natural way, you will see the 
coming forth of Its fruits. Even listening to It many times in order to memorize It 
extensively ought not to be discarded altogether, but you should not treat that one 
aspect as the primary tool. Those who are exploring the Matter with a Master 
should know this, and our Founding Ancestor Tozan had thoroughly explored It. 


Abbot Ungan said, “Since you have not heard even what I have 
given voice to, how could you possibly hear the expressing of the 
Dharma by nonsentient beings!” 

Here, Abbot Ungan has loosened his collar in order to certify that our Founding 
Ancestor Tozan has the Bones and Marrow of the Forefathers, which Tozan had 
just then revealed by manifesting his awakening to both enlightenment and the 
promise of Buddhahood. Ungan is saying, in effect, “You are as if you did not hear 
my expressing It.” This is not Ungan’s affirmation of some run-of-the-mill person. 
He was making clear that, even though nonsentient expressions of the Dharma are 
multi-faceted, they do not exist for the sake of the intellect. Tozan’s succeeding as 
Ungan’s heir at this time is truly an intimate matter. Those in the realms of the 
mundane and the saintly cannot easily reach it or catch a glimpse of it. 


Thereupon Tozan composed the following verse, which he 
presented to the Abbot: 

How wondrous! Oh, how wondrous! 

The Dharma voiced by the nonsentient boggles the mind. 

Thus the nonsentient, as well as the Dharma that the nonsentient express, are both 
difficult for the discriminating, deliberative mind to handle. What is this thing we 
call ‘nonsentient’? You should explore through your training that it is not the 
mundane or the saintly, and that it is beyond being sentient or nonsentient. 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


663 


‘Mundane’ and ‘saintly’, as well as ‘sentient’ and ‘nonsentient’, whether voiced or 
not voiced, will be on a level with the lunacies produced by discriminatory 
thinking. Now, since It is mind-boggling, It has been and will continue to be a great 
mystery. It cannot be reached by the wisdom and consciousness of the mundane or 
of the wise and holy, nor is It concerned with the plans and considerations of 
mortals or celestial hosts. 


When we hear It with our ears, in the end It is hard to 
comprehend. 

Even if we had celestial ears, or ears attuned to the whole universe and to the 
whole of time, when we aim at listening with our ears, It is ultimately too difficult 
to understand. Even if we had an ear to the wall or an ear atop a pole, we could not 
understand the Dharma that the nonsentient express, because It is beyond sound. It 
is not that we cannot hear It with our ears, but even were we to do our utmost for a 
hundred thousand eons, ultimately It would be too difficult to understand. It has the 
everyday dignity of the One Way that is beyond sounds and forms: It does not 
reside in the nests and caves of the mundane and the saintly. 


When we hear It with our Eye, we can, by all means, 
understand It. 

Certain people fancy this to mean, “What human beings in the present see as the 
coming and going of grasses and trees, and flowers and birds, is what may be 
described as ‘hearing a sound with one’s eyes.’” This point of view is completely 
mistaken and is not at all the Buddha Dharma, nor does the Buddha Dharma have 
any principle like this. 

When we explore through our training our Founding Ancestor Tozan’s 
expression ‘when we hear It with our Eye’, the place where the Dharma expressed 
by the nonsentient resounds is in the Eye, and the place where the sound of the 
Dharma expressed by a sentient being manifests is in the eyes. You should 
thoroughly and broadly explore this Eye. Because hearing sound with the eyes 
must be comparable to hearing sound with the ears, hearing sound with the Eye 
must be unlike hearing sound with the ears. Do not explore this as “There are 
organs of hearing in the eyes,” or as “Eyes are therefore ears,” or as “Sounds are 
manifesting in the eyes.” 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


664 


djb 

A former Master, Chosa Keishin, once said, “The whole universe in all ten 
directions is the solitary Eye of a mendicant monk.” Do not be eager to get into 
discussions about hearing sounds through this Eye being a reference to Tozan’s 
saying “When we hear It with our Eye.” Even though you may study the words 
that the ancient Master spoke, namely, “The whole universe in all ten directions is 
the solitary Eye,” the whole universe in all ten directions is the solitary Eye, and 
further, there are the thousand hands of Avalokiteshvara,* each with its Eye. And 
there are the thousand Eyes of the True Teaching. And there are thousands of Eyes 
in one’s ears. And there are thousands of Eyes on the tip of one’s tongue. And there 
are thousands of Eyes from the point of view of one’s heart. And there are 
thousands of Eyes that penetrate our mind. And there are thousands of Eyes that 
penetrate our body. And there are thousands of poles, each with an Eye at its tip. 
And there are thousands of Eyes before our body appears. And there are thousands 
of Eyes before our mind appears. And there are thousands of Eyes within death. 
And there are thousands of Eyes within life. And there are thousands of Eyes of 
self. And there are thousands of Eyes of other. And there are thousands of Eyes 
atop our eyes. And there are thousands of Eyes that do the training. And there are 
thousands of Eyes that are vertical. And there are thousands of Eyes that are 
horizontal. 

So, even though you may learn that the totality of all Eyes is the totality of 
all realms, you have still not fully experienced the Eye. Simply make it a pressing 
need to thoroughly explore hearing the Dharma expressed by the Nonsentient with 
your Eye. Now, the main point in what our Founding Ancestor Tozan was saying is 
that it is difficult to comprehend with the ears the Dharma that the Nonsentient is 
expressing, for it is your Eye that hears the sound. And, further, there is hearing the 
sound as it permeates one’s body, and there is hearing the sound with one’s whole 
being. Even if you fully experience hearing the sound with your Eye, you need to 
come to the realization that the Dharma that the nonsentient express can indeed be 
heard by the nonsentient, and then let it go. 


Because this principle has been passed down, my late Master Tendo, an Old 
Buddha, said, “The vines of the bottle gourd embrace the bottle gourd’s vines.” 
This is a nonsentient being who is giving voice to the Dharma in which the 
awakened Eye of our Ancestor Ungan has been passed on, along with his Bones 
and Marrow. Based on the principle that all expressions of the Dharma are 



Shobogenzo: On the Dharma That Nonsentient Beings Express 


665 


nonsentient, nonsentient beings express the Dharma, which is a traditional 
Teaching. It is for the sake of the nonsentient that the nonsentient give voice to the 
Dharma. What is it that we call ‘the nonsentient’? You need to know that it is the 
one who hears the Dharma that the Nonsentient expresses. And what is it that we 
call ‘expressing the Dharma’? You need to know that it is that which does not 
know ‘I am nonsentient’. 


Great Master Tosu Daido in Shuchou Province 8 was once asked 
by a monk, “Just what is this ‘nonsentient beings express the Dharma’ 
stuff all about?” 

The Master responded, “Do not bad-mouth it.” 

What Tosu is asserting here now is the very practice of the Dharma of an Old 
Buddha and it is the governing principle in our Ancestral tradition. Generally 
speaking, such statements as “Nonsentient beings express the Dharma,” and 
“Expounding the Dharma is what a nonsentient being is,” are instances of not bad- 
mouthing it. Keep in mind that the expounding of the Dharma by the nonsentient is 
precisely what the defining attribute of an Ancestor of the Buddha is. That bunch 
who have followed Rinzai and Tokusan don’t know about it; only our Ancestors of 
the Buddha have explored it thoroughly through their training. 

Given to the assembly at Kippo-ji Temple in the Yoshida district of Echizen Province on the 
second day of the tenth lunar month in the first year of the Kangen era (November 15, 
1243). 

Copied here on the fifteenth day of the tenth lunar month in the same year (November 28, 1243). 

Ejo 


8. There is an interpolation in the text at this point, whose authorship is uncertain. It reads: He 
was Dharma heir to Suibi Mugaku; in his lifetime he was called Daido Myokaku, as well as 
the Old Buddha Tosu. 



55 

On Washing Your Face 

(Semmen) 


Translator’s Introduction: The importance that Dogen placed on this discourse is signaled in 
the postscript by the fact that he gave it to his community on three occasions. The first occasion 
was in 1239 as a companion piece to Discourse 7: On Washing Yourself Clean ( Senjo ). It was 
repeated with the addition of a final paragraph in 1243, when he and his monks were staying in 
Kippo-ji Temple while Eihei-ji Temple was being built nearby. The third delivery, with some 
emendations, was given at Eihei-ji in 1250. This last version is the one presented here. 

The title has a double meaning. On a literal level, ‘face’ refers to the physical part of the 
body; on a metaphorical level, it refers to the surface of the mind’s mirror, which is also being 
cleansed by seeing the spiritual significance of the mundane act of cleaning the fonner. As the 
text makes abundantly clear, on the literal level the face includes not only the whole outer 
surface of the head but also, most importantly, the mouth, teeth, and tongue. An implement for 
brushing the teeth similar to that which Dogen describes is still the preferred fonn of toothbrush 
with many Theravadin mo nk s. 


In the Lotus Scripture it says in verse: 

Anoint your body with fragrant oil 
After having washed away all dust and dirt, 

And put on a fresh, clean robe, 

So that you are clean both within and without. 

This Teaching is one that the Tathagata voiced before the Lotus assembly for the 
sake of those who practice the four forms of conduct that ease the way of practice . 1 
It is unequaled in His Teachings at other assemblies, and is surely unlike that found 
in other Scriptures. Since this is so, cleansing your body and mind and anointing 
yourself with fragrant oil after having removed the dust and dirt of life is foremost 
in the Buddha’s Teaching. And putting on a fresh, clean robe is one of the methods 
for purifying yourself. By washing away the dust and dirt and by anointing 
yourself with fragrant oil, you will be clean both within and without. When both 


1. These four fonns of conduct were also voiced by the Tathagata in the Lotus Scripture. One 
translation may be found in “The Scripture on the Conduct That Eases the Way” from 
Buddhist Writings on Meditation and Daily Practice, (Shasta Abbey Press, 1994), pp. 5-25. 


666 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


667 


inside and outside are clean, the conditions around you and the conditions within 
you will be immaculate. 

Even so, befuddled people who do not understand what the Buddha’s 
Dharma is and who do not practice the Buddha’s Way say, “Bathing merely 
cleanses the body’s skin, but it does not cleanse the five vital organs or the six 
forms of entrails within the body. Since it does not cleanse each of these, one after 
the other, we cannot really become immaculate. Therefore, it follows that we 
cannot really cleanse our bodies.” People who talk like this do not yet know the 
Buddha’s Dharma, nor have they even heard It; they have not encountered a true 
teacher or met an offspring of the Buddhas and Ancestors. You should just cast 
aside the words of folks who hold to false views like these. Instead, explore and 
put into practice the True Teaching of the Buddhas and Ancestors. The limits of all 
thoughts and things have never been determined, and what lies within and outside 
the various elements, likewise, cannot be fully grasped. This is why what lies 
within our mind and outside our body is also beyond our grasp. 

Be that as it may, when bodhisattvas* who are in their final body 2 are sitting 
in the Meditation Hall and are just on the verge of realizing the Way, even they 
wash their kesa* and then cleanse their body and mind. This is part of the ordinary, 
everyday behavior of all Buddhas in all times—past, present and future— 
everywhere in the ten directions. 

Bodhisattvas who are in their final body are different from other types of 
beings in all matters. Their meritorious wise discernment and the splendor of their 
body and mind are most precious and unsurpassed. The same will also be true for 
their methods of washing and cleansing, not to mention the fact that everyone’s 
body and mind, along with their limitations, differ according to the times. Within 
the time of one period of seated meditation, it is said, three thousand worlds have 
passed away. Even though such a period of time is like this, it is not some measure 
of self or other: it is the meritorious fruit of the Buddha Dharma. The measure of 
body and mind is beyond ‘five feet’ or ‘six feet’, because body and mind are 
beyond the five or six feet that we conventionally define as ‘five feet’ and ‘six 
feet’. 

The place where body and mind exist is also beyond both the limits and the 
limitlessness of the realms of self or other, or of the whole universe or 
immeasurable universes, because “ Right here is where the What is, whether the 


* See Glossary. 

2. A technical term for one who is about to realize Buddhahood. It is synonymous with a non¬ 
returner, which is the third of the four stages of arhathood. A brief explanation of these four 
stages can be found in the Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


668 


Matter* is put clumsily or put delicately .” 3 The dimensions of mind are beyond 
anything the discriminations of intellective thought can possibly know: they are 
beyond anything that the non-discriminations of not thinking can possibly fathom. 
Because this is the way the dimensions of body and mind are, it is also the way the 
dimensions of cleansing are. To grasp what these dimensions are and to train until 
one fully realizes them are precisely what Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after 
Ancestor are concerned with and have held to. We should not take our estimate of 
ourselves to be foremost, nor should we take our estimate of ourselves to be real. 
Therefore, it follows that when we wash and cleanse ourselves in this manner, we 
fully fathom the dimensions of body and mind, and we make ourselves 
immaculate. Whether we see ourselves as comprised of six elements, or five 
skandhas,* or of That which is indestructible, through our cleansing we can make 
everything immaculate. 

This does not mean that we are immaculate only after we have fetched water 
and washed ourselves with it. How can water be inherently pure or inherently 
impure? Even if it were inherently pure or inherently impure, we cannot assert that 
it makes the place we bring it to pure or impure. It is simply that, when we preserve 
the methods that the Buddhas and Ancestors have trained in and actualized, then a 
Buddha’s methods for using water with which to wash the body and using the 
Water with which to cleanse the mind will have been handed down to us. 
Accordingly, in training to realize Buddhahood, we go beyond ‘clean’, we discard 
‘unclean’, and we abandon ‘not clean’ and ‘not unclean’. 

Hence, even though we may not yet have soiled ourselves, we wash and 
cleanse ourselves, and even when we have reached Great Immaculacy, we still 
wash and cleanse ourselves. This process has been preserved solely in the Way of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors. It is beyond what those who are non-Buddhists 
understand. Were the situation as those befuddled persons say, even if we were to 
reduce the five vital organs and the six forms of entrails to particles of dust so 
minute that they were like empty space, and then completely use up the waters of 
the great ocean in washing them, unless we washed the inside of these particles, 
how could they possibly be immaculate? And unless we washed the inside of 
empty space, how could we possibly achieve complete immaculacy within and 
without? 


3. This quotation is a remark made by Meditation Master Fuke to Meditation Master Rinzai 
when both were novice monks. This koan story, as recounted by Dogen in his Chinese Shinji 
Shobogenzo, is given in the Addendum to Discourse 21: On Buddha Nature (Bussho), p. 
279. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


669 


Such befuddled people are also incapable of recognizing the process of 
cleansing emptiness. We make use of Emptiness to cleanse emptiness, and we 
make use of Emptiness to cleanse body and mind. Those who, with faith, accept 
cleansing as a form of the Dharma will be preserving what the Buddhas and 
Ancestors trained in and came to realize. That is to say, in the True Dharma of 
Buddha after Buddha, Ancestor after Ancestor, and Successor after Successor of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors, when we engage in cleansing ourselves, then body and 
mind—both inside and out—along with the five vital organs, the six forms of 
entrails, the outer world and the inner world, the inside, outside, and middle of the 
realms of thoughts and things, as well as unbounded space, are all instantly 
immaculate. When we make use of incense or flowers in purifying ourselves, then 
our deeds of past, present, and future, as well as their accompanying causes and 
conditions, are instantly immaculate. 

djb 

CX) 


The Buddha said, “By washing thrice and perfuming thrice, our body and 
mind become immaculate.” Thus, the method for washing our body and cleansing 
our mind is to habitually do one perfuming with one washing, and by such a 
sequence to do three washings and three perfumings. We then pay homage to the 
Buddha, recite some bit of Scripture, and do seated meditation followed by 
walking meditation. Once our walking meditation is finished and before we 
endeavor to sit up straight in seated meditation again, it is said that we should 
always wash our feet. Even if our feet have not become sullied, this is still the 
method of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

In these three washings and three perfumings of which He spoke, washing 
once refers to taking a bath: it is bathing the whole body. And after having done so, 
we get dressed as usual, then we light incense in a small censer and cense inside 
the bosom of our upper robe, as well as censing our kesa, our meditation place, and 
so forth. After that, we bathe again and cense again. We do it like this three times. 
This is the ceremony that accords with the Dharma. At this time, even though the 
six sense organs and the six types of objects that stimulate them are still there, they 
will undoubtedly manifest the virtue of immaculacy before your very eyes. And, as 
the Buddha taught, even though we may not be rid of the three poisons of greed, 
hate, and delusion or of the four topsy-turvy beliefs , 4 the virtue of being 
immaculate will immediately manifest before our very eyes. Who can fathom It by 
using conventional ways of thinking? What person can spot It by using his 


4. Namely, believing that what is impermanent has permanence, that what causes suffering is 
pleasurable, that what is sullied is pure, and that what is without self has a self. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


670 


ordinary eyes? For instance, when we wash aloes wood to cleanse it for making 
incense, we should not break it into bits and pieces before washing it, nor should 
we grind it into a powder before washing it; it attains immaculacy simply by our 
washing the whole piece, in a body. 

The method for cleansing has been definitely set forth in the Buddha’s 
Teaching. We wash our body, we wash our mind, we wash our feet, we wash our 
face, we wash our eyes, we wash our mouth, we wash our private parts, we wash 
our hands, we wash our alms bowl, we wash our kesa, and we wash our head. All 
of these are part of the True Teaching of all the Buddhas and Ancestors of the past, 
present, and future. 

When we undertake to make an offering to Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, 
we first wash our hands and face, rinse out our mouth, and put on a clean robe. We 
then bring some type of fragrant wood, and, taking fresh water in a clean bowl, we 
wash this incense. Once this is done, we offer it to the realm of Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha. May the offering we make to the Triple Treasure be as sandalwood 
incense from the Malaya Mountains that has been washed in Lake Anavatapta’s 
water of eight virtues . 5 

Washing the face was passed down from India in the west and spread 
throughout China in the east. Although the procedure is made clear enough in 
various passages in the monastic regulations, it will still be something that 
Buddhas and Ancestors hold to and directly pass on to Their genuine successors. It 
is not merely something that Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor 
have come to practice over the centuries; it has flowed down through hundreds of 
thousands of millions of eons of the past, and will continue to do so in the future. It 
does not merely remove dirt and grime; it is the lifeblood of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors. 

It is said that if we do not wash the face, both our receiving obeisances and 
our making obeisances to others will be stained. 

When we bow, and bow to others, 

If we can make our bow to That which is bowed to, 

Then our True Nature will be free and serene, 

For ‘True Nature’too will have dropped away. 

This is why we must, by all means, wash the face. 


5. The Malaya Mountains in southern India are renowned for their highly prized sandalwood. 
Lake Anavatapta is considered by some as the source of the four major rivers of India, and 
by others as a lake on Mount Sumeru. Its eight virtues are its sweetness, its coolness, its 
softness, its lightness, its purity, its absence of odor, its harmlessness to the throat, and its 
harmlessness to the stomach. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


671 


djb 

CX) 

The time for washing our face may be during the pre-dawn fifth watch or it 
may be after the sun has risen. When I was staying with my late Master, Nyojo, he 
took the third period of the third watch (around 2:00 A.M.) to be the time for doing 
it. Putting on our skirt and undershirt, or a full under-robe, and carrying our hand 
towel, we proceeded to a washstand. A hand towel is a piece of cloth twelve feet 
long. It should not be white in color since white is prohibited. 

It says in the Great Scripture on the Three Thousand Forms of Everyday 
Behavior for Monks : 

There are five things to consider when using the hand towel. 

First, wipe with the top and bottom ends. Second, wipe your hands 
with one end and wipe your face with the other. Third, do not wipe 
your nose with it. Fourth, should it become soiled through using it to 
wipe up grease or dirt, by all means wash it right away. Fifth, do not 
wipe your body with it. When you wash, each of you should have 
your own towel. 

When handling our hand towel, we should take care of it in the following way. We 
fold the hand towel in two and then drape it over our left forearm. We wipe our 
face with one half of the hand towel and our hands with the other half. The 
statement “Do not wipe your nose with it” means that we do not use it to wipe the 
insides of our nostrils or the mucus from them. We should not use the hand towel 
to wipe our sides, back, belly, navel, thighs, or lower legs. We should wash our 
hand towel if it becomes soiled with dirt or grime. When it gets wet, we dry it by 
the fire or hang it out in the sun to dry. We should not use a hand towel when 
taking a bath. 

The washing place for those in the Cloud Hall is the rear washstand. 6 7 The 
rear washstand is to the west of the Illumination Hall. This layout is what has been 
passed on to us. For retreat huts and private quarters, a washstand is put in a 
convenient place. The Abbot washes up in the abbatical quarters. In the residence 
for elderly monks, a washstand has been put in a convenient place. When the 
Abbot is residing in the Cloud Hall, he should use the rear washstand to wash up. 

When going to the washstand, we hang the middle part of our hand towel 
over the nape of our neck. Bringing the two ends in front over our shoulders, we 


6. The Cloud Hall is the hall where the monks meditate. ‘The rear washstand’ refers 
specifically to the washstand behind the Cloud Hall. 

7. The Illumination Hall is used when senior monks other than the Abbot give Dharma talks. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


672 


use both hands to take the ends under our arms and to our back. Then, crossing the 
ends, we bring the left end around to the right and the right end around to the left, 
and tie the ends in front of our chest. When we do it in this fashion, the upper part 
of our robe is covered by the hand towel, and our sleeves are bound up by it above 
our elbows, while below our elbows, our arms and hands are left exposed. It is just 
as if we had tucked up our sleeves with a sash. 8 

Next, if we are at the rear washstand, taking a wash bucket in hand, we go to 
where the iron cauldron is and get a bucket of hot water. Then, returning, we put it 
atop the washstand. If we are somewhere else, we pour hot water from the hot 
water tub into a washbowl. 

Next, we use our willow twig. 9 Nowadays, in various monasteries in Great 
Sung China, the method for chewing a willow twig has long been discarded and is 
not passed on, so there is no place for chewing a willow twig. But today at Eihei-ji 
Temple on Mount Kichijo there is a place for chewing a willow twig, which is our 
present way of looking at the matter. Accordingly, first we chew the willow twig. 
Then, holding the willow twig in our right hand, we recite the appropriate verse. I 
In the “Pure Deeds” chapter of the Avatamsaka Scripture, it says the following: 

Taking this willow twig in hand, 

I pray that all sentient beings 

May realize in their hearts the True Dharma 

And thereby become naturally pure. 

After we have finished reciting this text and are about to chew the willow twig 
again, we should then recite the following: 

Chewing the willow twig this morning, 

I pray that all sentient beings 

May obtain the teeth for overcoming evil, 

So that they may chew up their defiling passions. 

Having finished reciting this text, we chew on our willow twig. 

The length of a willow twig is the width of four, eight, twelve, or sixteen 
fingers. As it says in Article 34 of the Code of Behavior for Members of the 
Greater Sangha, “We use for our teeth a twig of suitable dimensions. The longest 
is the width of sixteen fingers, the shortest is the width of four fingers.” We need to 
keep in mind that it should not be shorter than four fingers and that beyond sixteen 


8. The sleeves worn by monastics during Dogen’s time were of a large, koromo style and 
therefore needed to be bound up. 

9. The willow twig was used as a toothbrush. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


673 


fingers is not a suitable dimension. The thickness is that of our little finger. 
However, there is nothing to preclude it from being thinner than that. Its shape is 
that of the little finger: one end thick, one end thin. The thicker end is chewed into 
fine shreds. As it says in the Great Scripture on the Three Thousand Forms of 
Everyday Behavior for Monks, “Do not go beyond a third of an inch along the 
length of the willow twig.” We must chew it well, then rub and clean the front and 
back of our teeth as if we were polishing them. We rub and polish, and then rinse 
out our mouth from time to time. We should thoroughly polish and clean the base 
of our teeth above the gums and thoroughly scrape between our teeth, and wash 
that area clean. When our mouth is rinsed out again and again, our teeth will be 
washed clean. 

After we have done this, we need to clean our tongue. It says in the Great 
Scripture on the Three Thousand Forms of Everyday Behavior for Monks: 

There are five things to consider when scraping the tongue. 

First, do not go beyond three times. Second, if your tongue begins to 
bleed, by all means cease. Third, do not soil your sanghati robe or 
your feet by flailing your hands about. 10 Fourth, when discarding your 
willow twig, do not put it where others walk. Fifth, always scrape 
your tongue in a screened off area. 

In the phrase ‘scrape your tongue three times’, ‘scraping your tongue’ means 
putting some water into your mouth and scraping your tongue repeatedly. It does 
not mean scraping it just three times. Keep in mind the statement that if your 
tongue begins to bleed, by all means cease. 

As to the remark that we should thoroughly scrape our tongue, it says in the 
Great Scripture on the Three Thousand Forms of Everyday Behavior for Monks, 
“Purifying your mouth means chewing a willow twig, rinsing your mouth out, and 
scraping your tongue.” Hence, the willow twig is something that the Buddhas and 
Ancestors, along with Their successors, have come to preserve and hold to. 


The Buddha was living in the Bamboo Grove Park at Raj agriha, 
along with twelve hundred and fifty monks. It was the first day of the 
twelfth month, and King Prasenajit was providing food for them on 
that day. At daybreak he personally offered the Buddha a willow twig. 
After the Buddha had taken and thoroughly chewed it, He discarded 


10. The sanghati robe is the largest of three basic types of kesa. Dogen gives a detailed 
explanation of all three in Discourse 84: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa (Kesa Kudoku). 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


674 


what remained. No sooner had it touched the ground than it came to 
life, with roots and sprouts gushing forth in great profusion, until it 
was five hundred yojanas* tall. Its leaves and branches spread out like 
a cloud to a circumference of the same magnitude. At length, it 
brought forth blossoms as large as cart wheels. Finally, it produced 
fruit the size of five-gallon jars. The roots and buds, branches and 
leaves, were entirely comprised of the seven treasures,* whose various 
colors glimmered with extraordinary beauty. In accord with their 
color, they gave off rays of light that eclipsed both sun and moon. 

When the fruit was eaten, it proved as delicious as nectar. Its fragrance 
filled the four quarters; whoever smelled it was truly filled with 
delight. As the fragrant breeze came blowing, the branches and leaves 
rubbed against each other so that they all gave forth melodious 
sounds, delightfully voicing the essence of the Dharma. Whoever 
heard this never tired of listening. The hearts of all the people who 
witnessed this transformation of the tree grew ever more pure and 
their reverence and trust deepened. The Buddha then gave voice to the 
Dharma according to their ability to grasp Its intent, so that all their 
hearts were opened to comprehend It. Those who sought what the 
Buddha intended attained their goal and were reborn in a heavenly 
state, their number being extremely great. 11 

The method for making an alms offering to the Buddha and the assembled monks 
was invariably to proffer willow twigs at daybreak. After that, various other 
offerings were prepared. There are many instances of willow twigs being given to 
the Buddha, and there are many instances of the Buddha using a willow twig, but, 
for the time being, I have presented the story of King Prasenajit’s personally 
making the alms offering, along with the story of this great tree, because you 
should know about them. 

djb 

CX) 


Also on that day, six non-Buddhist teachers were all bested in debate by the 
Buddha. Being dismayed and frightened, they took to flight. Ultimately, as the 
Scripture recounts: 

All six teachers together threw themselves into the river and 
drowned. The nine hundred million followers of these six teachers all 


11. This narrative is quoted from “The Defeat of the Six Teachers,” which is the second chapter 
of the Scripture on Accounts of the Wise and the Befuddled. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


675 


came to the Buddha, seeking to be His disciples. Upon the Buddha’s 
welcoming them as monks, their beards and hair naturally came off, 
and they had Dharma robes on their bodies, for they had all become 
mendicant monks. As the Buddha voiced the Dharma for their benefit, 
pointing out Its essence, they disentangled themselves from their 
defiling passions and fully attained arhathood.* 


Thus, because the Tathagata was already accustomed to using willow twigs, 
both ordinary people and those in lofty positions made alms offerings of them. It is 
clear that all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, along with disciples of the Buddha, 
beyond doubt, hold to chewing a willow twig. Should anyone not use a willow 
twig, they will have forfeited the Teaching. And what a pity that would be! 

It says in the Bodhisattva Precepts section of the Scripture of Brahma’s Net: 

During the two retreat periods in winter and summer, as well as 
during the renewal period at the beginning of summer when 
pilgrimages are undertaken, as a disciple of the Buddha, you should 
always have for your personal use a tooth-cleaning willow twig, soap, 
your three monastic robes, a water jug, your alms bowl, your bowing 
mat, your mendicant’s traveling staff, an incense burner, a clothes 
box, a water filter, a towel, a razor, something to light a fire with, 
tweezers, a hammock, a Scripture and Vinaya text, an image of the 
Buddha, and some image of a Bodhisattva. Whenever you go on a 
pilgrimage or travel for other spiritual reasons, be it for thirty miles or 
three hundred, you should always carry these eighteen objects with 
you. The retreat periods last from the fifteenth day of the first month 
to the fifteenth day of the third month and from the fifteenth day of 
the eighth month to the fifteenth day of the tenth month; during these 
two periods you should always carry these eighteen objects with you 
when you travel, just as a bird carries its two wings. 

Not even one of these eighteen objects should be missing. If you lack any, you 
would be like a bird that had shed one wing. Even though one wing remained, the 
bird would be unable to fly, for its condition would not be the way birds are. 
Similarly for bodhisattvas: if they are not equipped with these eighteen ‘wings’, it 
will not be the way that bodhisattvas do their practice. 

Among these eighteen articles, the willow twig already occupies the first 
position and should be the very first thing you supply yourself with. Folks who are 
clear about the use of the willow twig will be bodhisattvas who are clear about the 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


676 


Buddha Dharma. Those who have not yet clarified this matter have probably not 
encountered the Buddha Dharma even in their dreams. 

Hence, to see the willow twig is to encounter the Buddhas and Ancestors. If 
someone should ask me, “What is its purpose?” I would reply, “How fortunate we 
are to have witnessed that old fellow Dogen chewing on a willow twig.” 

All Buddhas and bodhisattvas of past, present, and future invariably accept 
and hold to this Bodhisattva Precept from the Scripture of Brahma s Net. Thus, 
they have likewise come to accept and hold to the willow twig in the three periods 
of time. 

djb 

CX) 


It says in the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple: 

It is imperative that you read, recite aloud, and thoroughly 
comprehend both the Ten Great Precepts and the Forty-eight Less 
Grave Precepts in the Mahayana* Scripture of Brahma’s Net, and 
thereby know well what keeps to them or breaks them, as well as what 
they permit or prohibit. But do so in accord with the sage words from 
the golden mouth of the Buddha. Do not indulge in following ordinary 
people in such matters. 

By all means, you need to understand that Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after 
Ancestor have correctly Transmitted the import of what this quotation is saying. 
Whatever deviates from this is not the Buddha’s Way, nor is it the Buddha’s 
Teaching, nor is it the Way of the Ancestors. 


Be that as it may, in Great Sung China today the willow twig is never to be 
seen. In the fourth month of the eighteenth year of the Chinese Chia-ting Era 
(1223) when I began to visit the various monasteries and temples in China, the 
willow twig was unknown to the monks, and it was likewise unknown in court and 
country both to ordinary people as well as to those in lofty positions. Because it 
was unknown to any in the monastic family, whenever I inquired about the method 
for using a willow twig, they would turn pale and lose their composure. What a 
pity that this spotless method has been lost. Folks who barely rinse out their 
mouths have fashioned a device by cutting more than an inch of hair from a horse’s 
tail and then setting it, two inches deep, into a piece of ox horn about a third of an 
inch thick and six or seven inches long, so that it quite resembles a horse’s mane. 
This is the only thing they use for cleaning their teeth. It is an inappropriate 
implement for monks to use. As it may well be an unclean utensil, it is not an 
instrument of the Buddha’s Teaching. Pious common folk, who worship the 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


677 


emperor and other celestial beings, are bound to be repelled by it. Further, 
commoners and monks both use this instrument as a tool for brushing the dirt off 
their shoes, or use it for brushing their hair. Though some of these tools may be a 
bit larger or smaller, they are one and the same in their usage. And only one in ten 
thousand use even this inadequate device. As a result, the breath of monks and 
householders alike is foul smelling. When people two or three feet away speak, 
their bad breath comes forth and even a whiff of it is hard to take. Not even those 
praised as venerable senior monks who have realized the Way or those who are 
known as teachers and guides for ordinary people and those in lofty positions know 
that there is a method for rinsing the mouth, scraping the tongue, and chewing a 
willow twig. Based on this, we cannot begin to know in how many other ways we 
may now find the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors in decay. Although I do 
not begrudge either committing my dewdrop existence to thousands of miles of 
blue waves, or my crossing foreign mountains and rivers in order to find the Way, 
yet I must regret this sad state of affairs. How many unstained methods have 
already disappeared there? How sad, how very sad! 

Despite this, throughout the whole of Japan both monks and laity in court 
and country are all personally acquainted with the willow twig, which may be due 
to their personal experience of the Buddha’s light of wisdom. Even so, their way of 
chewing a willow twig is not like the standard practice, and the method for 
scraping the tongue has not been introduced to them, probably due to their being in 
too big a hurry. Still, those who are aware that they should use a willow twig—in 
contrast with the people of Sung who are totally unaware of the willow twig—have 
naturally learned this method of the spiritually preeminent ones. Among the 
practices of mountain hermits, we find that they too use the willow twig. You need 
to realize that, as they say, it is the instrument whereby all may emerge from the 
dust; it is the tool of immaculacy. 

djb 

CX) 


It says in the Great Scripture on the Three Thousand Forms of Everyday 
Behavior for Monks : 

There are five things to consider when using a willow twig for 
chewing. First, cut it according to the proper length. Second, split it 
according to the proper method. Third, when chewing its head, do not 
go beyond one third of an inch. Fourth, in cleaning between the teeth, 
chew it three times. Fifth, make use of the sap to bathe your eyes. 

Our present-day practice of washing our eyes by scooping up some water in our 
right hand from the water that we used for chewing the willow twig and rinsing out 
our mouth was originally a doctrine in the Great Scripture on the Three Thousand 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


678 


Forms of Everyday Behavior for Monks. Nowadays in Japan, it is a long-standing 
domestic custom. The method for scraping the tongue was transmitted by the 
exemplary monk Eisai. 12 Before disposing of your used willow twig, use both 
hands to split it in two, tearing it from the chewed end. Put the sharp edge of the 
split twig crosswise on your tongue and scrape it. That is, take up some water with 
your right hand, put it in your mouth and rinse it out, and then scrape your tongue. 
Again and again, rinse your mouth and scrape your tongue, scraping repeatedly 
with the edge of the split willow twig as if you were attempting to draw blood. 

When you are rinsing your mouth, you should silently recite the following 
verse, as put forth in the Avatamsaka Scripture : 

In cleansing my mouth and teeth, 

I pray that all sentient beings 

Will turn towards the Gate to Immaculacy 

And ultimately attain freedom. 

Repeatedly rinse your mouth out and use the ball of the first, second, or third finger 
of your right hand to cleanse the inside of your lips and under your tongue, as if 
you were licking them clean. When you have recently eaten something oily, you 
should use ground honey locust pods. When you have finished with the willow 
twig, you should then dispose of it out of sight. After you have disposed of your 
willow twig, you should snap your fingers three times. There is a container for 
disposing of willow twigs on the rear washstand. In other places, you should 
dispose of it in an unobtrusive place. You should spit out the water from rinsing 
your mouth somewhere other than in the washbowl. 


Next, we need to wash our face. Scooping hot water from the washbowl in 
both hands, we wash all over, from the forehead to the eyebrows, the eyes, the 
nose, the inside of the ears, the crown of the head, and the cheeks. We should first 
douse them thoroughly with hot water and then scrub them. Take care not to let 
tears, spittle, or nasal mucus drip into the washbowl water. When washing in this 
manner, do not use excessive amounts of hot water, spilling or slopping it outside 
the washbowl, so that you run out of it too soon. Wash until the dirt and oil has 
been removed. Wash behind your ears, since water does not customarily reach 
there. Rinse your eyeballs, since they cannot be cleaned with sand. And washing 
even from your hairline up over the crown of your head is ordinary, everyday 


12. The Japanese monk who introduced the Rinzai tradition into Japan. He was the first Zen 
Master under whom Dogen trained. 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


679 


monastic behavior. After you have finished washing the face and have disposed of 
the water in your washbowl, snap your fingers three times. 

Next, wipe and dry your face with one end of your hand towel. After that, 
take off the hand towel, fold it as it was before, and hang it over your left arm. At 
the rear washstand behind the Cloud Hall are face-wiping cloths for common use; 
long pieces of toweling have also been provided, and there are charcoal braziers. 
Members of the community need not worry about there not being sufficient 
toweling for drying their face. They can dry their heads and faces with those 
provided or use their own hand towel: both are proper methods. 

When washing your face, do not make a sound by noisily clanging the ladle 
against your bowl. And do not let the surrounding area get wet by splashing hot or 
cold water about. Quietly reflect on the fact that, even though we were born in the 
final five hundred years of the Dharma and live on a remote island, the merit that 
we have accumulated from the past has not fallen into decay. We should rejoice in 
deepest gratitude that we have had correctly passed on to us the ordinary, everyday 
behavior of earlier Buddhas and that, without stain, we do our training to 
experience the Truth. In returning to the Cloud Hall, we should step lightly and 
speak with a low voice. 

In the private quarters of aged and virtuous monks, without question there 
needs to be a washstand, since not washing the face is counter to the Dharma. 

When washing the face, there are methods for using facial medicines. 

In short, chewing a willow twig and washing the face are the True Teachings 
of Old Buddhas. Those who do their utmost to train with a heart that is fixed on the 
Way should train with and experience these Teachings. Using cold water when 
there is no hot water is an ancient custom, a long-established method. When there 
is neither hot nor cold water available, in the early morning wipe your face 
thoroughly dry, using a fragrant grass, powdered incense, or the like. Then, pay 
homage to the Buddha, recite a Scripture, light incense, and do seated meditation. 
To do our religious practices before we have washed our face is discourteous. 

Delivered to the assembly on the twenty-third day of the tenth lunar month in the first year of the 

En’o era (November 21, 1239) at Kannondori in Koshohorin-ji Temple, Yamashiro 

Province. 


In India and China, kings, princes, ministers of state, government officials, 
lay Buddhists, monks, men and women in court and country, all the people 
throughout wash their faces. Among their household goods is a washbasin, perhaps 
of gold, perhaps of tin. Every morning, some people perform the act of washing 



Shobogenzo: On Washing Your Face 


680 


their face at a shrine to a celestial deity or at the gravesite of their ancestors. Others 
offer their face-washing at the stupa* of a Buddha or an Ancestor. After lay 
Buddhists and monks have washed their faces and straightened their clothing, they 
bow to those in heavenly states, and bow to the resident spirits, and bow to the 
Ancestors of their lineage, and bow to their parents. They bow to their teachers, 
and to the Triple Treasure, and to the myriad beings in the three worlds of desire, 
form, and beyond form, and they bow to the benevolent guardian spirits. There are 
none who forget to wash their face, not even farmers and rice growers, fishermen 
and woodcutters. Even so, they do not chew the willow twig. In Japan, amongst 
emperors and ministers of state, old and young, courtiers and gentry, householders 
and monks, both ordinary people and those in lofty positions all remember to chew 
a willow twig and rinse out their mouth, but they do not wash their face. In each 
country, it is a case of one strong point and one shortcoming. To preserve and hold 
to the practice of washing the face and chewing a willow twig corrects this 
deficiency and is the luminous manifestation of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Delivered again to the assembly on the twentieth day of the tenth lunar month in the first year of 
the Kangen era (December 2, 1243) at Kippo-ji Temple in Yoshida Prefecture, Echizen 
Province. 

Delivered to the monks on the eleventh day of the first lunar month in the second year of the 
Zencho era (February 13, 1250) at Eihei-ji Temple on Mount Kichijo in Yoshida 
Prefecture, Echizen Province. 



56 

On the Model for Doing Meditation 

(Zazengi) 


To train under a Master is to do seated meditation. In doing seated 
meditation, a quiet place serves well. Spread out your meditation mat so that it lies 
thickly. Do not put it in a place that is windy or smoky, and do not expose it to rain 
or dew. Make the place where you sit secure for your body. There is the example 
from the past of Shakyamuni’s sitting in a diamond-hard place under the Bodhi 
tree, seated upon a huge rock in the shape of a lotus, upon which He had spread out 
a thick cushion of dry grass. Your sitting place should be lit, without letting it be in 
the dark, day or night. Make ‘warm in winter and cool in summer’ your technique. 

Set aside all involvements and give everything a rest. Do not think about 
what is good or what is bad. Do not exercise your discriminatory mind or weigh 
and judge your mind’s remembrances, concepts, and reflections! Do not aim at 
becoming a Buddha, and drop off any concern with whether you are sitting or lying 
down. Eat and drink in moderation. Cherish the light of days and the dark of 
nights. Take to doing seated meditation as though you were extinguishing a fire 
upon your head. The Fifth Chinese Ancestor, Daiman Konin of Mount Obai, did 
not do anything particularly different: he just diligently did seated meditation. 

When sitting in meditation, wear your kesa. * Spread out your mat and put 
your round cushion atop it. Do not sit in lotus position with the cushion supporting 
the whole of your legs, but put it well behind the back half of your legs. 
Consequently, the mat will be under your knees and thighs while the cushion will 
be under the base of your spine. This is the method for seated meditation that has 
been used by Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor. 

Some people sit in the half lotus position and some sit in the full lotus 
position. When sitting in the full lotus position, we put the right foot atop the left 
thigh and the left foot atop the right thigh. The tips of our toes should line up 


* See Glossaiy. 


681 



Shobogenzo: On the Model for Doing Meditation 


682 


uniformly on our thighs and not lie unevenly. When sitting in half lotus position, 
we simply place our left foot on our right thigh. 1 

We should drape our clothing in a loose-fitting manner, yet neatly. We place 
our right hand atop our left foot and our left hand atop our right hand. The tips of 
our two thumbs touch each other. Both hands are then held close to our body. The 
point at which the two thumbs touch should be placed opposite the navel. 

You should sit with your body upright, that is, not leaning to the right, 
inclining to the left, bending forward, or arching back. You need to align your ears 
with your shoulders and your nose with your navel. Let your tongue rest in your 
mouth. Breathe through your nose. Your lips and teeth should be touching. Your 
eyes should remain open, but neither widely nor narrowly so. 

With body and mind regulated in this manner, breathe out once. Sit with the 
stillness of a mountain, and let what you are thinking about be based on not 
deliberately trying to think about any particular thing. How can what anyone is 
thinking about be based on not deliberately thinking about something ? Simply, by 
not making ‘what I am thinking about’ the point of your meditation. This, then, is 
the technique for doing seated meditation. Seated meditation is a practice and not 
something for intellectual study. It is the Dharma Gate to peace and joy. It is 
unstained training to realize the Truth. 

Delivered to the monks at Kippo-ji Training Temple, Yoshida Prefecture, Echizen Province, in the 
eleventh lunar month of the first year of the Kangen era (December 1243). 

Copied in the chief disciple Ejo’s quarters at Kippo Hermitage, Echizen Province, on the 
twentieth day of the first lunar month in the second year of the same era (March 1, 1244). 


1. Readers who choose to follow Dogen’s practice of sitting in full or half lotus are cautioned 
to alternate which leg is on top so as to avoid back problems that can develop over long-term 
practice. Also, to avoid putting injurious strain on the spine and knees, several other modes 
of sitting have developed in the Zen tradition, such as sitting in a chair or on a meditation 
bench. One may even meditate while lying down. 



57 

On the Plum Blossom 

(Baika) 


Translator’s Introduction: The plum tree holds a particular place in Chinese culture, one that 
was transplanted into the culture of Japan. As the earliest blooming of all trees, it comes into 
flower in the latter part of winter and is therefore considered a harbinger of spring. In Buddhist 
contexts, it is used as a metaphor for Shakyamuni Buddha, who was considered the first to bring 
forth the blossoming of the Dharma, and whose blossoming has inspired others to seek and find 
the Way. 

By extension, the plum tree is also seen as a reference to one’s Master and, in his writings, 
Dogen frequently refers to his Master as an ‘Old Buddha’. Further, the plum blossom is used as a 
metaphor for the udumbara flower which Shakyamuni held aloft, His eyes atwinkle. Upon seeing 
this, His disciple Makakasho broke out into a smile in response to his spiritual recognition of 
True Nature. 

Dogen’s commentaries in this discourse are based primarily on various poems that his late 
Master, Tendo Nyojo, had composed. The discourse begins with a poem that describes Nyojo’s 
relationship with his own Master, Setcho Chikan. Dogen uses this poem to comment on the 
Master-disciple relationship in general, as well as to explore various applications of the metaphor 
to the functioning of the non-personal Buddha Nature (the Plum Blossom) after the conventional 
body and mind have dropped off. 

The perspective from which Dogen speaks derives from just such a spiritual experience, 
which not all of his disciples would have had. How he puts things often bypasses customary 
modes of discourse wherein one’s intellect functions as the final arbiter of meaning. To attempt 
to explain or ‘rationalize’ all the allusions in this text would require extensive annotation and 
would seem counter to Dogen’s intent in the first place. To put it simply, his process of ‘boggling 
the mind’ is intended, in part, to liberate his disciples from conventional modes of thinking and 
to help point them towards their True Nature. 

My late Master Tendo, an Old Buddha, was the thirtieth Abbot and a most 
venerable monk of Keitoku-ji Temple on the renowned Mount Tendo in the Keigen 
district of Great Sung China. Once when speaking to the assembly he said, “Here 
at Tendo in midwinter have come forth the first lines of a verse.” He then recited 
the following poem of his: 

The thorn-like, spike-branched Old Plum Tree 
Suddenly bursts forth, first with one or two blossoms, 

Then with three, four, five, and finally blossoms beyond 
count. 


683 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


684 


No perfume to take pride in, no fragrance to boast of 

In scattering, they evoke a springtime scene as they are 
blown over grass and trees. 

The patch-robed monks, to a one, have no sooner shaved 
their heads 

Than, suddenly, the weather shifts with howling winds 
and squalling skies, 

Until the whole earth is wrapped in swirling snow. 

The Old Plum Tree s silhouette is barely to be seen, 

As the freezing cold seizes their noses and rubs them raw. 

The Old Plum Tree with which he began his talk was a silhouette barely to be seen 
when It suddenly burst into bloom and bore fruit. Sometimes It brought forth a 
springtime, sometimes It brought forth a winter. Sometimes It brought forth 
howling winds, sometimes It brought forth squalling skies. Sometimes It was 
simply the head of a patch-robed monk, sometimes It was the Eye of my Old 
Buddha. Sometimes It changed into grass and trees; sometimes It suddenly 
changed into a pure fragrance. Its sudden spiritual transformations and spiritually 
wondrous ways were inexhaustible, even up to the point where the great earth and 
the high heavens, along with the luminous sun and the pure moon, were 
functioning like trees, due to the arboreal merits of the Old Plum Tree, as they— 
Master and disciple—entwined around and supported each other, like the vines of 
kudzu and wisteria do. 

At the time when the Old Plum Tree burst into bloom, Its flowering 
characterized the world. Whenever Its flowering characterizes the world, that is 
what we call ‘the arrival of spring’. On that occasion, there is a single blossom of 
five petals that bursts forth. At the time of this single blossom, there can be three, 
or four, or five blossoms, or there can be a hundred, or a thousand, or myriad 
blossoms, right up to there being countless blossoms. These blossomings forth are 
nothing compared to the one or two or countless boughs that the Old Plum Tree 
can boast of. Flowers such as the udumbara and the blue lotus are like one or two 
branchings of the Old Plum Tree’s blossoming. 1 All blossomings, in general, are 
beneficent gifts of the Old Plum Tree. There is the Old Plum Tree of common folk 
and the Old Plum Tree of those in loftier realms. And from within the Old Plum 
Tree, both the ordinary human realms and the realms of the more lofty manifest, 


1. The udumbara flower is said to bloom only once every three thousand years. For this reason 
it is used in Buddhism as a metaphor for how difficult it is to come into contact with the 
True Teaching. The blue lotus is a metaphor for wise discernment and one’s victory over 
slavery to the senses. 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


685 


due to the merits of the Tree. We call the hundreds and thousands of blossoms the 
flowering of ordinary people and of those in loftier realms; the thousands of 
millions of blossoms are the flowering of Buddhas and Ancestors. At this very 
moment in time the blossoms cry out, “A Buddha has appeared in the world!” and 
they cry out “From the first, the Ancestral Master Bodhidharma came to this very 
land of ours!” 

djb 

CX) 


My late Master, an Old Buddha, once addressed his assembly in verse: 

When Gautama finally lost His deceiving eyes, 

There appeared in the snow a single blossom on one 
bough of the Old Plum Tree. 

What has now arrived is the growing of thorn-like spurs, 

So that all the more I laugh at the spring winds which 
send all things flying in disarray. 

Now that this Old Buddha has turned the Wheel of the Dharma to Its full 
throughout the whole universe, it has created an opportunity for all ordinary folk, 
as well as those in lofty positions, to realize the Way. There is nothing that has not 
been covered with the benefits of the Dharma, even including clouds and rain, 
winds and water, plants and insect life. The heavens and the earth, along with their 
domains, having been set in motion by this Wheel of the Dharma, are like fish 
freely and vigorously swimming about in water. When people say, “I am hearing 
words that I have not heard before,” they are saying, “I am listening to the Dharma 
of the present moment.” When they say, “I am getting what I did not have before,” 
they are giving a name to their realizing the Dharma of the present moment. In 
short, His Wheel of the Dharma cannot be seen or heard without there being at 
least a vague feeling of happiness and prosperity. 

In and about the hundred and eighty provinces within Great Sung China 
today, there are temples in the mountains and in populated areas whose number is 
beyond reckoning. Within them, the number of trainees is great. But most of them 
never met my late Master, the Old Buddha. Further, only a small percentage of 
those who had met him actually heard what he had to say. And even more, how 
could there possibly be many who had a one-to-one meeting with him and made 
their prostrations to him? And those permitted in his private quarters were fewer 


2. Gautama, Prince Siddhartha’s family name, is customarily used to refer to Shakyamuni 
Buddha before His enlightenment. 

3. That is, became his disciples. 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


686 


still, to say nothing of those who were permitted to do prostrations to my late 
Master’s Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow, Countenance and Eye. 

My late Master, the Old Buddha, did not readily allow new monks to stay in 
the monastery. He would often say, “Those who are unfamiliar with the mind that 
seeks the Way cannot dwell here with me,” and then he’d send them on their way. 
Once rid of them, he would say, “If they are not ‘such a one’,* what, pray, do they 
want to achieve? Dogs like that are noisy beings. They are not permitted in the 
monastery.” I have actually witnessed this and personally heard him say that. In 
private, I thought to myself, “What could they possibly have done wrong that even 
though they are his countrymen, he would not allow them to dwell with him? By 
what good fortune have I been permitted to enter his monastery, even though I am 
an alien seed from a distant foreign land? And further, I have been allowed to have 
free access to the Abbot’s private quarters that I might do prostrations to his 
venerable body and listen to his words of Dharma. Though I am foolish and 
ignorant, I have been able to form a fruitful bond with him.” 

At the time when my late Master was doing his part to transform the worldly 
ways of Sung China, there were people who were able to explore the Matter,* as 
well as those who were not able to do so. Now that my late Master, the Old 
Buddha, has departed from the world of Sung China, it has probably become even 
more dismal than a moonless night. And why is that? I would simply answer, 
“Because around the time of my late Master, an Old Buddha, there were no Old 
Buddhas like my late Master, the Old Buddha.” Thus, when you trainees of today 
encounter and hear what he said in his poems, do not think that other countrymen 
of yours are able to encounter and heed the Wheel of the Dharma and thereby 
explore the Matter with a Master. The Plum Blossom in the snow is a single 
glimpse of the udumbara flower. How often does it happen in everyday life that, 
while looking respectfully at the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching of 
the Buddha Tathagata, we vainly fail to break into a smile when His eyes twinkle? 
Right now, beyond doubt, we have already had authentically Transmitted to us— 
and affirmed for us—that the Plum Blossom in the snow is the very Eye of the 
Tathagata. Taking this up, some may take the Eye to mean a painted eye on a 
forehead or the pupil within an organ of sight. But when we get inside the Plum 
Blossom through our training and completely investigate It, such dubious 
explanations do not come forth any longer. This is the very Eye of the statement, 
“In the heavens above and the earth below, I alone am the Honored One.” 4 


4. This quotation is attributed to the Buddha who, upon His birth, is said to have taken seven 
steps and then uttered these words. However, as the discourse states, it was Gautama’s Eye 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


687 


Thus it is that the celestial flowers in the world of the heavens and the 
celestial flowers in the world of humans—coral tree flowers and great coral tree 
flowers, as well as the red manjusha tree flowers and great red manjusha tree 
flowers—along with flowers that are kindred to innumerable lands within the ten 
quarters, are all the kith and kin of the Plum Blossom in the snow. Because they 
have received a portion of the beneficence of the Plum Blossom, millions of 
blossoms are the kin of the Plum Blossom and should, therefore, be called 
miniature plum blossoms. Illusory flowers in the sky, earthbound flowers, 
flowerings within the mind of meditation, and so on, are all large and small flowers 
that are kindred to the Plum Blossom. The flowers that have opened within the 
millions of domains within the Flower are all a portion of the beneficence of this 
Plum Blossom. 5 Apart from the beneficence of the Plum Blossom, there is not a 
single raindrop or dewdrop of beneficence. The bloodlines of all who have 
flowered have come forth from the Plum Blossom. Do not explore the statement 
“The whole earth was wrapped in swirls of snow” as something that occurred only 
at Shorin-ji Monastery. That snow was the Eye of the Tathagata, which shone upon 
Eka’s head and under his feet. 6 Do not merely explore it as what the snow of ‘a 
snow-covered shrine in the snow-capped Elimalayan Mountains’ refers to. It was 

H 

the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching for Old Gautama, for in that 
place He fully realized the opening of the five eyes. 8 The eyes of the Thousand¬ 
eyed One would have been completely fulfilled within these five eyes of His. 9 

Truly, there was not one smidgen of the Real Form of all thoughts and things 
that Old Gautama did not fully realize within the luminous brilliance of His body 
and mind. Even though the views of ordinary people and those in lofty positions 
have differences, and even though the feelings of the mundane and the saintly 


(Buddha Nature) that made the statement. That is, the T in the quote does not refer to a 
personal self. It is Buddha Nature Itself that is making the claim. 

5. ‘The Flower’ is an allusion to the multi-petaled lotus that opens upon the crown of the 
Tathagata’s head, in the center of which sits Vairochana Buddha, that is, the Cosmic Buddha. 

6. The reference here is to the Second Chinese Ancestor Eka, who stood all night in the 
deepening snow outside Bodhidharma’s quarters while seeking to be Bodhidharma’s 
disciple. 

7. A reference to Gautama doing His training in the Himalayan Mountains. 

8. ‘The five eyes’ refers to Gautama’s two physical eyes, which are the non-worldly eyes of 
someone who is in meditation, plus the Eye of wise discernment, the Eye of the Dharma, 
and the Eye of a Buddha. 

9. ‘The Thousand-eyed One’ refers to the Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara of the Thousand Eyes 
and the Thousand Hands, who is the embodiment of the compassion of Vairochana Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


688 


stand far apart, the vast expanse of snow is what the earth is, and the earth itself is 
a vast expanse of snow. If there were no vast expanse of snow, there would be no 
Earth anywhere within the universe. The whole of this vast expanse of snow— 
inside and out—is synonymous with these eyes of Old Gautama. 10 

You need to realize that both the Flower and the Earth are completely 
beyond birth and death. The Flower is beyond birth and death, and because the 
Flower is beyond birth and death, the Earth is beyond birth and death. Because 
both Flower and Earth are completely beyond birth and death, the Eye is beyond 
birth and death. What is called ‘beyond birth and death’ is synonymous with 
supreme enlightenment. What is seen at that very instant of enlightenment is 
simply a Plum Blossom branch. What is expressed at that very moment is simply ‘a 
Plum Blossom bough in the snow’. Both Earth and Flower are Life that transcends 
life. 

Further, the phrase ‘the vast expanse of snow’ means the vast expanse of 
snow totally, inside and out. The whole universe is one’s Original Mind. Because 
Original Mind is what the flowers in the whole universe feel, the whole universe is 
the Plum Blossom. Because the universe is the Plum Blossom, the whole universe 
is synonymous with the eyes of Gautama. What they perceive at the moment of 
understanding is the Great Earth with Its mountains and rivers. Arriving at the 
Matter, arriving at the Moment, is synonymous with Bodhidharma’s poem, which 
is an expression of what has been arrived at: 

From the first, I came to this land to Transmit the 
Dharma 

That I might rescue deluded beings, 

And when the Single Blossom opened Its five petals, 

The fruit thereof naturally came about of itself 

Even though there was his coming from the West and his barely arriving in the 
East, nevertheless the Plum Blossom was ‘the Now’ of what arrived. 

Bodhidharma’s manifesting ‘the Now’ like this is called ‘the growing of 
thorn-like spurs’. Now at this very moment, there are old branches and new 
branches on large limbs, which has resulted in places where old twigs and new 
twigs are on small branchings. You need to explore the places wherein these have 
arrived, and explore ‘arrival’ as meaning ‘the Now’. ‘What is within three, four, 
five, six blossoms’ means ‘what is within countless blossoms’. The Flower is 
equipped with internal meritorious functions that are profound and far-reaching, 


10. That is, what one sees before spiritually awakening is the product of the intellect’s 
interpretation of the data from the sense organs. 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


689 


and It clearly opens up external meritorious functions that are far-reaching and 
great. Both this ‘internal’ and ‘external’ manifest in the blooming of one blossom. 
Because it is just one bough, there is no other, different one, since it is not one 
species among others. The One who calls the arrival of the one bough ‘the Now’ is 
our Old Fellow Gautama. 

Because there is only One Bough, It is what is Transmitted from heir to heir. 
Hence, it is expressed as “My Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching is 
what I Transmit to Makakasho,” and it is expressed as “You have got what my 
Marrow is.” In this manner, because each heir is a greatly honored and valued life 
where an arrival has manifested, it is a matter of the five petals opening, for five 
petals comprise a plum blossom. Thus, there are the Seven Ancestral Buddhas,* 
and there are the twenty-eight Indian Ancestors and the six Chinese Ancestors up 
through Eno, plus nineteen other Ancestors. 11 All are the five petals opening on 
just One Bough; it is just One Bough of five-petaled blossoms. Once you have 
explored the One Bough and the five petals, you will encounter face-to-face the 
genuine ‘Transmission of the Plum Blossom in the snow’ being Transmitted to you. 
Once you have turned yourself around and turned your mind around within the 
way that the words ‘only One Bough’ relate to each other, ‘clouds’ and ‘moon’ are 
what are equal, whereas ‘valleys’ and ‘mountains’ are different from each other. 

However, folks who have never had an Eye for exploring the Matter are 
wont to say, “What the five petals means is that there is the one flower which is 
comprised of the First Chinese Ancestor Bodhidharma plus the subsequent five 
generations of Chinese-born Ancestors, and because the line-up of the five 
transcends past and present, before and after, we speak of them as the five petals.” 
These words are not even worth taking up and refuting. These folks, sad to say, are 
not sentient beings who explore the Matter with Buddhas or train with Ancestors. 
How could the saying ‘one flower comprised of five petals’ possibly be limited to 
just these five generations? Are those who have come after the Sixth Ancestor not 
to be spoken of? What such folks have to say does not even come up to the prattle 
of little children. It is something they don’t see or hear about even in their dreams. 


11. As traditionally counted, the six Chinese Ancestors would be Bodhidharma down through 
Eno. As to the nineteen subsequent Ancestors, which are not specifically identified as being 
Chinese, some scholars understand the nineteenth to refer to Nyojo, but by actual count he 
would be the seventeenth. Dogen’s Dharma heir, Koun Ejo, would be the nineteenth, which 
may be why Dogen does not identify the nineteen as being specifically Chinese. 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


690 


djb 

CX) 

My late Master, the Old Buddha, once said as his salutary poem that 
followed his formal Dharma talk on a New Year’s Day: 

On this first day of the year I wish you happiness. 

All the myriad things arising are fresh and new. 

Upon reflection, my great assembly, I submit to you, 

The Plum Tree has blossomed early this spring. 

When I quietly reflect upon this poem, I realize that even if you dear old veteran 
monks in all ten quarters within the three periods of time have let go of your 
bodies, if you have no equivalent of “The Plum Tree has blossomed early this 
spring,” who would say that you have expressed the Matter fully? My late Master 
alone, the Old Buddha, was the Old Buddha among Old Buddhas. 

The fundamental meaning of what he said was that once the Plum has 
blossomed, a myriad springtimes are quick to follow its lead. The myriad 
springtimes are but one or two of the meritorious functions of the Plum Tree. Just 
one springtime can make the myriad things that arise into something fresh and new, 
and make our myriad thoughts and things into a New Year’s Day. 

His wish for our happiness denotes the authenticity of his Eye. ‘The myriad 
things that arise’ are not only of the past, present, and future, they are what existed 
before the Lords of Awe-inspiring Voices and what will come after the future. 
Because he is saying that the past, present, and future, which are immeasurable and 
inexhaustible, are ever fresh, this freshness has dropped off‘freshness’. Thus, what 
he reflected on and submitted was his wish for his great assembly, because what he 
wished was that each of them might be ‘such a person’. 


My late Master Tendo, the Old Buddha, during a Dharma talk for his 
assembly, once said in verse: 

If a single word accords with the Truth, 

It will not change, though myriad generations pass: 

Thus, eye-shaped willow buds sprout forth from new 
branches, 

12 

Whereas plum blossoms fill up the older boughs. 


12. In this section of the discourse, ‘willows’ refers to those who are new to training, for whom 
all is new and who are ‘all eyes’, whereas the plum tree refers to a Master whose years of 
training, like old boughs, have brought forth a profusion of blossoms. 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


691 


That is to say, pursuing the Way for hundreds of eons is, from beginning to end, 
equivalent to a single word according with the Truth, and the effort of one 
moment’s thought is, from before to after, the same as its not changing, though 
myriad generations pass. The willow brings about a luxuriant growth of new 
branches and contrives ‘eyes’ to burst out upon them; even though the branches are 
new, it is ‘eyes’ that they bring forth. The principle is that the ‘eyes’ are nothing 
other than ‘eyes’, and we thoroughly explore these branches as being new. The 
‘new’ should be explored through your training as meaning “Everything is all 
new.” To say that plum blossoms fill up the older boughs means that Plum 
Blossoms are entirely old boughs, that They permeate old boughs, that the old 
boughs are Plum Blossoms. For example, plum boughs explore the Matter just as 
willow branches do; plum boughs come into being just as willow branches do; 
plum boughs are filled up, just as willow branches are. Because plum boughs are 
filled up with bloomings, just as willow branches are, this is the same as saying, “I 
have the True Teaching which I Transmit to Makakasho.” The countenance of the 
One filled the countenance of the other with His raising the Flower aloft: the 
flowering of the one filled the flowering of the Other by his breaking into a smile. 


My late Master, the Old Buddha, in formally addressing his assembly, once 
said in verse: 

The riverside willows look as though adorned with a 
minister s waist sash: 

The plum blossoms look as though clad in an archer’s 
gauntlet . 13 

This gauntlet is not like some fine brocade from Szechwan Province or like Pien- 
ho’s priceless jewel: 14 it is simply the opening of a Plum Blossom. The opening of 
a Plum Blossom is equivalent to ‘you whom my Marrow has gotten’. 15 


13. On a literal level, this verse describes the way the dark branches of the budding willow and 
the bright blossoming plum tree look. 

14. Pien-ho was a person in ancient China who offered to three rulers a huge, unpolished jewel 
that he had found, but none of these rulers were able to perceive its intrinsic value, and they 
therefore summarily rejected the offering. 

15. “You whom my Marrow has gotten” is Dogen’s reversal of the words Bodhidhanna spoke to 
Eka when confirming him as a Dhanna heir: “You have gotten what my Marrow is.” 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


692 


djb 

CX) 

Once, when King Prasenajit invited the Venerable Pindola to a 
midday meal, the king asked him afterwards, “I have been given to 
understand that you, O Venerable One, have actually met the Buddha. 

Is this true?” 16 

The Venerable One pointed to the Matter by using his hand to 
raise his eyebrow. 

Concerning this, my Late Master, the Old Buddha, composed a poem: 

Raising his own eyebrow as response to the question, he 
laughed, 

Showing without guile that he had ‘encountered Buddha ’ 
in a familiar way. 

For which he deserves gratitude from the four quarters 
up to this very day. 

The Spring occurs within the twigs of the Plum, which, 
wrapped in snow, are ever so cold. 

This story is about King Prasenajit once asking a Venerable One whether he had or 
had not actually met the Buddha. ‘Encountering Buddha’ means becoming a 
Buddha, and ‘becoming a Buddha’ means using one’s hand to raise an eyebrow. If 
the Venerable One had merely realized some fruit of arhathood and were not a full- 
fledged arhat,* he could not have encountered Buddha. If he had not encountered 
Buddha, he could not have become Buddha. If he had not become Buddha, he 
would probably not have used his hand to raise an eyebrow, signaling that he had 
realized Buddhahood. 

Accordingly, you need to keep in mind that, as a disciple who had received 
the Face-to-Face Transmission of Shakyamuni Buddha and as one who had already 
experienced the fourth fruit of arhathood and was awaiting his rebirth in the world 
as a present-day Buddha, 17 how could the Venerable One possibly not have 
encountered Shakyamuni Buddha? ‘Having met Shakyamuni Buddha’ does not 
mean ‘encountering Buddha’. As you explore this through your training, 
understand that to encounter Shakyamuni Buddha as Shakyamuni Buddha is 


16. As used in the translation of this section of the discourse, ‘to meet the Buddha’ means 
having had a social contact with the historical Shakyamuni, whereas ‘to encounter Buddha’ 
means having seen one’s own Buddha Nature. 

17. The fourth fruit of arhathood refers to the results experienced from attaining the fourth stage 
of arhathood. Please see the Glossary for an explanation of these four stages. 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


693 


‘encountering Buddha’. In that King Prasenajit was able to open his eyes to 
exploring, he had come in contact with one who skillfully used his hand to raise an 
eyebrow. You simply need to have the Eye of a Buddha to explore the principle 
underlying ‘having encountered Buddha in a familiar way’. This Spring, of which 
my Master spoke, is beyond humankind, beyond the domains of a Buddha; It is 
within the twigs of the Plum Tree. How do we know this is so? Because the chill of 
the snow is the raising of an eyebrow. 

djb 

CX) 


My late Master, the Old Buddha, once said in verse, 

Our Original Countenance is beyond birth and death. 

The Spring is within the blossom of the Plum and has 
entered a picture. 

To paint a picture of Spring, you need not paint willows, or plum trees, or peach 
trees, or damson trees; you should just portray Spring. To picture willow, plum, 
peach, or damson is to picture a willow tree, a plum tree, a peach tree, or a damson 
tree; it is not yet portraying Spring. It is not that Spring should not be portrayed, 
but apart from my late Master, an Old Buddha, there is no one within India in the 
west and China to the east who has portrayed Spring. Only my late Master, the Old 
Buddha, and he alone, had sharp-tipped a brush to portray the Spring. The Spring 
he spoke about now is the Spring within the picture, because he has put It into the 
picture. Because he had no need to call upon other abilities, he could simply make 
a plum blossom be Spring by putting it or its tree into the picture—such were his 
skillful means. 

Due to the clarity of my late Master, the Old Buddha, concerning the 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, he Transmitted It to Buddhas and 
Ancestors who had assembled from all ten quarters over the past, present, and 
future. Thus it was that he penetrated what the Eye is and clarified what a Plum 
Blossom is. 

On the sixth day of the eleventh lunar month in the first year of the Kangen era in Japan 
(December 18, 1243), at Kippo-ji Temple in the Yoshida district in Echizen province, 
where snow, some three feet deep, has wrapped the whole earth in swirling white. 

cSp djb djb 
(Xj (Xj 


If perchance some demon of self naturally arises and the Plum Blossom 
seems not to be the Eye of Gautama, then ponder on the question, “What physical 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


694 


thing can you see as the Eye that is more apt than the Plum Blossom?” And if at 
such a time, you search for the Eye somewhere else, then every moment will be 
your being face-to-face with It and failing to recognize It, because mutual 
recognition will not have occurred to you as possible. Today is not ‘my today’, it is 
the today of our whole tradition. Straight off, you must clarify what the Eye of the 
Plum Blossom is and seek that, and that alone! 


My late Master, the Old Buddha, once said in verse, 

Everything is so bright and clear, 

No need to seek some phantom in the Flowering Plum, 

Spontaneously creating rain and raising clouds in past 
and present. 

Past and present are rare enough, and what ending will 
they have? 

Thus, the creating of rain and the raising of clouds are functions of the Plum 
Blossom. Floating clouds and falling rain are the Plum Blossom’s thousands of 
twists and turns and myriad masses of forms, as well as Its thousands of merits and 
myriad virtues. What is naturally ever-present is the Plum Blossom. Thus, we 
speak of the Plum Blossom as being forever. 


The time-honored Meditation Master Hoen once said in verse: 

The snow-laden north wind sets the valley trees to 
swaying. 

Everything is buried deep within, with little complaint, 

While on the mountain peak, the bright-spirited plum 
stands alone. 

Even before the twelfth month s heavy snows spew forth, I 
have the feeling of the yearly ‘greater cold ’. 18 

Thus, without having penetrated what the movements of the Plum Blossom are, it 
is hard to know what the feeling of the greater cold is. Harmonizing the 


18. Traditionally in China, there is a period around early November that is called ‘the time of 
light snow’ and, a month later, one called ‘the time of heavy snow’. Similarly, a short while 
after the winter solstice there is a period called ‘the time of the lesser cold’ and, a month 
later, one called ‘the time of the greater cold’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Plum Blossom 


695 


meritorious functioning of little bits of the Plum Blossom with the north wind is 
what has created the snow. Be very clear about this. It is the strength of the Plum 
Blossom that calls forth the wind, creates the snow, brings order to the year, and 
brings the valley woodlands, along with all other things, into existence. 


The senior monk Taigen Fu expressed his awakening by saying in verse, 

I remember from the days before I had awakened 
Whenever I heard the wail of the painted horn, it was like 
a cry of grief 19 

Now, when upon my pillow, I have no idle dreams 
And just trust to whatever the Plum Blossom may blow 
my way, large or small. 

Senior monk Fu was originally an academic lecturer. Having been shaken up by the 
Chief Cook of Mount Kassan, he had a great awakening. This was his Plum 
Blossom letting the Spring Wind blow as It would, large or small. 


19. The painted horn is the name of an ancient Chinese musical instrument. 



58 

On the Whole Universe in All Ten Directions 

(Jippo) 

Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, depending on context, the Japanese word ‘jippo ’ is 
translated in various ways, such as the ten directions, the ten quarters, the ten domains, and the 
ten worlds, all of which refer to the whole universe not only in a literal, worldly sense but also in 
a spiritual one. 


A Master’s making a Fist signifies this whole universe of ours in all its ten 
directions. 1 This one instance of his manifesting his sincere heart is the whole 
universe—all ten quarters—in all its splendor. It completely pounds out the 
marrow from our bones. 


Shakyamuni Buddha once proclaimed to His great assembly, “Within the 
Buddha lands in all ten quarters there is only the Teaching of the One Vehicle and 
no other.” What He calls the ten quarters have produced the Buddha lands and they 
form the ten quarters. Therefore, unless we choose to make use of the Buddha 
lands in our training, we will not yet have the ten quarters. Because they are 
Buddha lands, we have taken the Buddha as our Master. This ordinary worldly 
country of ours is no different from Shakyamuni Buddha’s Land. You need to 
explore through your training that when someone expresses what this ordinary 
worldly realm is, it is the six- or eight-foot-tall Buddha lands in all ten quarters, in 
the same sense that we clearly describe something as weighing either eight ounces 
or half a pound. 2 

These ten quarters are contained within one single quarter and are contained 
within one single Buddha, which is why they have manifested as ten quarters. 
Because they are the ten worlds which is one world, and because they are this very 


1. A Master’s making a Fist refers to a Chinese Zen Master’s raising of his fist to direct a 
disciple away from a narrow way of thinking in order to have him encompass the whole of 
the universe, spatially and temporally. 

2. That is, we use different terms for the same thing. In short, what we call the ordinary 
worldly realm is another name for the Buddha lands, depending on our perspective. 


696 



Shobogenzo: On the Whole Universe in All Ten Directions 


697 


world which is both one’s own world and the world of the present moment, they 
are the Eye of the world, the Fist of the world, the supporting pillar of the world, 
and the stone lantern* of the world. The Buddhas of the ten quarters within these 
Buddha lands of the ten worlds are not something comparatively larger or smaller, 
nor are They something pure or sullied. Because of this, all Buddhas on Their own, 
along with all the Buddhas of the ten quarters, deeply admire and praise each other. 
Further, They do not slander each other or talk about each other’s merits or 
weaknesses or each other’s likes and dislikes as if They were turning the Wheel of 
the Dharma to express It. As Buddhas and the disciples of Buddhas, They help give 
rise to spiritual goals by making respectful inquiries. 

In receiving the Dharma of the Buddhas and Ancestors, we explore It 
through our training, just as They do. We do not insult Them, or judge Them as 
being right or wrong, or say insulting things about Them as do non-Buddhists and 
the demon hordes. When we open and read the Buddhist Scriptures that have been 
passed on to China, and look at Shakyamuni Buddha’s Teaching over the span of 
His life, we see that He never spoke of Buddhas in other domains as being inferior 
or superior to Him, nor did He say that They were not Buddhas. In short, we 
cannot find in any of the Teaching that He gave in His lifetime a word of His that 
criticized any Buddha. 

Thus it was that Shakyamuni Buddha once addressed His great assembly, 
saying, “I, on My own, have come to know how It appears, as every Buddha in the 
ten quarters has also done.” 3 You need to know that the appearance referred to in 
His statement “I, on My own, have come to know how It appears” is the 
appearance of That which is fully perfected. The appearance of perfection is, as the 
saying goes, “This cane of bamboo is on the tall side whereas that cane of bamboo 
is on the short side.” The Way of the Buddhas in the ten quarters is synonymous 
with giving full expression to the saying, “I, on My own, have come to know how 
It appears, which was the same for Shakyamuni Buddha.” It is “I, on My own, 
have awakened to this appearance, and Buddhas in Their own domains are also like 
this.” It is the way ‘I’ appears, the way ‘knowing’ appears, the way ‘this’ appears, 
the way ‘all’ appears, the way ‘this ordinary worldly country of ours’ appears, the 
way ‘Shakyamuni Buddha’ appears. 

The underlying principle of this is what the Buddhist Scriptures give voice 
to. The Buddhas, along with Their Buddha lands, are beyond duality, beyond being 


* See Glossary. 

3. In this discourse, the various forms of the word ‘appearance’ carry the meaning of ‘the form 
that something takes’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Whole Universe in All Ten Directions 


698 


sentient or nonsentient, beyond being deluded or enlightened, beyond being good, 
bad, or neutral, beyond being pure or sullied, beyond being something created and 
beyond being something permanently abiding, beyond yearning for things and 
beyond there being nothing to yearn for, beyond permanence and impermanence, 
beyond existence and non-existence, and beyond self. They are apart from the four 
phrases—there is existence, there is no existence, there is both existence and non¬ 
existence, and there is neither existence nor non-existence—as well as apart from 
the one hundred ways of negating. They are simply nothing other than the ten 
quarters, nothing other than the Buddha lands. Thus, the ten quarters are nothing 
other than what they are, just as we humans are: we have heads but no tails. 


Meditation Master Chosa Keishin, when addressing his assembly, once said, 
“The whole universe in all ten directions is nothing other than the discerning Eye 
of a mendicant monk.” What is being spoken of now is the discerning Eye of 
Gautama. The discerning Eye of mendicant monk Gautama is synonymous with 
‘the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, which is what I have’. Even 
though It is Transmitted to whomever, It is still mendicant monk Gautama’s 
discerning Eye. The whole universe, all sharp-edged and raggle-taggle in all its ten 
quarters, is Gautama’s very organ of sight. This whole universe in all ten quarters 
is the One Eye among the mendicant monk’s eyes, and up and beyond this, He has 
ever so many eyes. 4 

djb 

“‘The whole universe in all ten directions’ is a term that a 
mendicant monk is accustomed to.” 5 

‘Accustomed to’ means ‘familiar with’. Among words in common use in Japan, it 
would be described as ‘everyday’. So, ‘the whole universe in all ten directions’ is 
an everyday phrase in a mendicant monk’s spiritual family. Its words are accurate 
and the phrase itself is accurate. Clearly, you need to explore through your training 
the underlying principle that everyday words are the whole universe in all ten 
directions, and therefore ‘the whole universe in all ten directions’ are everyday 
words. Because these ten directions are inexhaustible, they are the ten quarters in 


4. An allusion to the thousand-armed Avalokiteshvara Bodhisattva, personification of the all- 
seeing, all-helping compassion of Buddha Nature. 

5. This is the first of five statements that Dogen quotes. He then supplies a commentary after 
each. 



Shobogenzo: On the Whole Universe in All Ten Directions 


699 


their entirety. We use these words in their ordinary, familiar sense. It is like seeking 
for a horse, seeking for salt, seeking for water, seeking for a drinking vessel, or like 
offering a drinking vessel, offering water, offering salt, offering a horse. 6 Who 
would know that an awakened one, one whose perspective is beyond duality, has 
transformed his body and transformed his mental functioning within the stream of 
his words, for he has transformed his speech within the stream of his words? The 
accuracy of his words and the straightforwardness of his speech, which gives a 
mouth to the oceans and a tongue to the mountains, has an everyday familiarity. 
Thus, even were we to cover his mouth and blanket our ears, what he expressed 
about the ten quarters would still be true. 


“The whole universe in all ten quarters is the whole body of a 
mendicant monk.” 

With one hand pointing towards the heavens, the Buddha showed what the heavens 
are and, with the other hand pointing towards the earth, He showed what the earth 
is, for this is the way things are. Even so, He said, “In the heavens above and the 
earth below, I alone am the Honored One.” This is the whole universe in all ten 
directions, which is the whole body of a mendicant monk. The crown of his head, 
his eyes, his nose, his skin and flesh, his bones and marrow, each and every one, is 
totally the embodiment of a mendicant monk, one who has clarified and let go of 
the whole ten quarters of the universe. Without our having to set all the ten quarters 
into motion, the whole of them are no different for us. Without depending on the 
fictions constructed by the intellective mind, we come to realize the body of a 
mendicant monk as the whole universe in all ten quarters and view the whole 
universe in all ten quarters as comprising the body of a mendicant monk. 


“The whole universe in all ten quarters is what our radiantly 
luminous True Self is.” 

What we call ‘the True Self’ is our Nose before ‘father’ and ‘mother’ were born. 7 


6. The significance of what is sought and what is offered is the topic of Discourse 79: On ‘The 
King Requests Something from Sindh’ (O Saku Sendaba). It concerns a certain king whose 
servants could anticipate their master’s desires without his having to specifically say what he 
wanted at any given moment. 

7. “Our Nose before ‘father’ and ‘mother’ were born” is a Zen expression for one’s innate 



Shobogenzo: On the Whole Universe in All Ten Directions 


700 


When we mistake what our True Self is, we call whatever comes to hand ‘the 
whole universe in all ten directions’. Despite that, the emerging of the True Self is 
the spiritual question manifesting before our very eyes. It is our opening the 
Buddha Hall and encountering Buddha. At the same time, it is someone else 
exchanging your eyes with black nuts from a soapberry tree . 8 Be that as it may, 
you will precipitously encounter the Great Master. Further, it is easy to call to That 
One, but it is difficult to do what is asked. Even so, when we hear the call, we turn 
our head. Of what use is it to go through the motions of arbitrarily turning our 
head? It is That One who makes our head turn. But when there is rice that is going 
uneaten and a robe that is going unworn, even though you are like someone 
groping about who has not yet made contact with That One, I shall, for pity’s sake, 
deal you thirty blows . 9 

djb 

“The whole universe in all ten quarters resides within the 
radiant luminosity of our True Self.” 

The eyelid of the Eye is taken for the radiant luminosity of the True Self. Its 
sudden opening is taken for something that resides within. What is seen as residing 
in the Eye is what people call ‘the whole universe in all ten quarters’. However, 
though there are people who speak in this manner, only those who lie down in the 
same bed actually see where the bedding is shot through with holes . 10 


“In the whole universe in all ten quarters, there is not one single 
person who is not the True Self.” 

Accordingly, among each and every trainer of novices and each and every Fist, 
there is not one who is not a True Self, just as the ten quarters are. Because they are 
their True Self, each and every one of these True Selves is the ten quarters. The ten 
quarters of each and every one of these True Selves delimits what the ten quarters 


Buddha Nature prior to the first arising of the discriminating mind which separates things 
into opposites such as ‘father’ and ‘mother’. 

8. That is, one’s voracious eyes are replaced by eyes that have a cleansing effect on self and 
others. 

9. Uneaten rice refers to someone passing up the opportunity to ingest the Dharma; an unworn 
robe refers to someone who passes up the opportunity to adhere to the Precepts. 

10. That is, only those who have awakened share the same insight as to the nature of things. 



Shobogenzo: On the Whole Universe in All Ten Directions 


701 


are on a deep and intimate level. Because the lifeline of each and every True Self is 
in the hands of the True Self, each repays the original cost of his or her straw 
sandals . 11 Now, why is it that the Eye of Bodhidharma and the Nose of Gautama 
are newly born from within the Womb of some pillar* of the temple? It is because, 
as they say, they freely come into, and go out of, the ten quarters in all ten 
directions. 


Gensha Shibi once said, “The whole universe throughout all its ten 
directions is the One Bright Pearl.” You need to clearly recognize the converse, 
which is that the One Bright Pearl is the whole universe throughout all its ten 
directions. Those with heads of gods as well as those with faces of demons take It 
to be their cavernous dwelling place, whereas the Dharma heirs of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors take It to be Their Eye. Ordinary folk take It to be the crown of their 
head or their own fists. Those with a beginner’s heart and those who are present- 
day trainees take It to be their donning the kesa* and their eating rice . 12 My late 
Master made It into mudballs which he would use to pelt both those junior to him 
and those senior to him. Further, even though this was just like placing a stone on 
a Go board, he would customarily be scraping out the eyes of those in our 
Ancestral tradition . 14 When he was scraping them out, not only would our 
Ancestors lend him a hand at it, but a radiance would stream out from within their 
Eye. 

djb 

The venerable monk Kempo was once asked by a monk, “A 
certain Scripture says, ‘The World-honored Ones in the ten quarters 
are on one and the same road that leads to the gateway to nirvana,’ 
but, I wonder, where does that road begin?” 

Kempo took his traveling staff and drew a circle, saying, “It is 
in here.” 


11. That is, a monastic earns his or her keep by ceaselessly doing the training wholeheartedly. 

12. ‘Donning the kesa’ refers to living by the Precepts, whereas ‘eating rice’ refers to ingesting 
the Dharma. 

13. The principle is that if the Master pelts trainees with sufficient Teaching, sooner or later 
some of it will ‘stick’, like mudballs. 

14. That is, he would help remove their worldly way of looking at things so that the Truth could 
shine through their Eye. 



Shobogenzo: On the Whole Universe in All Ten Directions 


702 


His words, “It is in here,” refer to the ten quarters. What he calls a ‘World-honored 
One’ is a veritable traveling staff.* ‘Traveling staffs’ are what is ‘in here’. ‘The one 
road’ refers to the ten quarters. However, do not try to hide your staff in Gautama’s 
nose. Do not try to stick your traveling staff into the nostrils of one who is a 
traveling staff. Even if you are acting in that way, do not conclude that the Old 
Fellow Kempo had already finished stewing on “The World-honored Ones in the 
ten quarters are on one and the same road that leads to the gateway to nirvana.” He 
only speaks of it as ‘being right here’, but that doesn’t mean that his ‘being right 
here’ is in some way deficient. If Old Fellow Kempo, right from the start, was not 
being deceived by his traveling staff, then well and good for him. 

In sum, just explore through your training that living noses are the ten 
quarters. 

Delivered to the assembly on the thirteenth day of the eleventh lunar month in the first year of 
the Kangen era (December 25, 1243) in Echizen Province at Kippo-ji Monastery. 

Copied on the twenty-fourth day of the year s end in the third year of the Kangen era (January 
14, 1246), whilst in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant at Daibutsu-ji Temple in Echizen 
Province. 

Ejo 



59 

On Encountering Buddha 

(Kembutsu) 


Translator’s Introduction: The Japanese word that Dogen chose for the title appears with great 
frequency throughout this discourse and has numerous possibilities for translation, including to 
see Buddha, to meet Buddha, to encounter Buddha, a Buddha, the Buddha, Buddha Nature, one’s 
own Buddha Nature, and someone else’s Buddha Nature, among others. English, on the other 
hand, requires the choice of just one of these at any point in the text. While there are places 
where context aids in choosing the most likely nuance, there are other places where a translator 
picks somewhat more randomly from the list of possibilities. 

The discourse itself offers some passages that are rather difficult to render into easily 
comprehendible English, the opening section being a case in point. Readers may find it helpful 
to keep in mind the following point which lies at the heart of what Dogen is talking about: there 
is That which transcends all that we perceive to be appearing or arising, and that That is in no 
way excluded from what we perceive, as It encompasses both what appears (has form) and what 
does not appear (is beyond fonn). Hence, there is the way that things appear, which is what we 
perceive the world to be, and then there is That which transcends the fonns that comprise our 
world. That which transcends these forms is, at the same time, not separate from them. Thus, 
appearance is part and parcel with what is Real. In more concrete tenns, the That is synonymous 
with Buddha Nature. 


Shakyamuni Buddha, in addressing His great assembly, once said, “When 
you see all material forms, which are provisional, as being part of That which goes 
beyond such appearances, you will then be seeing the Tathagata .” 1 To see the 
forms of things and to see That which goes beyond such appearances is a 
realization experienced bodily, one which will free you from delusion. As a 
consequence, you will meet the Tathagata . 2 We treat as ‘seeing Buddha’ the 
manifestation which the Eye that sees Buddha has already brought forth. The 
ultimate way by which the Eye sees Buddha refers to the Eye by which we 
encounter Buddha. When we see Buddha Nature in other places and when we see 


1. ‘All material forms, which are provisional’ refers to all thoughts and things, which arise, 
persist for a while, disintegrate, and disappear. ‘That which goes beyond such appearances’ 
refers to the Buddha Nature which embraces not only all forms in past, present, and future, 
but also what is not form (the Void). Also, in this discourse, all the quotes Dogen attributes 
to Shakyamuni Buddha come from the Lotus Scripture. 

2. That is, it is a spiritual realization, not an intellectual one. 


703 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


704 


our own Buddha Nature as being apart from Buddhas, then, even though 
everything seems to be all tangled up like overgrown vines, we first explore 
through our training what ‘meeting Buddha’ means. Then we work on dropping off 
‘meeting Buddha’ until we realize the vital, living state of ‘meeting Buddha’. 
Finally, we make use of our ‘having met Buddha’. All of these functions comprise 
our encountering the Sun-faced Buddha and the Moon-faced Buddha . 3 

To see such Buddhas is to see an endless stream of countenances, bodies and 
minds, as well as hands and eyes. From the time of our giving rise to our intention 
to realize Buddhahood and our stepping forth, right up to our doing our daily 
practice now, all is the Living Eye and the Living Bones and Marrow rushing in to 
see Buddha. It is our doing our utmost in training to realize the Way until there is 
no gap between our own enlightenment and that of our Master. As a consequence, 
the whole realm of self and the whole domain of other—that is, this individual and 
that individual—are all doing their utmost to see Buddha. Those folks who lack an 
Eye for exploring the Matter* through training take up the Tathagata’s phrases, ‘all 
material forms’ and ‘That which goes beyond such appearances’ and, fancying that 
the way things appear are not true appearances, imagine that they have encountered 
the Tathagata. Truly, some of those who are small-minded will take up studying 
His words like that, but the full realization of the Buddha’s intent is not like this. 
You need to realize that to see the way things appear while concurrently going 
beyond the matter of how they appear is to forthwith meet the Tathagata. There is 
the Tathagata within existence and there is the Tathagata that is beyond existence. 


The Great Meditation Master Hogen of Seiryo-in Monastery once said, “If 
we see the way things appear as being devoid of form, then we will not see the 
Tathagata.” Now, this saying by Great Master Hogen expresses his encounter with 
Buddha. It contains what Hogen personally said and what his encounter with 
Buddha imparted. To put the matter in the colloquial, it is like Hogen and 
Shakyamuni Buddha coming head-on in competition and extending Their hands to 


3. The lifespan of the Sun-faced Buddha is 1,800 years, whereas the lifespan of the Moon¬ 
faced Buddha is twenty-four hours. This derives from a koan story concerning Baso, who, 
when he was ill, was asked how he felt. He used the reference to the two Buddhas to express 
how he was experiencing time, which went beyond conventional, calendar measurements, in 
that his days seemed to drag on while his months seemed to fly by. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


705 


each other in cooperation . 4 You need to listen with your ears to what Hogen said, 
and, as to what his encountering Buddha imparted, you need to hear what he is 
voicing with your Eye. At the same time, those in the past who have explored this 
underlying principle through their training have said: 

All the ways in which things appear are appearances of the 
Tathagata. There is no single way in which the Tathagata appears, nor 
are the appearances of things and the appearance of the Tathagata ever 
to be confused with each other. And you should not, even 
provisionally, take these appearances not to be His appearance. Were 
you to treat them as not being His appearance, you would be as one 
deserting his father and running away from home . 5 

In other words, what these trainees are habitually saying is, “Because the 
appearances of things are the appearing of the Tathagata, the way things appear 
will be just the way things appear.” Truly, this is a profound discourse on the 
Greater Vehicle;* it is what is awakened to in all ten quarters. 

You should definitely settle the Matter by taking it on faith and then making 
it your training. And do not be like threads of gossamer blown hither and thither by 
every breeze. 

“The way things appear is the way the Tathagata appears: He is not separate 
from form.” You should thoroughly explore this statement until you encounter 
Buddha. Then, having settled the Matter and awakened to faith, you should accept 
the Teaching given in this statement and, reciting it, thoroughly penetrate its 
meaning. In this manner you should not let there be any time when your own eyes 
and ears are not observing and hearkening to it, or when you are not dropping off 
your own body and mind, bones and marrow, or when you are not letting go of 
your own self-created world with its mountains and rivers, for this is the daily 
behavior of Buddhas and Ancestors for exploring the Way through Their training. 
Do not think that because it is your own way of putting things, it could not 
possibly bring clarity to your own eyes. Turned around by one word of your own, 
you may see yourself dropping off your own concept of what Buddhas and 
Ancestors are, for such is the everyday Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Hence, there is only one way to explore the Matter: ‘the way that all things 
appear’ has already gone beyond their not having appeared, and ‘That which 

4. That is, the two of them are saying the same thing but in different ways. 

5. An allusion to a parable in the Lotus Scripture, found in the fourth chapter entitled “Belief 
and Understanding”, which describes how we spend so much of our lives running away 
from the Tathagata. 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


706 


transcends what appears’ is synonymous with the appearance of all things. Because 
That which transcends appearances is not separate from appearances, That which 
transcends appearances truly goes beyond what has appeared. You need to explore 
through your training that the appearance that is referred to as ‘That which 
transcends appearances’ and the appearance that is referred to as ‘the way all things 
appear’ are both the way that the Tathagata appears. Within what we are exploring 
there are the two Scriptural interpretations: that of going to visit Buddha and seeing 
Him, and that of going to visit Buddha and not seeing Him. These are what we 
explore with our vital Eye. If your Eye has not yet manifested in order to look at 
these Scriptural interpretations, yours will not be the Eye of thorough 
enlightenment. If It is not the Eye of thorough enlightenment, you have not 
encountered Buddha. In encountering Buddha, there is what is seen as form and 
what is seen as being beyond form: it is “I do not understand the Buddha 
Dharma .” 6 7 In not encountering Buddha, there is what is not seen as form and what 
is not seen as being beyond form: it is what people who intellectually understand 
the Buddha Dharma have attained. This is what Hogen’s previously quoted 
statement is getting at, which demonstrates his realization of eighty or ninety 

H 

percent of the Matter. At the same time, in regard to the One Great Matter, we may 
say, “When you see all forms as the True Form, then you will straight off encounter 
the Tathagata.” Such statements as this are entirely due to the influence of 
Shakyamuni Buddha: it is not the Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow of any other 
person. 

djb 

CX) 

At that time when Shakyamuni Buddha was residing on Vulture 
Peak, He once addressed His great assembly through Bhaisajya Raja, 
the Bodhisattva* Lord of Healing, speaking in verse: 

If we are on intimate terms with a Dharma Master, 

We will surely arrive at the Bodhisattva Path. 

If we learn by faithfully following this Master, 

We will surely catch sight of Buddhas as numberless as 
the Ganges ’grains of sand. 

6. The quotation is by Daikan Eno and refers to his not being content with having just an 
intellectual understanding of Buddha Dharma. 

7. In Zen stories, realizing the Truth short of a hundred percent is not a negative judgment but 
actually high praise, as it expresses that someone has a more profound understanding than 
just what has been voiced. 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


707 


‘Being on intimate terms with a Dharma Master’ resembles the Second Chinese 
Ancestor Eka’s attending on Bodhidharma for eight years, after which he got his 
Master’s Marrow with his whole arm, and it is like Nangaku’s training in the Way 
for fifteen years. Getting the Marrow of one’s Teacher is what we mean by ‘being 
on intimate terms’. ‘The Bodhisattva Path’ is synonymous with “I am also like this, 
and you are also like this .” 8 It is straightaway attaining the innumerable daily 
tangles that go along with Buddhist practice. 

‘Straightaway attaining’ does not mean acquiring all that has been 
manifested from ancient times up to now, nor does it mean giving rise to some 
experience that has never arisen before, nor does it mean consciously grasping 
what is unbounded in the present; ‘straightaway attaining’ means dropping off the 
notion of acquiring intimacy. Thus, all attaining is straightaway attaining. ‘What 
we learn by faithfully following our Master’ means following in ancient footsteps 
as his attendant, something that we need to thoroughly explore. At the very 
moment when we do our daily Buddhist practice, we can realize what a Master can 
see. At that moment, it is our seeing Buddhas as innumerable as the sands of the 
Ganges River. “Buddhas as numberless as the Ganges’ grains of sand” are just the 
moments when we are freely functioning, like fish darting about through water . 9 
Do not keep chasing after seeing Buddhas as numberless as the Ganges’ grains of 
sand by fawning on your Master. What you should do first off is strive to follow 
the teachings of your Master, for by following them you will attain the perspective 
of a Buddha. 

djb 

CX) 


Shakyamuni Buddha, in addressing all who were experiencing a genuine 
state of awakening, said in verse: 

Having profoundly entered into a state of meditative 
concentration, 

We see Buddhas in all directions. 

The whole universe is profound because it is the Buddha Lands of the Ten 
Quarters. It is not broad, nor large, nor small, nor narrow. When we act, we act by 
following it. We call this meditative state ‘complete absorption’. This is not seven 


8. This quotation is part of a dialogue between Nangaku and his Master Eno, in which the 
latter speaks of being freed from stain, a condition that he equates with being one with the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. 

9. That is, when we act like a Buddha, at that moment we are a Buddha, and we see all as 
Buddhas. 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


708 


feet or eight feet, nor is it ten feet. It is encapsulated in the one phrase ‘entered 
into’, that is, it is complete absorption, without anything being left outside. This 
‘profoundly entered into’ refers to meditative concentration, whereas ‘having 
profoundly entered into meditative concentration’ means ‘to see Buddhas in all 
directions’. Because we have reached this state by profoundly entering That Place 
where no one can reach us, we see Buddhas in all directions. No matter what 
someone may try to distract us with, we would not chase after it and, as a result, 
Buddhas will manifest everywhere throughout the ten quarters. The state of 
‘entering profoundly’ cannot manifest itself for a very long time. ‘Seeing Buddhas 
in all directions’ is simply Joshu’s seeing his Master Nansen as a reclining 
Tathagata . 10 And ‘meditative concentration’ is beyond something to be ‘gotten into’ 
or ‘gotten out of’. In our leaping beyond any doubt or fear of the True Dragon, at 
that very moment when we see Buddha we will not radiate uncertainty. Because we 
encounter myriad Buddhas by our having encountered Buddha, we profoundly 
enter myriad states of meditative concentration by our having entered a state of 
meditative concentration. The underlying principle of such things as ‘meditative 
concentration’, ‘seeing Buddha’, and ‘entering profoundly’ was not something 
made up by people in the past who were leisurely in their efforts and then foisted it 
off to present-day folks. Nor is it some new, present-day item, for such an 
underlying principle is invariable. All instances of Transmitting the Way and 
accepting the Precepts have been like this. Exploring the Matter and obtaining Its 
fruits are also like this. 

djb 

CX) 

Shakyamuni Buddha once addressed Samantabhadra,* the Bodhisattva of 
Universal Goodness, saying: 

If there are any who accept and keep to these words of Mine on 
the flowering of the Dharma, who read or recite them, accurately 
remember them, put them into practice, or make copies of them, know 
that such persons have encountered Shakyamuni Buddha just as truly 
as if they had heard what was said directly from the Buddha’s 
mouth . 11 

In general, all Buddhas say that to encounter Shakyamuni Buddha and to become 
Shakyamuni Buddha is to realize enlightenment and to realize Buddhahood. This 


10. Dogen recounts the story of Nansen’s first meeting with Joshu, from which this image is 
derived, in Discourse 34: On the Cypress Tree (Hakujushi), pp. 474-475. 

11. ‘These words of Mine on the flowering of the Dharma’ is a reference to the Lotus Scripture. 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


709 


realization by Buddhas has, from the first, been made possible by Their doing these 
seven acts: accepting, keeping to, reading, reciting, remembering, putting into 
practice, and making copies of what the Buddha said. Anyone who performs these 
seven acts is ‘one of those persons’ whom we should by all means undertake to 
know: they are ‘such a one’,* just as he or she truly is. Because this is how we 
encounter Shakyamuni Buddha, hearing His words being recited is just like hearing 
the Buddha speak directly to us. Shakyamuni Buddha has been Shakyamuni 
Buddha ever since He encountered Shakyamuni Buddha. Thus, His eloquent 
tongue has enfolded the three-thousandfold world far and wide. What mountain or 
ocean would not be a Scripture of the Buddha? This is why ‘such a person’ who 
copies down His words encounters Shakyamuni Buddha face-to-face. The 
Buddha’s mouth has always been open throughout myriad ancient times, so on 
what occasion has there not been His voicing of Scriptures? Thus, only those who 
accept and keep to what He has expressed may encounter Shakyamuni Buddha. 
The meritorious functioning of the sense organs of such persons will be no 
different from this. And what is before and what after, what is to the right and what 
to the left, what is given and what taken, as well as whatever constitutes one’s daily 
attitude of mind, will also be no different. How can we fail to rejoice in having 
been bom in a time when we have met this Scriptural Teaching of His, which 
permits us to encounter Shakyamuni Buddha? It is our having been born to meet 
Shakyamuni Buddha. Those who are diligent in body and mind, and have accepted 
and kept to these words of His on the flowering of the Dharma, have read or 
recited them, have accurately remembered them, have put them into practice, or 
have made copies of them, all such persons will consequently encounter 
Shakyamuni Buddha. Hearing these Scriptural words of His being recited is just 
like hearing the Buddha speak directly to us, so who would not be eager to hear 
them? Those who feel no compunction to be the best that they can be are human 
beings who are tmly poverty stricken and lacking in good fortune and astuteness. 
Those who do their exploring and training are among ‘those persons’ whom we 
should by all means undertake to know, for, by doing so, we will consequently 
come to see Shakyamuni Buddha. 


Shakyamuni Buddha, when addressing His assembly, once said: 

If you good men and women, upon hearing Me say that My life 
is immeasurably long, trust in what I say and awaken to it with a heart 
that is profoundly seeking, then you will see the Buddha as constantly 
existing on Vulture Peak, surrounded by His Bodhisattvas and 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


710 


shravakas, giving voice to the Dharma . 12 And you will see this 
everyday world as bedecked with lapis lazuli, ever calm, just, and 
proper. 

This ‘mind that is profoundly seeking’ is our everyday world. Who, pray, would 
not trust in and thereby awaken to the Buddha’s words that are so true and real? 
Your encountering these Scriptural words of His is an opportunity for you to trust 
in Them so as to awaken. Trusting and awakening with a heart that is profoundly 
seeking is what the flowering of the Dharma is. And so that we might trust in, and 
awaken to, His immeasurable life with a heart that is profoundly seeking That 
which is the Truth, He vowed to be reborn in this everyday land of ours. By means 
of His spiritual powers, the strength of His compassion, and His capacity for 
immeasurable life, the Tathagata has helped us to trust and awaken by inclining us 
towards our mind, by inclining us towards our body, by inclining us towards the 
whole universe, by inclining us towards the Buddhas and Ancestors, by inclining 
us towards all thoughts and things, by inclining us towards the True Form of all 
things, by inclining us towards skin and flesh, bones and marrow, and by inclining 
us towards birth and death, coming and going. These instances of trusting and 
awakening are ‘seeing Buddha’. Thus, we know that we can encounter a Buddha 
with the eyes of the mind and that we can see Buddha with the Eye of trusting and 
awakening. 

Surely, the fact that He speaks not only of our seeing Buddha but also of our 
seeing His continual existence on the Divine Vulture Peak means that the continual 
existence of the Peak occurs simultaneously with the Tathagata’s life. So, seeing 
Buddha continually existing on the Divine Vulture Peak describes the continual 
existence in the past, present and future of both the Tathagata and the Divine 
Vulture Peak. Bodhisattvas and shravakas alike will have continual existence, and 
giving voice to the Dharma will also have continual existence. We will see the 
everyday world as bedecked with lapis lazuli, ever calm, just, and proper. Do not 
be troubled when seeing this everyday world, for what is high is on a level with 
whatever is high, and what is low is on a level with whatever is low. This land is a 
land of lapis lazuli. Do not disparage those eyes that see it as ever calm, just, and 
proper, for indeed the land of lapis lazuli is ever just so. If you treat this land as not 
being that of lapis lazuli, the Divine Vulture Peak will not be the Divine Vulture 
Peak, and Shakyamuni Buddha will not be Shakyamuni Buddha. To trust and 


12. Shravakas, here and later in the text, refer to those who, along with Bodhisattvas, stayed to 
listen to the Buddha’s Teaching while others, being too proud, left in the middle of the 
Buddha’s expressing the Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


711 


realize that this land is lapis lazuli is the appearance of profound trust and 
awakening, for this is seeing Buddha. 


Shakyamuni Buddha, in addressing His great assembly, once said in verse: 

When those who wholeheartedly yearn to see the Buddha, 

Do not begrudge even their own lives, 

Then I, with all the Sangha, 

Will appear together on the Divine Vulture Peak. 

The wholeheartedness spoken of here is not the wholeheartedness, say, of ordinary 
folk or of those who follow lesser courses: it is the wholeheartedness derived from 
yearning to encounter Buddha. ‘The wholeheartedness derived from yearning to 
encounter Buddha’ refers to the Divine Vulture Peak, along with all the Sangha. 
When each individual, in private, arouses the desire to see Buddha, that person 
desires to see Buddha through devotion to the Heart of the Divine Vulture Peak. 
Thus, wholeheartedness is already the Divine Vulture Peak, so how could one’s 
whole being not appear together with that Heart? How could it not be body and 
mind together as one? Our body and mind are already like this, just as are the years 
of our life and our life itself. Thus, we entrust our own regrets, which are merely 
our regrets, to the unsurpassed Way of the Divine Vulture Peak. Therefore, 
Shakyamuni Buddha said that His appearing on the Divine Vulture Peak, along 
with all His Sangha, is brought about by our wholehearted desire to see Buddha. 


Shakyamuni Buddha, in addressing His great assembly, once said in verse: 

If you give voice to this Teaching, 

This, then, is to see Me, 

As well as the Tathagata Whose Treasures Are Abundant, 

13 

Along with all My many transformations. 

What this Scripture is voicing is, “I continue to abide in this world, using My 
spiritual powers to make confused beings not see Me, though I am near.” The 
Tathagata’s marvelous spiritual powers, both visible and invisible, have bestowed 


13. The Tathagata Whose Treasures Are Abundant is said to have appeared and praised 
Shakyamuni Buddha after the latter had given voice to the first ten chapters of the Lotus 
Scripture. The transfonnations spoken of refer to the many ways in which the Cosmic 
Buddha, Vairochana, manifests through Shakyamuni Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


712 


upon Him the meritorious functioning expressed by “This then is to see Me,” and 
so forth. 


Shakyamuni Buddha, in addressing His great assembly, also said in verse: 

Those who can keep to this Scripture 

Are persons who already behold Me 

Along with the Buddha Whose Treasures Are Abundant, 

As well as all My various bodily transformations. 

Because it is difficult to keep to this Scripture, the Tathagata urged us to do so as a 
matter of daily practice. 

If there are people who, on their own, keep to this Scripture, they will 
encounter Buddha. You need to realize that the one who meets Buddha is the one 
who is keeping to the Scripture, and that the one who is keeping to the Scripture is 
the one who is seeing Buddha. Thus, someone who, upon hearing but a single 
verse or a single line, accepts and keeps to it is someone who will be able to see 
Shakyamuni Buddha, as well as meet the Buddha Whose Treasures Are Abundant 
and see all His various bodily transformations. And such a one will receive the 
Transmission of the Treasure House of the Buddha’s Teaching, and acquire the 
True Eye of Buddha, and will see what the life of a Buddha is, attain the Eye to go 
beyond ‘Buddha’, get the fleshy topknot of a Buddha, and understand what a 
Buddha’s Nose means. 


The Buddha Whose Wisdom Has Flowered, Who is Lord of the 
Constellations, and Whose Voice Thunders Forth from the Clouds, in 
addressing the Lord of Wondrous Adornment, once said, “O Great 
Lord, you need to keep in mind that a good spiritual friend is a great 
persuader, one who guides us to change so that we may see the 
Buddha and give rise to the heart of supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment.” 

At this time, the great assembly had not yet folded up their sitting mats. Even 
though we may speak of the Buddhas of past, present, or future, you should not 
liken these to the three temporal worlds of ordinary people. What we call ‘the past’ 
is what is in our minds, what we call ‘the present’ is our fist, and what we call ‘the 
future’ is what is in the back of our minds. So, the Buddha Whose Wisdom Has 
Flowered, Who is Lord of the Constellations and Whose Voice Thunders Forth 
from the Clouds, is seeing Buddha, which arises in the mind. The stock phrase ‘to 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


713 


see Buddha right now’ is just like this . 14 ‘Guiding all beings to change’ is seeing 
Buddha, and seeing Buddha is giving rise to the mind of supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment. Giving rise to the mind of enlightenment is seeing Buddha from 
start to finish. 

djb 

CX) 


Shakyamuni Buddha also said in verse: 

Those who practice deeds of merit 
And are gentle, honest, and forthright, 

All see Me in body 

And hear Me voice the Dharma. 

What He calls ‘deeds of merit’ is being dragged through the mud and being stuck 
in the water, following waves and chasing after billows . 15 He describes those who 
put this into practice as being gentle, honest, and forthright, as in “I am also like 
this, and you are also like this.” Being so, they see Buddha within the mud and 
they encounter Buddha within the midst of waves, and they thereby participate in 
His existing here, voicing the Dharma. 

At the same time, in present-day Great Sung China, the crowd that goes 
around calling themselves teachers of Zen is large indeed. They do not comprehend 
the length and breadth of the Buddha’s Dharma, for what they have seen and heard 
is slight indeed. After learning by rote barely two or three sentences of Rinzai’s or 
Ummon’s, they fancy that they have obtained the whole truth of the Buddha 
Dharma. If the truth of the Buddha Dharma was totally exhausted in two or three 
sentences of Rinzai’s or Ummon’s, the Buddha Dharma would not have reached us 
today. It is hard enough to hear of Rinzai and Ummon being described as venerable 
from the point of view of the Buddha Dharma. How much less venerable are that 
bunch today who fall far short of Rinzai and Ummon! They are rabble not worth 
mentioning. Being too dull-witted, they can hardly clarify for themselves what the 
heart of the Buddha’s Teaching is, so they go about arbitrarily slandering the 
Buddhist Scriptures, ignoring altogether the part about putting Them into practice 
and studying Them. Such people should be called non-Buddhist fishy folk. They 
are not the offspring of the Buddhas and Ancestors, much less have they reached 
the realm of having seen a Buddha! They are a bunch who have not even grasped 
the principles of Confucius and Lao-tzu. As you are offspring in the house of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, do not associate with that pack who go around 

14. That is, it is something that arises in the mind. 

15. That is, undergoing whatever is necessary to help all sentient beings realize the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


714 


proclaiming themselves to be teachers of Zen. Simply train yourselves thoroughly 
until you experience the Eye that sees Buddha. 


My late Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, once quoted the following: 

King Prasenajit once asked the Venerable Arhat* Pindola, “I 
have heard it said that you, O Venerable One, have personally met the 
Buddha. Is that so?” 

As a sign of affirmation, the Venerable One used his hand to 
raise his eyebrow. 

My late Master once wrote a eulogy to Pindola: 

Raising his own eyebrow in response to the question, he 
laughed, 

Showing without guile that he had encountered Buddha 
in a familiar way. 

For which he deserves gratitude from the four quarters 
up to this very day. 

The Spring occurs within the twigs of the Plum, which, 
wrapped in snow, are ever so cold. 

‘Encountering Buddha’ does not mean that he saw his own Buddha Nature 
or the Buddha Nature of others; it means that he actually met the Buddha. Because 
‘one plum branch’ is meeting ‘one plum branch’, it is the Flower’s bursting open, 
bright and clear. The underlying principle that King Prasenajit is asking about now 
is whether Pindola had already met Buddha and whether he had become a Buddha 
himself. The Venerable One clearly raised an eyebrow in verification that he had 
seen Buddha, about which no one can be deceived. To this day, this underlying 
principle has not been abandoned. It is evident that Pindola deserves our gratitude 
due to his meeting Buddha as a direct experience, even though the experience left 
no visible trace. He is one of the three billion who had actually encountered 
Buddha . 16 The present reference is to that meeting with the Buddha, one that went 
beyond Pindola’s merely seeing the Buddha’s thirty-two marks. Who is so set apart 
from the realm of the thirty-two marks so as not to see them? There may well be 


16. According to Nagarjuna’s commentary to the Mahaprajnaparamitd, “The world is 
comprised of nine billion people, three billion of whom have encountered Buddha, three 
billion of whom have heard of the Buddha’s coming into the world but have not actually met 
Him, and three billion who have neither encountered nor heard of Him.” 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


715 


great numbers of all sorts of ordinary humans, celestial beings, shravakas, and 
pratyekabuddhas* who do not know the principle of meeting Buddha. For instance, 
it is like saying that there are many who may be holding up a hossu, but there are 
not many who truly know what ‘holding up the hossu’ means . 17 ‘To see Buddha’ 
means ‘to have the Buddha see us’. Even if one wished to conceal from oneself the 
signs of having met Buddha, they would already show, for this is the underlying 
principle of seeing Buddha. We need to thoroughly explore in detail the aspect of 
raising an eyebrow, making efforts as numerous as the sands of the Ganges with 
our body and mind. Even if we had dwelt together with Shakyamuni Buddha 
constantly, day and night, for hundreds of thousands of myriad eons, if we did not 
have the ability to raise an eyebrow, we would not see Buddha. Even though we are 
in a distant place some hundred thousand miles away from India, if we personally 
exhibit our ability to raise an eyebrow, it will be due to our having seen 
Shakyamuni Buddha from the time before the Lord of Emptiness,* for it is our 
seeing a branch of plum blossoms and seeing the Spring within the plum twigs. As 
a consequence, when we encounter Buddha face-to-face, we make three 
prostrations, or bow with hands in gassho,* or let our face break into a smile, or 
make our Fist thunder forth, or sit cross-legged on our mat, doing meditation. 


The Venerable Pindola once went to a great gathering at the 
palace of King Ashoka for a meal. After the king had made an incense 
offering and had done his prostrations, he asked the Venerable One, 
saying, “I have heard it said that you, O Venerable One, have 
personally met the Buddha. Is that true?” 

The Venerable One brushed up his eyebrow with his hand and 
said, “Do you get it?” 

The king replied, “I don’t understand .” 18 

The Venerable One said, “When the Dragon King of 
Anavatapta invited the Buddha to a meal, a poor humble monk like 
me was also among the number that participated.” 


17. The hossu is a ceremonial implement resembling an Indian fly-whisk. A monk who holds up 
a hossu is presumably one who is a genuine Master, but Dogen is saying that many may hold 
it up, but that does not mean they know what they are doing. 

18. “Do you get it?” has a double meaning. The king took the question literally, whereas Pindola 
was asking a spiritual question: “Do you get It?” meaning “Do you not see my enlightened 
Buddha Nature?” 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


716 


The main point of King Ashoka’s question, “I have heard it said that you, O 
Venerable One, have personally met the Buddha. Is that true?” was to find out 
whether the Venerable One was already a Venerable One. At that point and without 
hesitation, the Venerable One brushed up his eyebrow. This caused ‘seeing 
Buddha’ to appear in the world and caused ‘becoming Buddha’ to be personally 
seen. What he replied was, “When the Dragon King of Anavatapta invited the 
Buddha to a meal, a poor humble monk like me was also among the number that 
participated.” Keep in mind that in a gathering of Buddhas, the Buddhas may well 
be as plentiful as rice, hemp, bamboo, and reeds, but no arhats or pratyekabuddhas 
may participate. Even were arhats and pratyekabuddhas to come, they would not be 
counted as being among the Buddhas. The Venerable One had already stated, 
“When the Dragon King of Anavatapta invited the Buddha to a meal, a poor 
humble monk like me was also among the number that participated.” This is a 
statement about himself that arose naturally, for the principle of meeting Buddha is 
quite clear. ‘Inviting the Buddha’ refers not only to Shakyamuni Buddha but also to 
inviting all the Buddhas within the immeasurable and inexhaustible three temporal 
worlds, as well as all Buddhas in the ten quarters. To be included among all the 
invited Buddhas was his meeting Buddha as a direct experience, one that was 
unconcealed and beyond concealment. Pointing to ‘seeing Buddha’, ‘seeing 
Master’, ‘seeing self’, and ‘seeing you’ should be no different. What he called “the 
Dragon King of Anavatapta” is the Dragon King of Lake Anavatapta. In our 
country, Lake Anavatapta is called “The Lake free of Suffering from Heat ”. 19 


Meditation Master Honei Jin’yu once praised Pindola in verse: 

When our Buddha met Pindola face-to-face, 

The latter had eyebrows long, hair short, eyes fierce. 

But King Ashoka still had his doubts. 

Well, om mani sn surya ! 20 

This eulogy is not a hundred percent right on, but I offer it because it is worth 
exploring as a possible point of view. 


19. Lake Anavatapta is traditionally said to be in Tibet, and is considered to be the source of the 
four major rivers of India. The particular Dragon King referred to is one of four who resided 
in the lake and were converted to Buddhism. As a result he became free from the sufferings 
that dragon kings are otherwise heir to. 

20. ‘Om mani sn surya’ (Hail to him who is a veritable pearl that shines like the sun!) is a 
mantra praising and confirming the Buddhahood of Pindola. 



Shobogenzo: On Encountering Buddha 


111 


djb 

CX) 

Joshu was once asked by a monk, “I have heard it said that you, 

O Venerable Monk, personally had a face-to-face encounter with 
Nansen. Is that true?” 

The Master replied, “In our Chinshu district, we grow really big 
daikon radishes.” 

What Joshu is now showing through his response is his experience of intimately 
meeting Nansen. It is not that he has words for it or that he does not have words for 
it; it is not that they are words that a Master or disciple might utter or words that 
common folk might utter. It is not his raising an eyebrow, or his brushing up an 
eyebrow, or his face-to-face encountering of Nansen’s eyebrow. Even though he 
was a person of excellent talents who walked his own way, if he had not 
encountered Nansen, he could not have been like that. Great Master Joshu uttered 
the words, “In our Chinshu district, we grow really big daikon radishes,” when he 
was Abbot of Shinsai-in Monastery in the Choka Gardens of the Chinshu district. 
He was later given the posthumous title of Great Master Shinsai. Because this was 
the way he was, he correctly Transmitted the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching of the Buddhas and Ancestors after the Eye that sees Buddha had opened 
through his training. When there is a correct Transmission of the Treasure House of 
the Eye of the True Teaching, it manifests in one’s everyday behavior as a 
softening, as an open-heartedness. 

Delivered to the assembly at Mount Yamashibu on the nineteen day of the eleventh lunar month 
during the winter of the first year of the Kangen era (December 31, 1243). 

Copied in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant in Daibutsu-ji Temple in Yoshida district, Echizen 
Province, on the sixteenth day of the tenth month during the winter of the second year of 
the Kangen era (November 17, 1244). 

Ejo 


21. Joshu’s remark can be understood as follows: just as my Master Nansen was to me, his 
disciple, so I am to my disciples, who are like the daikon radishes that I cultivate in our 
monastery garden, in that they sit still within their growing place, becoming ever larger and 
more deeply-rooted, just like a daikon. 



60 

On Seeking One’s Master Far and Wide 

(Henzan) 


Translator’s Introduction: The term ‘henzan’ conventionally refers to the practice of a novice 
monk’s going throughout the country on a pilgrimage to seek a Master under whom to study and 
train, and possibly to spiritually awaken. As such, it might be rendered as ‘seeking a Master far 
and wide’. Based on several koan stories, Dogen understands the term as referring to thoroughly 
exploring the Matter through one’s training with one’s Master, which does not require leaving 
one’s training place. In this sense, one is seeking far and wide within oneself for the Master, 
which is one’s True Self. 


To practice the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors is to become 
enlightened through and through, to go forth with no strings entangling our feet, 
with clouds appearing under our feet. Even though it has been described like this, 
when the Flower opens, the whole world is awakened. As Tozan put it: “I 
constantly make the Way the important Matter.” * This is why there is the saying 
that a sweet melon is sweet right to its stem and a bitter melon is bitter down to its 
roots: the sweetness of what is sweet is sweet right to its very stem. This is how 
Tozan had explored the Matter through his training with his Master. 


Great Master Gensha Shibi was once summoned by his Master 
Seppo, who said to him, “O Shibi, my austere monk, why haven’t you 
gone out on a pilgrimage to seek a Master to train with?” 

He replied, “Bodhidharma did not come east to China for that, 
nor did the Second Ancestor go west to India for that!” Seppo 
thoroughly approved of what Shibi had said. 

In this dialogue, the conventional meaning that underlies the term ‘henzan ’ has 
been turned completely upside down. And furthermore, what Shibi said is not 
something found in holy writ. What yardstick could possibly be used to measure 
his awakening? 


* See Glossary. 


718 



Shobogenzo: On Seeking One s Master Far and Wide 


719 


djb 

When Nangaku Ejo first visited the Old Buddha Daikan Eno, 
the Old Buddha said, “What is it that comes thus?” 

Nangaku thoroughly explored this mudball with his Master 
during a span of eight years. Finally he made his move, which was his 
thorough exploration with his Master, saying to the Old Buddha, “I 
have realized what you meant when I first came here. Upon receiving 
me, you said, ‘What is it that comes thus?’” 

Thereupon, the Old Buddha Eno asked, “And, pray, just what 
have you realized?” 

Nangaku then replied, “Were I to try to put the One Matter into 
words, they would miss the mark.” This was the manifestation of his 
thorough exploration with his Master, his manifestation of his eight 
years of training. 

The Old Buddha Eno asked, “And is this a substitute for 
training to become enlightened?” 

Nangaku responded, “It is not that there is no training for 
enlightenment, but rather, there is nothing to be had that will stain It.” 

Thereupon, Eno said, “I am no different, and you are no 
different, and all the Buddhas and Ancestors of India were no 
different.” 

After this, Ejo explored the Matter with his Master, inside and 
out, during another span of eight years. Counting from beginning to 
end, it was during a span of fifteen years that he thoroughly explored 
the Matter with his Master . 1 

His ‘coming thus’ was his thorough exploration of the Matter with his Master. With 
his remark, “Were I to try to put the One Matter into words, they would miss the 
mark,” he opened the door to the Temple and went in to meet the Buddhas and 
Ancestors: this too was how he sought far and wide for a Master. After entering the 
picture, he pursued his training with his Master, committing himself to turning 
away from multitudinous forms of delusion, which goes beyond casually entering 
one monastery upon leaving another. His going in and meeting the Buddhas Eye- 


1. By Japanese reckoning, he did not train for a full eight years but within the span of eight 
calendar years. Hence, the eighth year in which he trained before awakening was also the 
first year in which he trained after awakening. 



Shobogenzo: On Seeking One s Master Far and Wide 


720 


to-Eye was his seeking a Master far and wide, and his earnest acceptance of the 
Teaching was his exploring the Matter with his Master. To see through, and 
beyond, the flesh of the Master’s face is precisely what exploring the Matter far 
and wide with one’s Master means. 


From the first, the purpose of Seppo’s remark concerning visiting other 
Masters was not to recommend that Shibi leave the monastery, nor was it to 
recommend that he go traveling north or south. It was to help foster the kind of 
exploring far and wide that Shibi himself expressed by saying, “Bodhidharma did 
not come east to China for that, nor did the Second Ancestor go west to India for 
that!” Shibi’s saying that Bodhidharma did not come east to China for that goes 
beyond any silly remarks about his coming not being a coming. It is the principle 
of the Great Earth not having a single clod to tread upon. What Shibi calls 
‘Bodhidharma’ is but one part of the stream of life. Even if all the eastern lands had 
suddenly come to a full boil and had sought Bodhidharma out to serve under him, 
this would not be the same as his turning away from delusion nor would it be the 
same as his turning himself around within the outpouring of someone else’s words. 
Because Bodhidharma did not come to the eastern lands for such things, he saw the 
Face in an eastern land . 2 3 Even though he saw the Face of Buddhas and the Face of 
Ancestors in an eastern land, this ‘land’ goes beyond his coming east to China, for 
that would have been like his grasping what the Buddhas and Ancestors are while 
losing sight of his own Nose. In sum, ‘land’ is beyond being east or west: ‘east 
and west’ has nothing to do with lands. 

As to our Second Ancestor, Taiso Eka, not going west to India, in that he 
thoroughly explored ‘India’ with his Master, he did not actually travel west to 
India. Had the Second Ancestor actually gone to India, it would simply be his 
‘having dropped off a forearm ’. 4 Now, why did the Second Ancestor not go to 
India? He did not go to India because he had leapt into his Master’s blue Eye. If he 
had not leapt into his Master’s blue Eye, he certainly should have gone to India. 
Instead, he scraped out Bodhidharma’s Eye as his thorough exploration of the 


2. A reference to his four Chinese disciples, all of whom awoke to the Truth. 

3. ‘Losing sight of one’s Nose’ is a Zen phrase for missing the vitally important part, namely, 
one’s Original Self. 

4. This refers to spiritually severing one’s attachments in order to find the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On Seeking One s Master Far and Wide 


721 


Matter . 5 Going west to India or coming east to China is not thoroughly exploring 
the Matter with one’s Master, nor is someone making a thorough search by 
proceeding to Mount Tendai or Mount Nangaku, or by going to Mount Godai or to 
the heavens above. If you do not see through, and rid yourself of, your concept of 
the four seas and the five lakes, yours will not be a thorough exploration with your 
Master . 6 Going back and forth between the four seas and the five lakes does not 
constitute a thorough exploration of the Matter. It just makes our path slippery and 
our feet sore, thereby causing us to fall and lose sight of our thorough exploration. 

Speaking more generally, because we make our penetration into Master 
Chosa Keishin’s statement, “The whole universe in all ten directions is our True 
Body,” our exploring of the Matter with our Master, this will be our study and 
practice of Bodhidharma’s not coming east to China and the Second Ancestor’s not 
going west to India. Thoroughly exploring the Matter with one’s Master means that 
when a stone is large, it is large just as it is, and when a stone is small, it is small 
just as it is. Without setting stones in motion, we let the large ones do their training 
and the small ones do theirs. While training, to encounter a hundred thousand 
myriad things in a hundred thousand myriad places is still not thoroughly exploring 
the Matter. Turning ourselves around a hundred thousand myriad times within the 
outpouring of half a word is our thorough exploration of the Matter. For example, 
working the soil is simply working the soil, which is exploring the Matter 
thoroughly. To go from working the soil once to working the sky once and then to 
working the four quarters and eight directions once is not thoroughly exploring the 
Matter. When Gutei was exploring the Matter with Master Tenryu, he realized the 
realm of the One-finger, which was a thorough exploring of the Matter with his 
Master. Gutei’s simply raising one finger was his thorough exploring of the 
Matter . 7 


5. To ‘scrape out’ Bodhidharma’s Eye means to fully absorb his spiritual Teaching and to make 
It one’s own. 

6. ‘The four seas and the five lakes’ is a reference to the whole world with China as its center. 

7. At the heart of Meditation Master Tenryu’s Dhanna was his teaching that All is One, which 
he would express by holding up his index finger. Tenryu’s very young disciple, Gutei, took 
to imitating his Master’s gesture but without understanding what Tenryu was expressing. On 
one occasion when Gutei raised his finger, Tenryu is said to have cut it off. Frightened by 
this, Gutei ran to leave the room. When Tenryu called to him, Gutei turned to face his 
Master, who then held up his finger. This triggered Gutei’s awakening to the Truth. The 
cutting off of Gutei’s finger, like Taiso Eka’s cutting off his arm, is probably meant 



Shobogenzo: On Seeking One s Master Far and Wide 


722 


djb 

Shibi once addressed his assembly, saying, “I and Old Master 
Shakyamuni have done the same practice.” 

There was a monk at the time who came forth and asked, “I 
wonder what person you encountered?” 

The Master answered, “The Sha family’s third son, while on a 
fishing boat .” 8 

From start to finish, the genuineness of what our venerable Master Shakyamuni 
encountered is naturally the same as His encounter with ‘Old Master Shakyamuni’. 
And because the genuineness from start to finish of what the venerable monk Shibi 
encountered is naturally the same as his encounter with the ‘Venerable Fellow 
Shibi’, our venerable Master Shakyamuni and the venerable monk Shibi have 
made the same encounter. Both our venerable Master Shakyamuni and the 
venerable monk Shibi explored to the utmost the sufficiency and insufficiency of 
their spiritual search, a practice which we take to be the underlying principle of 
thoroughly seeking one’s Master . 9 Because our venerable Master Shakyamuni had 
the same kind of experience as the venerable monk Shibi had, He is an Old 
Buddha, and because the venerable monk Shibi had the same kind of experience as 
our venerable Master Shakyamuni had, he is one of His descendants. This principle 
should be thoroughly explored with one’s Master, and in detail. 

You need to clarify through your training the import of Shibi’s saying that he 
met the Sha family’s third son while on a fishing boat. That is to say, we explore 
through and through, with the utmost diligence, the instance when both our 
venerable Master Shakyamuni and the venerable monk Shibi had the same kind of 
simultaneous encounter with their Master. There was the venerable monk Shibi 
who encountered the Sha family’s third son while on a fishing boat, and there was 
the Sha family’s third son who encountered the shaven-headed monk upon Mount 
Shibi. Do your utmost to let yourself and others experience the sameness and 
experience the difference. The venerable monk Shibi and our venerable Master 


metaphorically as the dropping off of body and mind, since such physically violent acts are 
clearly serious violations of the Precepts. 

8. An allusion to Shibi’s meeting up with his own True Self while he was living on a fishing 
boat. 

9. That is, their awakening to their True Self was fully sufficient and, at the same time, it was 
insufficient in that there is always the ever going on, ever becoming Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On Seeking One s Master Far and Wide 


723 


Shakyamuni had the same kind of encounter and did the same exploring far and 
wide. In order for you to have the same encounter, you need to explore far and 
wide the principle that ‘the Sha’s third son’ and ‘I’ have encountered a One beyond 
what words can describe. When the principle of seeking the Master far and wide 
has not yet arisen, one is unable to encounter one’s Self and, lacking an 
encountering with one’s Self, one is unable to encounter another and, lacking an 
encountering with another, one is unable to encounter ‘such a person’* and, being 
unable to encounter the true ‘I’, one is unable to encounter a Master’s Fist 10 and, 
being unable to encounter a Master’s Eye, one is unable to let oneself hook one’s 
Self and haul It up, and one is unable to let It come on board even before It is 
hooked . 11 

When we have completely exhausted our seeking far and wide, we drop off 
seeking far and wide. It is comparable to the saying, “When the sea has dried up, 
one does not see its bottom,” or the saying, “When a person dies, the mind does not 
remain.” ‘When the sea has dried up’ means ‘when the whole sea has completely 
dried up’. At the same time, when the sea has indeed completely dried up, one does 
not see a seabed. ‘Not remaining behind’ and ‘completely ceasing’, together, 
comprise our human mind. The mind does not remain because it has customarily 
withered away into death. Hence, you need to recognize that the whole of a person 
is his mind and that the whole of the Mind is what a person is. In this manner, we 
thoroughly explore with our Master the front and back of each side of an issue. 


There was an occasion when my former Master Tendo Nyojo, the Old 
Buddha, was asked to give a Dharma talk by his veteran fellow monks, who had 
come from all over. Having gathered together in his Lecture Hall, they were given 
the following Teaching: 


10. Some Zen Masters were in the habit of raising a fist to express That which goes beyond 
conceptualization or words. 

11. The references to fishing are connected with Shibi’s ‘catching his True Self’ while he was 
living on a fishing barge. ‘Fishing’ itself has a metaphoric connection with doing one’s 
meditation. 



Shobogenzo: On Seeking One s Master Far and Wide 


724 


The Great Way has no fixed gate. 

From out the crown of our heads, It leaps forth in all 
directions. 

Unbounded as space itself It leaves no traces behind. 

Still, It has found Its way into Seiryo’s Nose. 

Even the bunch of you who would betray Gautama 
encounter It thus, 

To say nothing of those of you born from Rinzai s woeful 
womb . 13 

Ho! In our great family we are tumbled about like apricot 
blossoms set dancing by the spring breeze. 

Astonished, they fall, flying wildly in a riot of crimson. 

For the present Dharma talk, veteran monks from all directions came to Seiryo 
Temple in Chien-k’ang Prefecture, where the Old Buddha who was my former 
Master was serving as chief priest. He and these fellow monks of long-standing 
were sometimes related like guest and host and sometimes they were simply fellow 
practitioners sitting side-by-side in meditation. They were such old friends. How 
could their number fail to be large? It was an occasion when they had gathered 
together to petition him for a Dharma talk. Veteran monks who were totally devoid 
of having anything concrete to say to him were not among his friends or among 
that number who had petitioned him. Although those old friends were themselves 
highly respected and prized, they waited upon him, requesting his Teaching. 

Speaking more generally, my former Master’s practice of thoroughly seeking 
far and wide was not something fully mastered by those in any other place. In the 
last two or three centuries in Great Sung China, there has not been an Old Buddha 
comparable to my former Master. 

“The Great Way has no fixed gate” describes four or five thousand flower 
and willow lanes, and twenty or thirty thousand music pavilions . 14 At the same 


12. Seiryo is an allusion to Master Tendo himself, who at the time of this Dharma talk was chief 
priest at Seiryo Temple. 

13. The overall tone of Tendo’s poem, as well as Dogen’s subsequent comments, implies that the 
preceding two lines are meant ironically. 

14. ‘Flower and willow lanes’ is a common euphemism in China and Japan for a red-light 
district. Similarly, the term ‘pavilion’, particularly in association with some kind of 
entertainment, customarily refers to a brothel. Given the historic practice of monastic 



Shobogenzo: On Seeking One s Master Far and Wide 


725 


time, in letting one’s whole self leap forth, we make no use of whatever may 
remain behind. It is our leaping forth from the crown of our head and entering into 
our Nostrils: it is these two together that we explore through our training with our 
Master. Those who have not yet leapt free through the crown of their head and 
have not yet turned themselves around within their very Nostrils are not persons 
who are exploring the Matter through their training with their Master, nor are they 
folks who are thoroughly seeking the Master far and wide. We should explore the 
essence of ‘seeking the Master far and wide’just as Shibi did. 

What the Fourth Ancestor explored through his training under the Third 
Ancestor during the span of nine years was, simply, seeking the Master far and 
wide. Meditation Master Nansen Fugan once resided in Chih-yang without leaving 
the mountain for some thirty years, which was his seeking the Master far and wide. 
Master Ungan Donjo and Master Dogo Enchi, among others, diligently explored 
the Matter through their training at Meditation Master Yakusan’s monastery for 
forty years, which was their seeking the Master far and wide. The Second Ancestor 
spent eight years exploring the Matter with his Master on Mount Suzan and, 
through that training, thoroughly realized his Master’s Skin and Flesh, Bones and 
Marrow. 

‘To seek the Master far and wide’ simply means ‘just sitting there, dropping 
off body and mind’. It is as if at the present moment, one goes to where one goes 
and one comes from where one comes, without their being the slightest gap 
between them. This is seeking the Master far and wide with one’s whole body: this 
is the whole body of the Great Way. ‘To go on, beyond the top of Vairochana* 
Buddha’s head’ is the meditative state that is utterly still. Decisive attainment of 
such a state is Vairochana Buddha’s going on. To thoroughly awaken to seeking the 
Master far and wide by leaping forth means that the gourd leaps forth from the 
gourd plant. For a long time, we have regarded the stem end of the gourd to be the 
training place for our ‘uncorking Buddha’. Its lifeline is like a thread. We gourds 
thoroughly explore the gourd plant through our training with our Master. Our 


celibacy both in Chinese and Japanese Buddhism, it is unlikely that Dogen is suggesting or 
encouraging monks to engage in behavior that would break their vow of celibacy. Even so, 
there is the teaching in Buddhism that after someone has fully awakened to the Truth, and 
the false self has completely dropped off, such a person can freely go anywhere, even into 
brothels or wine shops, without being tempted to partake of what was being offered, and 
without judging those who were engaged in such activities. 



Shobogenzo: On Seeking One s Master Far and Wide 


726 


raising a single blade of grass is nothing other than our seeking the Master far and 
wide . 15 

Given to my assembly at my hermitage at the foot of Mount Yamashibu in Echizen Province on 
the twenty-seventh day of the eleventh lunar month in the first year of the Kangen era 
(January 9, 1244). 

Copied in the chief disciple s quarters at the same hermitage on the twenty-seventh day of the 
twelfth lunar month in the same year (February 8, 1244). 

Ejo 


15. Dogen’s gourd metaphor probably derives from a saying of his own Master, “The vine of the 
gourd plant embraces the gourd,” which is an allusion to the Master-disciple relationship. To 
paraphrase this closing passage, the vine is like the lifeline of the Buddhas and Ancestors, 
which threads its way to sustain the disciple. The training place for disciple and Master is 
like the juncture where the stem joins the vine. Coming to know one’s True Master, that is, 
one’s Buddha Nature, is like picking a ripened gourd, which ‘uncorks’ (lets out) the Buddha 
within the disciple. As Dogen says elsewhere, “Picking up a single blade of grass, we make 
it into a sixteen-foot tall golden body.” So here, our simple action of making a beginning by 
‘raising a single blade of grass’ sets us on our way to seeking far and wide with our Master 
for the True Master who, when ultimately found, will be the fully erect golden body of 
Buddha. 



61 

On the Eye of a Buddha 

(Ganzei) 


Translator’s Introduction: Ganzei, the title of this discourse, has several meanings. It literally 
refers to the physical organs of sight: the eyes. However, in most contexts its meaning is 
spiritual. For instance, in a story in which a disciple asks his Master to grant him the Eye, he is 
asking to be Transmitted, that is, to have passed on to him the Eye of the True Teaching. In 
other contexts, it refers to the Eye of Wisdom (Wise Discernment) or to the Eye with which one 
perceives that someone is ‘such a person’, that is, a person who has already awakened to his or 
her Buddha Nature. While the reader needs to be aware that the meaning of the word Eye in 
Dogen’s discourses does shift, which of these various meanings is intended is usually fairly 
clear from context. 


When we take up our explorations of the Matter* through our training for 
billions of myriad eons and roll them into balls, they will make eighty-four 
thousand Eyes . 1 

djb 

era 


When my late Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, was residing as Abbot at 
Zuigan Monastery, he once said as part of his formal teaching to his assembly: 

The autumn wind is cool, the autumn moon is bright, 

It lights up the Great Earth all with Its hills and streams. 

My eyes are atwinkle as we meet each other face-to-face, 

My blows and shouts mingle as I test my patch-robed 
monks. 

Now, ‘testing patch-robed monks’ means testing whether they too are Old 
Buddhas. The pivotal point is that he mixed his blows and shouts, using them to 
test his disciples. It is his Eye that manifests such vitality. The Great Earth with all 
Its hills and streams is the appearance of things as our Eye reveals them. It is the 
coolness of the autumn wind, which is inexhaustible. It is the brightness of the 
autumn moon, which is inexhaustible. Being the coolness of the autumn wind, It is 


* See Glossary. 

1. This is a ‘recipe’ for taking the fruits of one’s training and using them to help others see with 
the Eye of a Buddha. It relates to a story about his Master, which Dogen later presents. 


727 



Shobogenzo: On the Eye of a Buddha 


728 


beyond comparison with even the four great oceans. Being the brightness of the 
autumn moon, It is more resplendent than a thousand suns and moons. Its coolness 
and resplendence are the Great Earth with Its hills and streams which our vision 
perceives. Patch-robed monks are Buddhas and Ancestors. The one whose Eye 
does not opt for enlightenment, or for being unenlightened, or for being in some 
state before or after enlightenment, is one who is an Ancestor of the Buddha. 
‘Testing’ is the Master’s disclosing the Eye. It is the disciple’s manifesting the One 
Eye. It is the living Eye itself. ‘Meeting each other face-to-face’ is the mutual 
encountering of Master and disciple. ‘Mutually encountering’ is the Eye being 
sharp; ‘meeting face-to-face’ is the Eye thundering forth. In short, do not think that 
if your whole body is large, your whole Eye must be small. Even those in past ages 
who have considered themselves to be ever so eminent have been in agreement that 
their body is large and their eyes are small. This is because they were not yet in 
possession of their Eye. 

djb 

CX) 


Once when Tozan Ryokai was in the monastic assembly of 
Ungan Donjo, Ungan came upon him making straw sandals , 2 3 
whereupon Tozan spoke to Ungan, saying, “I pray that you will grant 
me the Eye, O Venerable Monk.” 

Ungan asked, “Who did you give yours away to?” 

Tozan replied, “This person never had One .” 4 
Ungan then asked, “Supposing you had One, where would you 
turn in order to give It to someone else?” 

Tozan had no words. 

Ungan then asked, “Is the Eye you are praying for your Eye or 

not?” 

Tozan replied, “It is not a matter of It being my Eye or not 
being my Eye.” 

Ungan responded, “Ahaaa !” 5 


2. The practice of making straw sandals is considered one of the secret meritorious practices, 
since such sandals were made for a fellow monk whose sandals had worn out. Without the 
maker letting it be known who he was, the sandals would be left where the chosen monk 
could find them. 

3. Tozan is fonnally asking Ungan for the Transmission. 

4. ‘This person’ is a humble way to refer to oneself and avoids the assertion of a personal ‘I’. 

5. Ungan’s response was his way of affirming Tozan’s answer. 



Shobogenzo: On the Eye of a Buddha 


729 


So, fully displaying one’s exploring the Matter through training with one’s Master 
is asking for the Eye. Practicing the Way in the Cloud Hall, attending the Abbot’s 
formal talks in the Dharma Hall, entering the Master’s quarters to inquire of the 
Way, these are ways of asking for the Eye . 6 7 In general, following the assembly 
when leaving formal meditation and following the assembly when coming to 
formal meditation are ways of asking for the Eye as a matter of course. The 
underlying principle that the Eye is beyond self and beyond other is evident. 

As the dialogue said, Tozan had already requested help by asking the Master 
to grant him the Eye. Be clear about this: if the Eye is truly yours, you do not need 
to ask anyone for It, and if It is truly someone else’s, you cannot beg It off that 
person. 

Ungan pointed to this by asking, “Who did you give yours 
away to?” 

There is the occasion of Its ‘being yours’ and there is the dispensing of It by 
‘giving It to whomever’. Tozan’s saying, “This person never had One,” was his 

n 

own way of expressing his Eye. You should take the time to explore through your 
training the Truth revealed by his manifesting the Way in this manner. 

Ungan asked, “Supposing you had One, in what direction 
would you turn in order to give It to someone else?” 

The Eye in this expression signifies that the ‘never had’ of “This person never had 
One” is both to have One and to have turned in order to give It to someone else. To 
turn in order to give It to someone is to have It. You need to thoroughly explore 
that this is ‘such an expression’. 

Tozan had no words. 

He was not dumbstruck. Rather, he was a victim of the sudden arising of dualistic 
thoughts due to past karma.* 

Pointing out the Matter for his disciple’s sake, Ungan then 
asked, “Is the Eye you are praying for your Eye or not?” 

This is a detail concerning the one-eyedness of the Eye. It is his vigorously 
shattering Tozan’s ‘Eye’. The main point of what Ungan is saying is, “It is the Eye 
asking for the Eye.” It is water pulling water along. It is mountains standing in 


6. Making straw sandals as a secret meritorious practice would also be a way. 

7. That is, there is no T that has the Eye of the True Treasure as a personal possession, and 
everyone has It. 



Shobogenzo: On the Eye of a Buddha 


730 


rows with mountains. It is our going forth among those of unlike mind and our 
living amidst those of like mind. 

Tozan replied, “It is not a matter of It being my Eye or not 
being my Eye.” 

This is his Eye singing forth of Its own accord . 8 Whenever body or mind, 
thought or knowledge, or form or rank are present, you should encounter those 
conditions as being the living Eye which is coming forth of Its own accord from 
beyond the duality of having or not having. All the Buddhas of the three temporal 
worlds are continually standing in the Dharma Hall listening to the Eye’s turning of 
the Great Wheel of the Dharma and giving voice to It. In short, within the 
innermost realm of what we thoroughly explore through our training, we leap into 
the Eye as we give rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood, as we do the 
training and practice, and as we awaken to Great Wisdom. From the first, this Eye 
is beyond self and beyond other. Because It has no obstructions of any kind, the 
Great Matter is likewise free of obstructions. 


In commenting on the preceding story, Roya Ekaku, a Master of old, once 
said, “How wonderful indeed are the Buddhas of the Ten Quarters. From the first, 
They have been flowers within the Eye.” What he called ‘the Buddhas of the Ten 
Quarters’ is your Eye. The flowers within the Eye are the Buddhas of the Ten 
Quarters. Your present activities of stepping forward and stepping back, of just 
sitting and just sleeping, are just such flowers. Be that as it may, you have inherited 
the power of the Eye Itself. It is your being stripped of your delusions and your 
being set loose to rid yourself of them. 


My late Master, the Old Buddha, once said, “I’m going to 
scrape out the Eye of Bodhidharma and make It into mudballs to pelt 
you monks with.” With a shout he said, “Yes! The sea has dried up, 
right to the bottom, and its waves are so high that they smite the very 
heavens!” 

While in the Abbot’s quarters at Seiryo-ji Temple, he made a point of this for the 
sake of the vast sea of assembled monks. This is why he spoke of ‘pelting them’, as 
if he were saying ‘making them into a real person’. Because of his pelting, all the 


8. This Eye is Tozan’s True Eye. 



Shobogenzo: On the Eye of a Buddha 


731 


various monks would give rise to their True Countenance. He meant, for instance, 
that with the Eye of Bodhidharma he would make each of them into a ‘real person’. 
And he has done so! This is what the underlying principle of ‘pelting persons’ is. 
Because each person is someone who has been struck alive with the Eye, the fist 
with which he struck someone in the Cloud Hall, the traveling staff* with which he 
struck someone in the Dharma Hall, and the lacquered hossu* with which he struck 
someone in the Abbot’s quarters are all the Eye of Bodhidharma. His gouging out 
Bodhidharma’s Eye and making It into mudballs to pelt monks with is called today 
‘seeking an interview with the Abbot to ask for a spiritual boon’ or ‘getting up in 
the morning to do one’s morning practice’ or ‘making the effort to just sit’. And 
what kind of person does he beat them into? “The sea has dried up, right to the 
bottom, and its waves are so high that they smite the very heavens!” 


My late Master, the Old Buddha, once entered the Dharma Hall and spoke in 
praise of the Tathagata’s realizing the Way, saying in verse: 

For six years He stumbled on through the weeds of 
provisional truth with the determined spirit of a 
wild fox. 

He would leap forth with His whole body, only to become 
entangled in delusion s vines. 

Having totally lost His eyes, there was no place for Him 
to seek for It. 

Now He goes about deceiving others by saying that He 
was awakened by the morning star. 

That “He was awakened by the morning star” are the words of someone who had 
totally lost His eyes at that very moment. This was the entangled condition of His 
whole being, and so He easily leapt free from it. Seeking what is sought is seeking 
for that which does not exist in what manifests before our very eyes; It is seeking 
for that which does not exist in what has not yet manifested before our very eyes. 

djb 

CX) 


In the Dharma Hall, my late Master, the Old Buddha, once said in verse: 



Shobogenzo: On the Eye of a Buddha 


732 


When Gautama finally lost His deceiving eyes, 

There appeared in the snow a single blossom on one 
bough of the Old Plum Tree. 

What has now arrived is the growing of thorn-like spurs, 

So that all the more I laugh at the spring winds which 
send all things flying in disarray. 

Gautama’s eyes are not simply one or two or three eyes. To which eye or eyes does 
this losing refer? It may be that there are eyes which are called ‘losing one’s eyes’. 
Further, in such a situation as this, there is the Eye that is ‘a single blossom on one 
bough of the Old Plum Tree’. Before the spring arrives, this Eye discloses the heart 
of spring. 

djb 


Once when ascending to the Dharma seat, my late Master, the Old Buddha, 

said: 

Day after long day the pouring rain, then finally the sky 
completely clear! The croaking of bullfrogs and the mumbling of 
earthworms. The Old Buddhas have never passed away, displaying for 
us Their diamond-hard Eye. Oh, dear! I’ve tangled the entangled. 

‘The diamond-hard Eye’ is the pouring rain day after long day; It is the sky’s being 
completely clear. It is the croaking of bullfrogs, It is the mumbling of earthworms 
and, because They have never passed away, It is the Old Buddhas. Even if the Old 
Buddhas were to pass away, it would not be the same as the passing away of those 
who are not Old Buddhas. 

djb 

CX) 


My late Master, the Old Buddha, while giving a Dharma talk, once said: 

From the winter solstice on, the days grow longer as the sun 
moves farther southward. From within my Eye, a light pours forth, 
and into my Nostrils pours the breath of Life. 

In the endless stream of present moments from the winter solstice to the summer 
solstice, though the days and months grew ever longer, he let go of measuring 
them. This is the light that was emitted from his Eye. It was his ‘seeing mountains’ 
in the light of day . 9 This is what everyday, dignified behavior was like among his 
assembly. 


9. That is, his seeing that his assembly of monks was doing their training well. 



Shobogenzo: On the Eye of a Buddha 


733 


djb 

CX) 

My late Master, the Old Buddha, when giving a Dharma talk at Jinzu-ji 
Temple in Lin’an prefecture, said: 

This morning is the first day of the second lunar month. The 
Eye of my hossu is bulging out; It is bright like a mirror and as shiny 
black as lacquer. With a dash, It leaps across heaven and earth and 
swallows them up, as both together are but a single form of It. You of 
this monks’ assembly are still beating your heads against your walls 
and butting up against your fences. And, in short, to what end? I’ve 
given you my all, tossing It your way with a hearty laugh. I entrust 
everything to the Spring Wind, for there is nothing more that I need to 
do. 

In this instance, his saying “beating your heads against your walls and butting up 
against your fences” means the whole of your walls are doing the beating and the 
whole of your fences are doing the butting. And there is this Eye. ‘This morning’, 
‘the second lunar month’, ‘the first day’ are all instances of the Eye; that is, the Eye 
of the hossu . 10 Because It leaps across every barrier with a dash, it is ‘this 
morning’, and because in thousands of myriad ways It swallows up the whole 
universe, heaven and earth, it is ‘the second month’, and when I’ve given you my 
all, tossing It your way, it is ‘the first day’. Such is the life of one who is 
manifesting the Eye. 


Given to the assembly on the seventeenth day of the twelfth lunar month in the first year of the 
Kangen era (January 28, 1244) while staying at Yamashibu Peak in Echizen province. 

Copied by me on the twenty-eighth day of the same month (February 8, 1244) whilst in the 
quarters of the Abbot’s assistant at the foot of the Peak. 

Ejo 


10. The hossu is used as part of the ceremonial connected with the disciples coming up in front 
of the whole community to ask the Master their spiritual question. This ceremony is 
customarily perfonned twice each month. 



62 

On Everyday Life 

(Kajo) 


Translator’s Introduction: Kajo literally means ‘what is habitual (jo) in one’s home life (7a/)’. 
Throughout the discourse Dogen speaks of sahan, literally ‘tea and cooked rice’, as the staples of 
everyday living. While at one level this tenn simply points out that the Buddhas and Ancestors, 
in Their humanity, are no different from any other person, it also, more significantly, carries a 
deeper spiritual connotation, referring to the everyday ceaseless practice that has spiritually 
sustained and nourished Them and which has the capacity to do the same for us. 


Generally speaking, in the dwelling places of Buddhas and Ancestors, taking 
tea and eating rice is what constitutes Their everyday life . 1 This custom of taking 
tea and eating rice has been passed on to us and fully manifests itself in the here 
and now. This is why the taking of tea and the eating of rice by Buddhas and 
Ancestors has come down to us as a way of living. 


The monk Fuyo Dokai, whilst on Mount Daiyo, once asked 
Tosu, “The thoughts and sayings of the Buddha’s Ancestors are like 
the tea and rice of everyday life. Putting these thoughts and sayings 
aside for the moment, is there any word or phrase you might have for 
the sake of others?” 

Tosu answered, “You, right now, say! The Emperor inside the 
capital rules it, so does he have to look back to previous emperors of 
legendary times, like Yu, T’ang, Yao, and Shun?” 

Just when Daiyo was intent on opening his mouth, Tosu picked 
up his ceremonial hossu and covered Daiyo’s mouth with it, saying, 
“At the very moment when you gave rise to the intention to realize 
Buddhahood, you immediately deserved thirty blows.” 


1. Taking tea and eating rice is a metaphor for partaking of the Dharma which spiritually 
nourishes us. 

* See Glossary. 


734 



Shobogenzo: On Everyday Life 


735 


Thereupon, Daiyo opened up to his enlightenment and, after 
having bowed in deepest respect to Tosu, immediately took his leave. 

Tosu called out to him, “Come back a minute, acharya!”* 

When Daiyo did not turn his head around, Tosu said, “Have 
you, my disciple, arrived at the place where there is no doubt?” 

Daiyo covered his ears with his hands and left. 

So, clearly, we should preserve and take care of the teaching that the thoughts and 
sayings of the Buddha’s Ancestors are the tea and rice of everyday life. The 
homely fare of everyday life is the thoughts of Buddhas and the sayings of 
Ancestors . 2 The Buddhas and Ancestors prepare the tea and rice, and the tea and 
rice help sustain and take care of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Since this is so, we, 
for our part, do not need to rely on anything apart from the potency of this tea and 
rice of Theirs. Simply, we do not squander the strength of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors that resides within the partaking of this tea and rice. 

You would do well to explore with great diligence the remark about not 
looking back to previous emperors of legendary times such as Yu, T’ang, Yao, and 
Shun. You would also do well to explore how to let the question as to whether 
there is any word or phrase that you may have for the benefit of others spring forth 
from the crown of your head. You should experiment through your training with 
your Master to see if you can get it to spring forth. 


When Great Master Sekito Kisen was at his hermitage on Mount Nangaku, 
he once said: 

I’ve thatched me a grass hut, without a coin to my name. 

Having finished eating rice, I feel content, and look to 
taking me a nap. 

His ‘having finished eating rice’, which he said time after time, over and over 
again, is the thought and saying of an Ancestor of the Buddha who has explored 
what rice is. Someone who has not yet eaten rice is someone who has not yet 
experienced satiety. At the same time, this principle of ‘feeling content, having 
finished eating rice,’ manifests before one eats rice, while one is eating rice, and 
after one has eaten rice. In a house where people finish eating up their rice, to fail 


2. ‘Homely fare’ (C. t’su-cha tan-fan), literally, ‘coarse tea and thin gruel’, is a conventional 
Chinese phrase used by a host as an apology for what is being offered to a guest. 



Shobogenzo: On Everyday Life 


736 


to see that there is always the eating of rice is to explore through one’s training 
only four or five measures out of ten. 


My late Master, an Old Buddha, when expounding the Teaching to his 
assembly, once said: 

I can recall an incident in which a monk asked Hyakujo, “Just 
what sort of thing is the Wondrous Matter?”* 

Hyakujo replied, “He sits alone atop Daiyu Peak/ O my great 
assembly, this Fellow cannot be disturbed by anything, so let Him sit 
for a while in meditation, eliminating dualistic thought.” 

If there was someone today, a novice, say, who suddenly asked, 

“Just what sort of thing is the Miraculous Matter?” I would simply 
turn to the person and say, “What Miraculous Matter is there?” In 
short, it is the ‘What! ’ in the alms bowl of pure compassion which was 
passed on to me to use for eating my rice . 3 4 

In the everyday life of the Buddhas and Ancestors, without fail, there is the 
Miraculous Matter, which is Their so-called ‘sitting alone atop Daiyu Peak’. Even 
though we now encounter that Fellow when we let Him sit in meditation and 
eliminate dualistic thinking, It is still what the Miraculous Matter is. And there is 
that which is even more miraculous: the alms bowl of great compassion being 
passed on to Tendo, from which he ate his rice. The Miraculous Matter is each and 
every thing everywhere ‘eating rice’. Thus, sitting alone atop Daiyu Peak is 
precisely what eating rice is. The alms bowl is what we use for eating rice, and 
whatever we use for eating our rice is our alms bowl. That is why it is the alms 
bowl of great compassion and why Tendo ate his rice from it. There was his 
knowing what rice is after he had fully satisfied himself. And there was his being 
satisfied from having completely eaten the rice. And there was his full awareness 
of the rice satisfying him. And there was his having been fully satisfied and yet 
continuing to eat his rice. 


3. Daiyu Peak is an alternative name for Mount Hyakujo, where Hyakujo had his monastery. 

4. There is a play on words in this last sentence. ‘The alms bowl of great compassion’ can also 
be understood as an allusion to Tendo’s alms bowl, which he had brought with him when he 
left Great Compassion Monastery in order to become Abbot of Tendo Monastery. The whole 
quotation was part of his inaugural Dharma talk to his new assembly. 



Shobogenzo: On Everyday Life 


737 


Now then, just what could this alms bowl of his possibly be? From my 
perspective, it is not merely a wooden object, nor is it something black like 
lacquerware. Might it be the One of unyielding stone? Might it be the Iron Man? It 
is bottomless: it is beyond our own Nose. In its swallowing up empty space, empty 
space receives it, in gassho.* 

djb 


My late Master, an Old Buddha, once addressed an assembly whilst in the 
Abbot’s quarters at the Zuigan Pure Land Meditation Temple in the Taishu District, 
saying, “When hunger comes, I eat rice, and when tiredness comes, I take a sleep. 
Forges and bellows fill the universe .” 5 His phrase, ‘when hunger comes’ refers to 
the life of one who habitually ‘eats rice’. The person who has never yet eaten rice 
is someone incapable of hungering for it. Hence, you need to realize that we for 
whom hunger may well be an event in our everyday life are persons who must 
have decided to eat rice to the full. 

‘When tiredness comes’ refers to being tired within tiredness, which 
habitually fully springs from a tired head . 6 Nevertheless, it is the here and now, 
wherein the whole of our being is swept clean, turned around, and put in order 
within our daily life. 

‘I take a sleep’ refers to letting the ego ‘nap’, having borrowed the Buddha 
Eye, the Dharma Eye, the Eye of Wise Discernment, the Eye of the Ancestors, the 
Eye of those who act as the temple’s pillars* and stone lanterns.* 


After my late Master, an Old Buddha, had gone by invitation from Zuigan-ji 
Temple in Taishu to Jinzu-ji Temple in Rin’an City, he once gave a talk in the 
Dharma Hall there, in which he said: 


5. ‘Forges and bellows’ is a traditional Zen Buddhist metaphor for the conditions and expedient 
means that intensify the heat of training, whereby a trainee is forged into a True Monk. As 
Tendo Nyojo points out, these conditions and expedient means are available everywhere. In 
other words, all things have the capability of teaching us the Dharma. 

6. That is, tiredness is a mental thing. 



Shobogenzo: On Everyday Life 


738 


For half a year I ate rice as I sat atop a cloud-covered peak, 

Sitting there to break through the smoke and mist which 
arose a thousand myriad times over, 

When suddenly a resounding clap issued forth, as thunder 
rumbled o ’er, 

And the heavens, with springtime glow, shone like apricot 
blooms all crimson red. 

All the methods of the Buddhas and Ancestors, as taught from the time of 
the Buddha, were Their ‘eating rice whilst sitting atop a cloud-covered peak’. 
Thoroughly exploring how to carry on the Buddha’s life of wise discernment was 
Their manifesting a life of eating rice. ‘Sitting atop a cloud-covered peak for half a 
year’ is called ‘eating rice’. They do not know how much the smoke and mist, in 
which They are sitting in order to break through, has piled up. And, however 
sudden the clap of thunder may be, the springtime glow is simply the crimson of 
apricot blossoms. 

The term ‘the heavens’ refers to being open at every moment of now. And 
those moments are what ‘eating rice’ is. 

The Cloud-covered Peak is the name for a peak at Zuigan-ji Temple. 


My late Master, the Old Buddha, while in the Buddha Hall at Zuigan-ji 
Temple in Keigen City in the Minshu District, once expounded the Teaching to the 
assembly, saying: 

Right at this moment, put down the load you are carrying. ‘The 
wondrous golden form’ is putting on one’s robe and eating one’s rice: 
‘putting on one’s robe and eating one’s rice’ is the wondrous golden 
form. Further, refrain from poking around, asking who is or isn’t 
putting on their robe and eating rice. Do not talk about so-and-so 
being the Wondrous Golden Form. Should you so restrain yourself, it 
will be an expression of what Master Tendo meant when he said, 

“That is why I bow to you.” As I am already eating my rice, so do 
your bow, with your hands in gassho, and then eat your rice. We act 
like this because we earnestly shun going about while holding flowers 
aloft . 7 


7. That is, going around acting holy. 



Shobogenzo: On Everyday Life 


739 


djb 

The monk Chokei Daian once addressed his assembly in the Dharma Hall, 
saying: 

I, Daian, stayed with Isan for thirty years. I supped on Isan rice. 

I urinated Isan urine. But I did not explore Isan’s Zen. I simply raised 
one unsexed water buffalo. When it wandered off into the weeds, I’d 
haul it out. When it trespassed on someone’s garden patch, I’d chastise 
it. As I had already bawled it out over a long time, people would treat 
it to such remarks as, “Oh, you poor creature.” Now it has changed 
and become a white ox right out in the open. It is constantly right 
before my face. All day long, it clearly shines forth, manifesting the 
Dharma. Even if one were to try to drive it off, it would not go away. 

Clearly, we should accept, and keep to, this address to his assembly. His thirty 
years of endeavor within the assembly of an Ancestor of the Buddha was his eating 
his rice, unmixed with cares and worries. When you manifest a life of eating rice, 
there are, quite naturally, the signs of your rearing a single castrated water buffalo. 


Great Master Joshu Shinsai once asked a newly arrived monk, 
“Have you ever come here before?” 

The monk replied, “Yes, I have.” 

The Master said, “Have some tea before you leave.” 

He also asked another monk, “Have you ever come here 
before?” 

The monk replied, “No, I never have.” 

The Master said, “Have some tea before you leave.” 

The Prior of the monastery asked the Master, “Why did you say 
to the monk who had been here before, ‘Have some tea before you 
leave,’ and also say to the monk who had not been here before, ‘Have 
some tea before you leave? ’ ” 

The Master gestured for the Prior to come to him. When the 
Prior complied, the Master said, “Have some tea before you leave .” 8 


8. Joshu’s questions are double-edged. While it appears as if he were asking a commonplace 
question as to whether someone had come to Joshu’s monastery before, he is actually asking 
a spiritual question (one which Dogen will explore), namely, “Have you ever arrived at the 



Shobogenzo: On Everyday Life 


740 


His ‘here’ is not something off the top of his head, nor does it refer to Ins Nose, nor 
does it refer to Joshu . 9 Because he had leapt free of ‘here’, he had already arrived 
at the Here and Now and had not yet arrived at the Here . 10 Right here is where the 
What is, but those others merely talked about it in terms of ‘having come before’ or 
‘not having come before’. This is why my late Master said, “What person who 
takes residence either in a gilded tower or in a wine shop could come to call on 
Joshu and drink his tea?” 

And so it is that the everyday life of Buddhas and Ancestors is simply Their 
taking of Tea and Their eating of Rice. 

Delivered to the assembly below Yamashibu Peak in Echizen Province on the seventeenth day of 
the twelfth lunar month in the first year of the Kangen era (January 28, 1243). 

Copied by me in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant below the peak on the first day of the first 
month in the second year of the same era (February 10, 1244). 

Ejo 


Here and Now?” Since both the two monks and the Prior all take Joshu’s question on a 
superficial level, Joshu offers them tea (that is, the Teaching) before they go off to find That 
which is the Here and Now. 

9. That is, the Here and Now is not an intellectual concept, nor is it a reference to Joshu’s own 
Original Nature, nor is it a personal reference to Joshu himself. 

10. That is, Joshu had fully realized the Truth (his having arrived at the Here and Now) and at 
the same time, his training and practice continued with his ‘always going on, always 
becoming Buddha’ (his not yet having arrived at the Here). 



63 

On the Roar of the Dragon 

(Ryugin) 


Translator’s Introduction: The roar of the Dragon refers to a sound not unlike that of the wind 
blowing through a grove of barren trees. This sound may become audible during meditation 
when the meditator has dropped off body and mind, that is, has let go of the greed, anger, and 
delusion which form attachments to the five skandhas. The withered tree that Dogen speaks of in 
this discourse is a common Buddhist metaphor for someone who has reached a deep level of 
meditation, a person whose passions have all but disappeared. This meditative state, however, is 
not to be confused with a quietistic or blissful condition, which is simply a passing phase that 
may arise in spiritual practice. 

The title could also be rendered as the “Song of the Dragon”, since it is also used to describe 
a particularly forceful expression of the Dhanna, one that sets the Wheel of the Dharma turning. 


Great Master Tosu Daido of Shuchou Province was once asked 
by a monk, “Does the roar of the Dragon exist even within a withered 
tree?” 

The Master replied, “As I would put it, the Lion’s roar exists 
within one’s skull.” 

Talk of withered trees and dead ashes is something taught by non-Buddhists. Even 
so, you need to distinguish between withered trees that non-Buddhists speak of and 
withered trees that Buddhists speak of. Even though non-Buddhists talk about 
withered trees, they do not know what a ‘withered tree’ is, much less would they 
actually hear the Dragon’s roar. Non-Buddhists imagine that a withered tree is 
something dead or dying. They have been taught that such a tree cannot experience 
the springtime. 

We explore through our training the ‘withered tree’ that the Buddhas and 
Ancestors speak of as ‘the ocean having dried up’. ‘The ocean having dried up’ is 
synonymous with ‘the tree having withered up’ and ‘the tree having withered up’ is 
synonymous with its having encountered the Spring. The tree’s being unwavering 
is a sign of its having withered . 1 Such trees as mountain trees, ocean trees, and sky 


1. ‘Unwavering’ in this context means not being shaken by the arising of delusive thoughts. 


741 



Shobogenzo: On the Roar of the Dragon 


742 


2 

trees are what withered trees are. Their budding is the roar of the Dragon within a 
withered tree. Even those trees whose girth is measured in hundreds of thousands 
are offspring of some withered tree. Its form and its innate nature, its embodiment 
and the strength derived from its being withered comprise the long-lived withered 
trees which Buddhas and Ancestors speak of. At the same time, they go beyond 
being long-lived or short-lived. There are the trees of mountains and valleys, and 
there are the trees of fields and villages. The trees of mountains and valleys are 
conventionally called pines and cedars. The trees of fields and villages are 
conventionally called ordinary people and those in lofty positions. We explore 
through our training that those whose ‘leaves grow from their roots’ are called the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, and we explore the expression ‘end and beginning here 
return unto the Source ’. 2 3 What is just like this is the long Dharma body of withered 
trees and the short Dharma body of withered trees. Those who are not withered 
trees do not yet roar like a Dragon, and those who are not yet withered trees will 
not forget the sound of the Dragon. “How many times have I met the spring, my 
heart unswerving?” is the Dragon’s song of one who is completely withered . 4 To 
be sure, this ‘song’ is not in the same category as the five tones in a conventional 
musical scale, but two or three of the Five Tones are in the sequence of the 
Dragon’s song. 

At the same time, by this monk’s question, “Does the roar of the Dragon 
exist even within a withered tree?” it has been brought forth for the first time in 
immeasurable eons. It was his bringing forth his spiritual question. Tosu’s saying 
“As I would put it, the Lion’s roar exists within one’s skull” means “What place 
could there possibly be that is concealed from It?” And it means “We never rest 
from surrendering our self and from supporting others.” And it means “Skulls are 
scattered everywhere in the fields.” 5 


2. This is a description of various types of meditators: mountain trees are those who are sitting 
as still as a mountain, ocean trees are those who are exploring the Depths, and sky trees are 
those who are exploring the Unbounded. 

3. The quotations in this sentence come from the Sandokai, a poem by our Thirty-fifth 
Ancestor, Sekito Kisen, which is customarily recited every day in Zen Buddhist monasteries. 

4. This quotation is from a poem by Daibai Hojo, which Dogen gives in full on page 387 of 
Discourse 29: On Ceaseless Practice ( Gydji ). 

5. That is, in the fields of training. 



Shobogenzo: On the Roar of the Dragon 


743 


djb 

CX) 

Great Master Kyogen Chikan was once asked by a monk, 
“What is the Way?” 

The Master answered, “The singing of the Dragon amidst the 
withered trees.” 

The monk replied, “1 don’t understand.” 

The Master said, “It is the Eye in skulls.” 

Later, there was a monk who asked Sekiso, “Just what sort of 
thing is this ‘singing of a dragon amidst withered trees?’” 

Sekiso replied, “Even now, there is Its being tinged with 
delight.” 

The monk then asked, “Just what is that thing about ‘eyes in 
skulls?”’ 

Sekiso replied, “Even now, there is Its being tinged with 
consciousness.” 

There was also a monk who asked Sozan, “Just what sort of 
thing is this ‘singing of a dragon amidst withered trees?”’ 

Sozan replied, “Its bloodline has not been severed.” 

The monk then asked, “Well, just what is that thing about ‘eyes 
in skulls?”’ 

Sozan replied, “They are not completely dried out.” 

The monk then said, “Oh, I don’t know about that! Are there 
any who can hear it?” 

Sozan replied, “There is not one person on the whole of the 
great earth who has not already heard It.” 

The monk retorted, “I’m not convinced. What verses does a 
dragon chant?” 

Sozan replied, “I do not know what those verses are, but those 
who do hear It bemoan the fact that others do not.” 6 


6. These three short dialogues are typical of many koan stories that involve a Master and 
someone identified only as a monk. The monk—presumably a novice—asks a question 
based on an attempt to understand some saying by an Ancestor from a commonplace, literal 
perspective, whereas the Master gives a response as if the monk had asked his or her 
question from a spiritual perspective. This is done to help the monk break through a 



Shobogenzo: On the Roar of the Dragon 


744 


The hearers and the chanters that these monks were just now talking about do not 
come anywhere near to those who actually sing the Dragon’s song, for this melody 
is what the Dragon Itself sings. Being amidst withered trees or in a skull are not 
referring to something inside or outside, nor are they a reference to self or other; 
they are referring to the ‘What’ that is here and now and to the ‘What’ that has 
always been of old. Its being tinged with delight even now is the horns on Its head 
coming forth. Its being tinged with consciousness even now is Its completely 
shedding Its skin. 

Sozan’s saying, “Its bloodline has not been severed,” means that the Way is 
not concealed and that, within the sphere of words, there is the turning around of 
self. “They are not completely dried out” means that the drying up of the ocean has 
not completely reached the bottom. Because the drying out has not achieved 
completion, there is drying going on atop the dryness. The monk’s asking, “Are 
there any who can hear it?” implies “Are there any who cannot?” As to Sozan’s 
saying, “There is not one person on the whole of the great earth who has not 
already heard It,” I should have liked to ask him, “Putting aside, for the moment, 
your remark about there being no one who has not already heard It, tell me, in the 
time before the whole earth sprang into existence, where was the roar of the 
Dragon then? Speak up! Quick, quick!” 

“I’m not convinced. What verses does the Dragon chant?” is the question 
that needs answering for all our sakes. The roaring Dragon, quite naturally, is 
making vocal sounds and taking up the Great Matter* whilst in mud; this is Its 
taking in a breath through Its nostrils. “I do not know what those verses are” means 
that a Dragon exists within those verses. “Those who do hear It bemoan the fact 
that others do not” is sad indeed! 

The roar of the Dragon that has now come forth through such Masters as 
Kyogen, Sekiso, and Sozan creates the clouds and makes the rain. It does not speak 
of the Way, nor does It speak of Eyes or skulls; it is just the thousands of songs, the 
myriad songs that the Dragon sings. Its still having delight is found in the croaking 
of bullfrogs, and Its still having consciousness is found in the mumbling of worms. 
Therefore, Its bloodline has not been severed; there is one gourd succeeding 


dependence on worldly ways of thinking. That is, in the above three cases the monks think 
that what they are quoting is somehow about mythical creatures called dragons, whereas the 
Masters are pointing the monks to a deeper meaning of the term ‘Dragon’, that is, they are 
pointing to one’s innate Buddha Nature. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Roar of the Dragon 


745 


another. 7 Because Its skull is not completely dry, It is the chief pillar* of the temple 
from whose Womb is bom the other pillars of the temple. It is the temple’s main 
stone lantern* which is most conspicuous among all the stone lanterns in the 
temple. 

Delivered to the assembly on the twenty-fifth day of the twelfth lunar month in the first year of 
the Kangen era (February 5, 1244), whilst beneath Yamashibu Peak in Echizen Province. 

Copied at Eihei-ji Monastery on the fifth day of the third lunar month in the second year of the 
Koan era (April 17, 1279). 


7. The gourd refers to a Master as a vessel for the Water of the Spirit, which is passed on 
through the Transmission. 



64 


On Spring and Autumn: 

Warming Up and Cooling Down 

(Shunju) 

Translator’s Introduction: This discourse is concerned with the teachings of Tozan who, along 
with his Dharma heir, Sozan, is considered a founding Ancestor of Dogen’s Soto tradition. 
Dogen first presents a koan story for which Tozan was famous, one dealing with how to train 
with the opposites. He then makes mention of the Five Positions (J. Goi ), in which Tozan 
outlines the relationships between the transient and the Absolute—the Absolute within the 
transient, the transient within the Absolute, the transient itself, the Absolute itself, and the 
transient and Absolute in hannony. Dogen quotes and critiques various Masters who have written 
poems expressing their understanding of both the story and the Five Positions. Since many of 
these poems contain Zen terms which would most likely have been understood in Dogen’s time 
but are unfamiliar to present-day Western readers, some effort has been made to clarify what 
these poems are pointing to, though Japanese scholarly commentators are not always certain of 
or in agreement as to the significance of some of the metaphors that the poem contains. 


Great Master Tozan Ryokai was once asked by a monk, “When 
cold or heat come our way, how are we to avoid them?” 

The Master replied, “Why don’t you proceed to the place where 
there is no heat or cold?” 

The monk then asked, “What is that place where there is no heat 
or cold?” 

The Master answered, “When it is cold, my acharya,* give 
yourself up to the cold; when it is hot, my acharya, give yourself up to 
the heat.” 

Ever so many people in the past have given much thought to this dialogue, and 
many people in the present need to make every effort to train with it. The Buddhas 
and Ancestors have invariably come to explore it, and those who come to explore it 
are Buddhas and Ancestors. Many of the Indian and Chinese Buddhas and 
Ancestors in both the past and present have treated this story as an actual incidence 
of one’s Original Nature manifesting. In this dialogue, Original Nature manifests as 
the spiritual question of Buddhas and Ancestors. 


* See Glossary. 


746 



Shobogenzo: On Spring and Autumn: Warming Up and Cooling Down 


747 


At the same time, the monk’s question, “When cold or heat come our way, 
how are we to avoid them?” needs to be examined in detail. It is your taking a 
good hard look through your training at the very moment when cold comes and at 
the very moment when heat comes. This cold and heat come from a cold and heat 
that are entirely cold and entirely hot. Since they come from cold and heat, when 
they do arrive, they have come from a head that thinks in terms of cold and hot, 
and they manifest from eyes that see in terms of cold and hot. Above this ‘head’ is 
the very place where there is no cold or hot. Within these ‘eyes’ is the very place 
where there is no cold or hot. The Great Ancestor’s statement, “When it is cold, my 
acharya, give yourself up to the cold; when it is hot, my acharya, give yourself up 
to the heat,” refers to what was happening at that very moment. Even though ‘when 
it is cold’ refers to his saying ‘give yourself up to the cold’, ‘when it is hot’ need 
not necessarily be his way of saying ‘give yourself up to the heat’. ‘Cold’ is 
fundamentally and totally cold; ‘heat’ is fundamentally and totally hot. Even 
though we may have been able to avoid experiencing them on myriad occasions, 
this is still just exchanging the head for the tail. Cold is what the living Eye of the 
Ancestors of our tradition is; hot is what the warm skin of my late Master was. 


Meditation Master Tanka Shijun was the Dharma heir of the Venerable 
Monk Fuyo Dokai. He once said: 

Among our monastic assembly, there are those who have 
deliberated among themselves and then made the assertion, “In this 
story, the monk’s question has already sunk him into duality, whereas 
the Venerable Monk Tozan’s reply returns the matter to the position of 
the Absolute. Recognizing what is being sounded in Tozan’s words, 
the monk then enters into the position of the Absolute, whereas Tozan 
now responds by stringing along with the dualistic position.” 
Deliberating in this way, those who assert such a view not only 
slander the late, saintly Tozan but they also disgrace themselves. Have 
you not encountered the saying, “When you listen to the explanations 
of ordinary people, they may call up pretty pictures in the mind—all 
in reds and greens—but even though these may be beautiful when 
before your eyes, after continued repetition, they will ultimately 
sicken you?” 



Shobogenzo: On Spring and Autumn: Warming Up and Cooling Down 


748 


In general, my noble Buddhist travelers of the Way, if you wish 
to grasp this Great Matter,* you must first become conscious of this 
Highest Ancestor’s Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. 

The teachings uttered by the rest of those Ancestors of the Buddha are 
as meaningful as the sizzling sounds a cold bowl makes when hot 
water is poured into it. Even so, I dare to put it to you, what ultimately 
is the place that is without cold or heat? Do you understand? 1 2 3 A pair 
of kingfishers come to roost in the Jeweled Mansion, whereas the 
mandarin drake and his mate are allied with the Golden Palace. 

This Master is one of Tozan’s direct descendants, an outstanding personage in the 
seat of our Ancestors. As such, he rebukes the many who, dwelling within the cave 
of duality, bow down to our Founding Ancestor, Great Master Tozan, for the wrong 
reason. If the Buddha’s Dharma had been Transmitted from such a position of 
duality, how could It possibly have ever come down to us today? Be they feral 
kittens or farmyard clowns, they have not yet been thoroughly trained within 
Tozan’s inner chambers. Folks who have never crossed the threshold into the day- 
to-day training with the Buddha’s Dharma have erroneously asserted that Tozan 
came in contact with people by applying such things as a dualistic five positions. 
This is barbarous and irresponsible talk, which you should not pay attention to. 
You should just thoroughly explore through your training that this superior 
Ancestor of yours was, by all means, in possession of the Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching. 

djb 


Meditation Master Wanshi Shogaku of Mount Tendo in Chingyiian 
Prefecture was a Dharma heir of Abbot Tanka Shijun. He once said: 

When we discuss this matter which my Master Tanka has 
brought up, it is just like the two of us playing a game of Go. If you 
do not respond according to the move I made, I will have caught you 
off guard. If you experience that this is what has happened, you will 


1. In accord with traditional Zen interpretations, these two questions could also be rendered as, 
“The ‘What’ is ultimately the place that is without cold or heat. Do you get It?” 

2. The pairs of birds—one male, one female—are a metaphor for the opposites, in the present 
case cold and hot. They come to rest in That Place which is beyond the opposites, and which 
is ‘experienced’ by kingfishers as a jeweled mansion and by ducks as a golden palace. 

3. That is, they do not grasp the true significance of Tozan’s teaching on the Five Positions, 
which ultimately transcends the duality of the transient and the Absolute. 



Shobogenzo: On Spring and Autumn: Warming Up and Cooling Down 


749 


be able to grasp Tozan’s intention right off. I cannot help but add the 
following comment in verse: 

When he looked inside himself, there was no cold or hot, 

For, in an instant, the vast ocean had dried up to its very last 
drop. 

I say that I can catch the Great Turtle by just picking It up, 

But I can’t help laughing as you go fishing for It in the sand. 

For the moment, let’s say that there is a game of Go. Well, how about these two 
players? If we call it ‘a two-person game of Go’, there could be an eight-stone 
handicap. If there is an eight-stone handicap, it would hardly be a game of Go, 
would it? But if I were to describe it, it would be something like the following: the 
game of Go is simply a player and his opponent encountering each other. Be that as 
it may, you should keep in mind Wanshi’s statement, “If you do not respond 
according to the move I made,” focusing on it single-mindedly and, while cloaking 
yourself in it, make a thorough exploration of it. His saying “If you do not respond 
according to the move I made” is equivalent to his saying “You can never be me.” 
Do not pass over his saying, “I will have caught you off guard.” Within mud, there 
is the mud. The one who walks in it washes his feet, and also washes his 
chinstrap. 4 5 Within a pearl, there is the Pearl. When It is radiant, It illumines both 
oneself and others. 

djb 


Meditation Master Kassan Engo was a Dharma heir of Meditation Master 
Goso Hoen. He once said in verse: 

The bowl sets the pearl to rolling and the pearl rolls in 
the bowl: 

The transitory within the Absolute and the Absolute 
within the transitory . 6 

The antelope holds onto a tree branch by its horns, 
thereby leaving no trace. 

When the hunting dogs circle the forest, uncertain, they 

n 

seek it in vain. 


4. The Great Turtle is a metaphor for Buddha Nature. 

5. That is, when you go through the mud of training to spiritually aid others, you do not stop at 
your ankles but go all the way up to your chin. 

6. These two assertions are the first two of the five positions. 



Shobogenzo: On Spring and Autumn: Warming Up and Cooling Down 


750 


The expression here, “the bowl sets the pearl to rolling,” is unprecedented and 
incomparable. It has rarely been heard in past or present. Hitherto, people have 
merely spoken as if the pearl rolling around in the bowl were something unceasing. 
The antelope is now using his horns to hang onto Emptiness, and the Forest is now 
circling the hunting dogs. 

cSb 

CX) 


Meditation Master Setcho Juken of Shisho Monastery in Keigen City was a 
Dharma heir of Venerable Abbot Chimon Koso. He once said in verse: 

The dangling of the Master s hands, on the contrary, is 
like a veritable cliff ten thousand feet high. 

Why do the transitory and the Absolute necessarily need 
to be offered a fixed place? 

When the bright moon illumines the ancient palace of 
lapis lazuli, 

The keen black hound, in eager pursuit, vainly bounds up 
its stairs . 7 8 


7. It is said that when the reiyd (C. ling-yang ), a type of antelope, sleeps at night, it uses its 
horns to hoist itself up onto a tree branch. By keeping its legs above the ground, it leaves no 
trace of its whereabouts, so that hunting dogs cannot find it. This metaphor is used in 
Chinese Zen to describe someone who has dropped off body and mind, and thereby leaves 
no trace of an egocentric self for ‘hunting dogs’ to attack. 

8. ‘Dangling hands’ refers to an ancient Chinese practice of raising children without using 
physical coercion. In Zen, it was used to refer to a Master’s approach to training a disciple. 
Despite the seeming gentleness, it ultimately leads to the disciple ending up at the top of a 
high cliff, from which he needs to take responsibility for his actions and to step off in full 
faith. When taking such an action, he is no longer in the position of guest looking up to the 
Master (host position), but has assumed the host position (acting as a Master acts). This 
resembles the shift in the Five Positions from the perspective of the transitory to that of the 
Absolute. This is possible because the positioning of Master and disciple is not absolutely 
fixed. 

Until this shift takes place, the disciple is like a kanro (C. han-lu), a type of black hunting 
dog associated with a small state in China named Han that flourished during the era of the 
Warring States (440-221 BCE). This highly intelligent dog was used to hunt down rabbits. In 
the present poem, the last two lines could be paraphrased as the following: When Buddha 
Nature shines forth like the full moon, It illumines all transitory things. A disciple, one who 
is as keen as a hunting dog, may attempt to pursue the Buddha Nature, but becomes 



Shobogenzo: On Spring and Autumn: Warming Up and Cooling Down 


751 


Setcho Juken was a third generation Dharma heir of Ummon. He could be 
described as a skin bag* who knew the full satisfaction of having awakened. In 
saying “The dangling of the Master’s hands, on the contrary, is like a veritable cliff 
ten thousand feet high,” he reveals an extraordinarily wondrous standard. Even so, 
dangling hands may not necessarily be as he describes. The present account of the 
monk asking Tozan what he was pointing to is not necessarily about hands 
dangling or hands not dangling or about renouncing the world or not renouncing 
the world. Even less does it make use of expressions about the transitory and the 
Absolute. It is as though people could not lay a hand on this story without making 
use of the perspective of the transitory and the Absolute. It is like their not having 
been led by the nose to pay a visit to their Master to ask for instruction and, 
consequently, they do not arrive at the border of our Founding Ancestor’s domain. 
They therefore fail to catch sight of the great ones of the Buddha Dharma in our 
monastic family. What is more, they should gather up their straw sandals and go 
pay visits to other Masters. And they should stop going around slandering the 
Buddha Dharma of our Founding Ancestor by saying that It is limited to the five 
positions of the Absolute and the transitory. 


Meditation Master Chorei Shutaku of Tennei Monastery in the Eastern 
Capital once said in verse: 

Within the relative, there is the Absolute; within the 
Absolute, the transitory, 

As centuries by the thousands have drifted by within the 
human realm. 

How many times have I desired to go back, yet have not 
been able to turn back time. 

Before my gate, as of old, how luxuriant the weeds! 

Though he also gave full expression to the transitory and the Absolute, 
nevertheless he has picked up on something. Without denying that he has picked 
up on something, what is It that exists within the transitory? 


confused and mistakes the illumined palace of lapis lazuli (the transitory) for what is Real 
(the Absolute, represented by the Moon) and vainly chases after that. 



Shobogenzo: On Spring and Autumn: Warming Up and Cooling Down 


752 


djb 

CX) 

Abbot Bussho Hotai of Mount Daii in Tanchou Province was a Dharma heir 
of Engo. He once said in verse: 

For my sake as a monk, you, Tozan, showed me the place 
beyond cold and hot, 

And once again a dead tree brought forth a blossom. 

People who scratch a mark on their boat in order to 
locate their sword are laughable indeed ! 9 
To this very day they are still among the cold ashes. 

This expression of his has a bit of the ability to activate one’s spiritual question and 
to pierce right through it. 

c£b 


Meditation Master Tando Bunjun of Rokutan once said in verse: 

At times of heat, you gave yourself up to heat and, at 
times of cold, you gave yourself up to cold. 

You did not involve yourself with the whys and 
wherefores of cold and heat. 

Having done the practice until you saw what the whole 
wide world really is and remembering what 
worldly matters really are, 

Your head, my dear Master Tozan, was crowned with a 
boar s-hide cap . 10 

So, right now, let me ask, what for heaven’s sake does he mean by not involving 
himself? Quickly say! Quickly spit it out! 


9. An allusion to a story in the Chinese classic, Spring and Autumn Chronicles, from which the 
title of this discourse derives. A man once lost his sword while sailing down a river. He 
made a scratch on the side of his boat to mark the spot where the sword fell overboard. 
Despite his efforts to retrieve the sword by looking for it beneath the place where he had 
scratched, he failed to find it, as the boat had drifted downstream. 

10. ‘Master’, here, refers to someone who is beyond ‘heat and cold’, someone who is at one 
with True Nature. ‘The boar’s-hide cap’ refers to that which is both hot and cold, since it 
keeps the head warm when the weather is cold. The transitory heat and cold simply ride 
above his True Nature. 



Shobogenzo: On Spring and Autumn: Warming Up and Cooling Down 


753 


djb 

CX) 

Meditation Master Kazan Shujun of Huchou Province was a Dharma heir of 
Zen Master Taihei Bukkan Egon. He once said in verse: 

The place beyond cold and hot is what Tdzan spoke of, 

But ever so many meditators wander off from there. 

When it is cold, I just huddle by the fire; when it is hot, I 
take advantage of whatever is cool. 

All my life, I have been able to escape, warding off both 
cold and heat. 

Although this Master is a Dharma grandson of Meditation Master Goso Hoen, his 
words are like those of a small child. Even so, his saying “All my life, I have been 
able to escape, warding off both cold and heat” shows promise of his becoming an 
excellent Master later on. His saying ‘all my life’ means ‘with my whole being’ and 
‘warding off both cold and heat’ means ‘dropping off body and mind’. 

Speaking more generally, even though there have been monastics from ever 
so many districts and ever so many generations who have beat their drum on both 
sides, making offerings of eulogies to the ancients, they have not yet caught even a 
glimpse of what our Founding Ancestor Tozan was talking about. Were you to ask 
why, it is because they have not known what ‘cold’ and ‘hot’ mean in the everyday 
life of an Ancestor of the Buddha. So indeed, they vainly speak of huddling by the 
fire and of taking advantage of whatever is cool. The more the pity that you, 
Shujun, even though living amidst venerable senior monks, did not hearken to 
what ‘cold’ and ‘heat’ meant. How regrettable that what our Ancestral Master 
Tozan said has been abandoned! When we truly know the forms of this ‘cold’ and 
‘hot’, and have passed through periods of ‘cold’ and ‘hot’, and have continually 
made use of ‘cold’ and ‘hot’, it is then that we should make eulogies to the ancients 
and make commentaries on what our Founding Ancestor Tozan’s words were 
pointing to for our sakes. Those who have not gone this far cannot even compare 
with those who know their own shortcomings. Even the worldly are aware of the 
sun and moon and rely upon the myriad things that arise. And they distinguish 
among themselves between those who are saintly and those who are wise, as well 
as between those who are gentle folk and those who are foolish people. Do not 
make a mistake and mix up the ‘cold and hot’ that Buddhas speak of with the ‘cold 
and hot’ of foolish people. You need simply to be diligent in your practice 
forthwith. 

Delivered to the assembly a second time in the second year of the Kangen era (1244), whilst 
deep in the mountains of Echizen Province. 



Shobogenzo: On Spring and Autumn: Warming Up and Cooling Down 


754 


I was expounding to the monks the teaching of revolving the Buddhist “Kirin Sutra” when one 
encounters a Buddha. As an Ancestral Master once said, “Although there may be many 
in the assembly who have sprouted a horn, one kirin will suffice. ” 


11. The Kirin Sutra is an alternative name for the Spring and Autumn Chronicles, the only work 
directly attributed to Confucius. Dogen may be expounding what he considers to be a 
Buddhist equivalent of that text. The kirin (C. ch’i-lin) is a fabulous, auspicious beast, 
considered to be the Far East equivalent of a unicorn. It has the body of a deer, the tail of an 
ox, the hooves of a horse, and one fleshy hom, with the hair on its back of varied colors and 
yellow hair on its stomach. It is a metaphor for a Dhanna heir who is highly skilled in 
innumerable means to help others to realize the Truth. 

12. This saying by Seigen Gyoshi means that it is fine to have many extraordinary disciples, but 
having just one Dharma heir will suffice. 



65 

On Why Our Ancestral Master Came from the West 

(Soshi Seirai I) 


Translator’s Introduction: This short discourse focuses on the question that each trainee is 
presumably keeping in mind at all times: why have I come to train? This is the spiritual question 
that penneates everything that the trainee is doing. It is what the trainee needs to get his teeth 
into and to hold onto, like someone holding onto the branch of a tree with his mouth as he 
dangles over a thousand foot cliff. It is the Great Matter of life and death, the willingness to risk 
life and limb in order to realize the Truth. 


Great Master Kyogen Chikan was a Dharma heir of Great 
Master Isan Reiyu. He once said to his assembly, “Imagine someone 
climbing up a tree at the edge of a thousand-foot-high cliff . 1 He grabs 
hold of a branch with his mouth, since he cannot get a hold with his 
feet and he is unable to pull himself up with his hands. Just at that 
moment, a man at the bottom of the tree asks him, ‘Why did 
Bodhidharma come from the West?’ At such a time, were he to open 
his mouth to answer the man, he would lose his grip and forfeit his 
life. Were he not to answer, he would make a mistake due to the 
nature of what was asked . 2 Speak up! What, for goodness sake, should 
he do at such a time?” 

At that moment, a novice monk named Koto Sho came forth 
from the assembly and said, “I have no question about the time when 
the man has gone up the tree but, Venerable Monk, please tell me, 
what about the time before he has climbed the tree?” 

The Master thereupon broke out in uproarious laughter. 

Although this dialogue has sparked many discussions and commentaries, few of 
them have expressed its essence. I am afraid that people, by and large, have been 
bewildered by it. Even so, in thinking about it, if you make use of ‘not deliberately 
thinking about it’, as well as of ‘not deliberately thinking about anything’, your 

1. ‘Climbing a tree’ is a metaphor for doing one’s training and practice. 

2. That is, by not answering a spiritual question, he would be acting contrary to the 
Bodhisattva vow to spiritually help all sentient beings. 


755 



Shobogenzo: On Why Our Ancestral Master Came from the West 


756 


efforts on your meditation cushion will naturally be like those of our dear old 
friend Kyogen . 3 When you sit as still as a mountain on your own cushion, as our 
dear friend Kyogen has already done, you too will be exploring this dialogue in 
detail with him, even though he has not yet opened his mouth. Not only will you be 
making free use of our dear Kyogen’s Eye to look upon the dialogue, but you will 
also be using It to break through and see the meaning of Shakyamuni Buddha’s 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. 


Imagine someone climbing up a tree at the edge of a thousand- 
foot-high cliff. 

We need to thoroughly explore these words in a quiet manner. Who is it that he is 
calling a ‘someone’? We should not say that whoever is not a temple pillar must 
necessarily be called ‘a piece of lumber’. Even though it was the exalted face of the 
Buddha along with the face of our Great Ancestor Makakasho that broke into 
smiles, we should not overlook the fact that we ourselves, as well as others, can 
also experience this mutual recognition. The place where the person was climbing 
up the tree was not the whole of the great earth, nor was it the top of a hundred- 
foot pole. It was a thousand-foot-high cliff. Even should the climber fall off the 
tree, it would still be within the context of a thousand-foot-high cliff. There are 
times when one falls and there are times when one climbs. In saying “Imagine 
someone climbing up a tree at the edge of a thousand-foot-high cliff,” we need to 
recognize that we are saying that there is a time when one is climbing. During that 
time, the climber is a thousand feet up and it is a thousand feet down. It is a 
thousand feet on the left and it is a thousand feet on the right. It is also a thousand 
feet from here and a thousand feet from there. Such a climber, as well as the tree 
being climbed, is also a thousand feet. The foregoing thousand feet will be just like 
this. Were you to ask me, “Just how much is a thousand feet,” I would answer, “It 
is like the diameter of the Old Mirror, like the width of the Fireplace, or like the 
height of a monk’s Seamless Stupa.” 4 


3. The two methods Dogen is recommending derive from a narrative concerning Abbot 
Yakusan Igen, which Dogen quotes at the beginning of Discourse 26: On Wanshi’s ‘Kindly 
Advice for Doing Seated Meditation’ (.Zazen Shin). 

* See Glossary. 

4. That is, like the three examples, it is beyond measure. The ‘Old Mirror’ refers to the whole 
universe which, although limitless, constantly reflects the activity of our own mind. The 
‘Fireplace’ is immeasurable because, when the fires of karmic consequence arise, the size of 



Shobogenzo: On Why Our Ancestral Master Came from the West 


757 


djb 

CX) 

He grabs hold of a branch with his mouth. 

Just what is this ‘mouth’? Even if we do not know the expanse of the whole Mouth 
itself, we may, just for the present, discover the whereabouts of the Mouth by 
moving along a branch of the tree, thoroughly exploring the branch by nipping off 
its leaves. It may be that by the very act of gripping the branch of the tree, his 
Mouth has taken form. Consequently, the whole of his Mouth is the tree: the whole 
of the tree is his Mouth. His whole body, through and through, is his Mouth: his 
whole Mouth, through and through, is his body. Because the tree already has a hold 
on itself, the Master said that the man’s feet could not get a hold on the tree, which 
is like saying that the man’s feet could not get a hold on his own feet. Because the 
branches are pulling themselves up with their branches, the Master said that the 
man was unable to pull himself up with his hands, which is like his saying that the 
man’s hands were pulling his own hands up. Even so, his feet still go forward and 
back, and his hands still make a fist and open a fist . 5 Now, people may well think 
of the man as dangling in space, but how could dangling in space be an 
improvement on grabbing hold of a branch with his Mouth? 


Just at that moment, a man at the bottom of the tree asks him, 

“Why did Bodhidharma come from the West?” 

To say that there was a person at the bottom of the tree at that moment is as if the 
Master had said that there was a person who was inside the tree, as if there was 
something called a ‘human tree’. To say that underneath the climber at that very 
moment there was a human being who was asking a question would be to express 
that very thing. Accordingly, it is ‘a tree asking a tree’ and ‘a man asking a man’. It 
is ‘the whole tree itself asking the whole question’ and ‘the whole intent behind 
Bodhidharma coming from the West’ asking ‘why he came from the West’. The 
one who is asking the question is the very Mouth grabbing hold of a branch and 
then asking. If the Mouth were not grabbing hold of the branch, there could be no 
asking of a question, nor any voice to fill the mouth, nor any mouth that was filled 


the fireplace is irrelevant in the face of the pain experienced. In construction and sewing, 
measurements are made along the seams of an object; therefore, a ‘Seamless Stupa’ is 
beyond our ability to measure. 

5. That is, even though the trainee may not yet have awakened fully, he may still be able to 
give expression to the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On Why Our Ancestral Master Came from the West 


758 


with speech. When we truly ask why Bodhidharma came from the West, we ask by 
getting our teeth into why he came from the West. 


Were he to open his mouth to answer the man, he would lose 

his grip and forfeit his life. 

Now you need to become intimately familiar with the words, “Were he to open his 
mouth to answer the man, he would lose his grip and forfeit his life.” It sounds at 
first as if the man could actually answer the other without opening his mouth. If 
this were really the case, he would not lose his grip and forfeit his life. Even 
though he has the choice between opening his mouth and not opening it, this 
choice will not interfere with his Mouth’s ability to grab hold of the tree branch. 
Opening and closing are not necessarily the only functions of the Mouth, and the 
mouth is capable of both opening and closing. Thus, grabbing hold of the branch is 
the everyday behavior of our whole Mouth and it will not interfere with the 
mouth’s opening and closing. Is ‘opening one’s mouth to answer another’ the same 
as ‘disgorging the tree branch to answer another’ or the same as ‘disclosing the 
intent behind Bodhidharma’s coming from the West to answer another’? If the 
climber does not disclose the intent behind ‘Bodhidharma’s coming from the West’ 
in order to answer another, then he is not answering the question that was asked. 

Not to have answered another is to grasp hold of life with one’s whole 
being; it cannot be called ‘losing one’s grip and forfeiting one’s life ’. 6 And if one 
has already released his grip and forfeited his life, there will not be any answering 
of the question. Even so, Kyogen’s heart did not refuse to answer others; in all 
likelihood he had already loosened his grip and forfeited his life. Keep in mind that 
when we refuse to answer others, we are protecting ourselves and holding onto our 
life. When we answer in a flash, we turn ourselves around spiritually and activate 
our True Life. Clearly, what fills the mouth of each and every person is the Truth. 
We should answer others, and we should answer ourselves; we should ask others, 
and we should ask ourselves. This is our Mouth holding onto the Truth, for it is our 
Mouth holding onto the Truth that Kyogen calls ‘holding onto the branch’. When 
you give your answer to others, you open the Mouth within your mouth. If you do 
not answer them, even though this may not be in accord with what they are asking, 
it will be in accord with what you yourself are asking. 

So, you need to realize that all the Buddhas and Ancestors have both asked 
and answered the question as to why Bodhidharma came from the West, and They 


6. That is, it cannot be called ‘dropping off body and mind’. 



Shobogenzo: On Why Our Ancestral Master Came from the West 


759 


have all experienced the moment of being up a tree holding onto a branch with 
Their Mouth, and They all continue to give the answer. 


The Venerable Abbot Setcho Juken once said in verse: 

It is easy to speak while high up a tree, 

It is hard to speak while beneath a tree, 

This old monk has climbed that tree, 

So come on, ask your question! 

Now, in response to his “Come on, ask your question!” it would be so sad if you 
were to employ all your strength and then ask your question too late, for your 
question will have come after his answer. Let me ask all the old sharp ones of past 
and present, “Is Kyogen’s uproarious laughter what he uttered whilst up the tree, or 
is it what he uttered whilst beneath the tree? Does it answer why Bodhidharma 
came from the West or not?” Let’s see if you can give it a try! 

Delivered to the assembly on the fourth day of the second lunar month in the second year of the 
Kangen era (March 14, 1244), whilst deep in the mountains ofEchizen Province. 


Copied on the twenty-second day of the sixth lunar month in the second year of the Koan era 
(August 2, 1279), whilst at Eihei-ji Monastery on Mount Kichijo. 



66 

On the Udumbara Blossom 

(Udonge) 


Translator’s Introduction: The udumbara tree is said to bloom once every three thousand 
years. It is used to illustrate how rare it is for a Buddha such as Shakyamuni to appear in the 
world, though many other Buddhas will arise as a result of Shakyamuni’s awakening. Although 
there is a Buddhist tradition that understands His holding the udumbara blossom aloft as a literal 
fact, there is another tradition which understands this as His holding aloft the flowering of His 
Buddha Nature for all to see, and that His disciple Makakasho’s breaking into a smile of 
recognition was his way of displaying his own Buddha Nature. All the others who were present 
on that occasion apparently assumed that only Shakyamuni Buddha could have Buddha Nature, 
whereas no one else could possibly have It. 

Before an assembly of millions on Vulture Peak, the World- 
honored One held aloft an udumbara flower, His eyes atwinkle. At 
that time, Makakasho’s face broke into a smile. The World-honored 
One then said, “I have the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching, which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana, and I bestow It on 
Makakasho.” 

Just as all other Buddhas have done, the Seven Buddhas* have likewise held aloft 
the Flower. Through Their practice and awakening, They too have manifested the 
raising and holding aloft of Their Flower. 

Thus, Their holding the Flower aloft encompasses the picking up of all 
Flowers by all Buddhas together, regardless of whether the Flowers are being 
raised or lowered, whether done in recognition of one’s own Buddha Nature or of 
other’s, whether pointing within or pointing without. This is the measure of the 
Flower, the measure of a Buddha, the measure of a mind, the measure of a body. 
No matter how many times the Flower has been held aloft, each instance has been 
a Transmitting of Truth to each and every genuine Dharma heir, for this is the very 
essence of Transmission. Once the Buddha held His Flower aloft, He never parted 
from It. And once the Flower held aloft the World-honored One, at that moment the 
World-honored One became the Flower’s Dharma heir. Because the time when 
one’s Flower is held aloft is the whole of time, the whole of time is in harmony 
both with the World-honored One and with the holding aloft of one’s Flower. 


* See Glossary. 


760 



Shobogenzo: On the Udumbara Blossom 


761 


‘The holding aloft of one’s Flower’ is the Flower holding the flower aloft; it 
is represented by such things as the plum blossom, the spring blossoms, the snow- 
covered blossoms, and the lotus blossom. The five petals displayed by the plum 
blossom are the more than three hundred and sixty other assemblies wherein He 
voiced the Dharma, the five thousand and forty-eight volumes of the Scriptures, the 
Three Vehicles,* the twelve divisions of the Canon, and the bodhisattva* stage of 
being ‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’.* Accordingly, it is beyond the stage of 
just being thrice wise and ten times saintly. The Great Treasure House with Its 
extraordinary wonders exists, about which it is said, “When the Flower comes into 
bloom, the whole world arises.” We call the effects of the five petals which open 
together as one flower ‘the natural realization of the Truth’, for it is the whole of 
oneself already being adorned with the whole of one’s Self. Reiun Shingon’s losing 
his worldly eyes upon seeing peach blossoms and Kyogen Chilean’s having his 
worldly hearing disappear at the sound of a pebble striking against a cane of 
bamboo are instances of their holding the Flower aloft. Great Master Eka’s 
standing waist deep in snow and ‘cutting off’ his arm, and then later doing 
prostrations after having realized what Bodhidharma’s Marrow is, was the natural 
opening of his Flower . 1 Eno’s pounding rice in a stone mortar until it was purely 
white and then receiving Daiman Konin’s kesa* in the middle of the night 
demonstrated his having already held the Flower aloft. Examples such as these are 
the roots of Life itself being held within the hands of the World-honored One. 

Speaking more generally, holding the Flower aloft already existed before the 
World-honored One had realized the Truth, and it existed at the same time as the 
World-honored One’s realizing the Truth, and it continues to exist even after the 
World-honored One’s realization of the Truth. Accordingly, the Flower is the 
realizing of the Truth. The holding of the Flower aloft goes far beyond these 
divisions of time. The Buddhas’ and Ancestors’ giving rise to the intention to 
realize the Truth, Their taking a first step, Their practicing until They awoke, and 
Their preserving the Truth well have all been instances of Flowers being held aloft, 
dancing like butterflies on the breezes of spring. Thus, because the World-honored 
Gautama put His Body into a Flower and concealed His Body within Space, we 
call His ability to grab hold of His Nose and to grab hold of Unbounded Space ‘His 
holding aloft His Flower’. Holding aloft the Flower is holding It aloft with one’s 
Eye, holding It aloft with the consciousness of one’s mind, holding It aloft with 
one’s Nose, and holding It aloft by one’s holding aloft a flower. 


1. This reference to Eka’s cutting off his ann may refer to giving up one’s attachments rather 
than to a literal, physical act. 



Shobogenzo: On the Udumbara Blossom 


762 


Generally speaking, the great earth with its mountains and rivers, as well as 
the sun, moon, wind, and rain, along with humans and animals, grasses and trees, 
are all being held aloft. Namely, they are the holding aloft of the udumbara flower. 
Birth and death, coming and going, are also varieties of the Flower. Indeed, they 
are the brilliant radiance of the Flower. When we explore the Matter* in this way, 
we continue to hold our Flower aloft. 


The Buddha once said, “It is like the udumbara flower, which All of Us love 
and delight in.” His saying ‘All’ refers to Buddhas and Ancestors, both those who 
reveal Themselves and Those who do not. Theirs is a presence of brilliant radiance, 
one which grasses and trees, insects and bugs inherently possess. All of us who 
love this radiance and delight in it describe it as the Skin and Flesh, Bones and 
Marrow of all beings as they go about like fish freely disporting in the water. 
Hence, each and every one of us is ultimately an udumbara blossom, a condition 
that some call ‘being rare indeed’! 

‘His eyes atwinkle’ describes the occasion when the Buddha was sitting in 
meditation at the base of the Bodhi tree and He exchanged His worldly eyes for the 
brightness of the Morning Star. And there was the occasion when Makakasho’s 
face broke into a smile. He had already broken into the smile, exchanging it for the 
face of one who was holding his Flower aloft. At that moment when the 
Tathagata’s eyes twinkled, we quickly lost our worldly eyes. This twinkling of the 
Tathagata’s eyes was His holding the Flower aloft. The udumbara blossom 
signifies the natural opening up of one’s heart. 

At the very moment of the flower being held aloft, all Gautamas, all 
Makakashos, all sentient beings, all of us, all together, are extending our hands and 
holding our Flower aloft, and this practice has not ceased even to the present day. 
Further, because we are in a meditative state in which our whole being keeps itself 
within our hands, we call this ‘being’ the four elements* and the five skandhas .* 2 3 

The Buddha’s ‘what I have’ refers to what He bestows on others and what 
He confers becomes their ‘what I have’. Of necessity, what is given is restricted to 
what it is that He has. 


2. ‘Our whole being keeps itself within our hands’ refers to our focusing our consciousness 
within our hands, which are being held in the traditional manner while doing seated 
meditation. 

3. Namely, the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, which is the Wondrous Heart 
of Nirvana. 



Shobogenzo: On the Udumbara Blossom 


763 


Your ‘what I have’ is your crowning glory. When you hold your ‘what I 
have’ aloft and exchange it, in turn, for ‘what I give you,’ you are keeping to the 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. Bodhidharma’s coming from the 
West was his coming to hold the Flower aloft. His holding the Flower aloft is 
called his delighting in single-minded pursuit of the Way. Delighting in single- 
minded pursuit of the Way means just control yourself and sit there, dropping off 
body and mind. Becoming a Buddha or an Ancestor is called delighting in single- 
minded pursuit of the Way, and putting on one’s clothes and eating one’s meals is 
also called delighting in single-minded pursuit of the Way. In short, the most 
important matter for Buddhas and Ancestors is, without doubt, delighting in single- 
minded pursuit of the Way. 

When those in the Buddha Hall mutually encounter each other spiritually 
and when those in the Monks’ Hall also encounter each other spiritually, they all 
become more and more endowed with variety in their flowerings, and these 
flowerings become ever more intense in their hues . 4 And what is more, within the 
Monks’ Hall the wooden han is now taken and struck, reverberating to the clouds, 
while in the Buddha Hall the bamboo sho is now blown, reverberating to the 
bottom of the water . 5 At just such times, my late Master might inadvertently begin 
to recite a melodious poem about plum blossoms, such as the following: 

When Gautama lost his worldly eyes, 

Only a single branch of plum blossoms appeared amidst 
the snow. 

Now everywhere new branches have sprung up 
And, laughing, I delight in the spring wind s scattering 
petals in wild disarray. 

The Tathagata’s worldly eyes have inadvertently become a Plum Blossom, while 
the plum blossoms have now become thorny twigs, sprouting up everywhere. The 
Tathagata keeps His True Self hidden within His Eye, and His Eye keeps Its True 
Self hidden within the plum blossom, and the plum blossoms keep their True Self 


4. The Buddha Hall is the place in the monastery where ceremonies are performed, with senior 
monks doing the perfonning. Thus, ‘those in the Buddha Hall’ is associated with senior 
monks and ‘those in the Monks’ Hall’ is associated with novices. 

5. A han is a wooden plate, or block, that is struck like a gong, whereas the sho is an organ-like 
wind instrument, producing dense, reedy chords. The clouds (J. un) and water (J. sui) refer 
to novice monks, who are commonly called unsui. Such reverberant, penetrating 
instrumental sounds are employed in monasteries to aid trainees in shaking themselves free 
from holding onto body and mind. 



Shobogenzo: On the Udumbara Blossom 


764 


hidden within the thorny twigs. The plum blossoms, in response, are now blowing 
in the spring breeze. Even though this is how things are, it is in peach blossoms 
that my Master took his delight and joy. 


My late Master, the Old Buddha Tendo, once said in verse, 

What Reiun saw were peach blossoms opening : 6 
What I see are peach blossoms scattering. 

Keep in mind that the opening of peach blossoms is what Reiun saw. He expressed 
it in his poem as, “And straightaway—at that very moment—I arrived, never again 
to be in doubt.” The falling of the petals of the peach blossoms is what Tendo 
himself saw. The opening of peach blossoms is aroused by the breezes of spring. 
These winds abhor the scattering of the blossoms’ petals. Even though the spring 
winds abhor the peach blossoms scattering thus, this scattering may well equate 
with the dropping off of body and mind. 

Delivered to the assembly on the twelfth day of the second lunar month in the second year of the 
Kangen era (March 22, 1244), whilst at Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province. 

Copied on the sixth day of the second lunar month in the third year of Showa (February 20, 
1314). 


6. The reference to Reiun Shigon is to his poem that capped his kensho: 

Thirty years I sought for Him, the Good Friend with His Sword of 
Wisdom: 

For so many rounds have the leaves fallen and the branches burst 
anew with blooms! 

But just one glance at those peach blossoms 

And straightaway—at that very moment—I arrived, never again to 
be in doubt. 



67 

On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 

(Hotsu Mujo Shin) 


Translator’s Introduction: This discourse was given on the same day as was Discourse 85: On 
Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind {Hotsu Bodai Shin). Considering the passage that describes 
how alms should be given to monastics, it is likely that this talk was given for Dogen’s lay 
disciples. 

An important aspect of this discourse is Dogen’s opening remarks concerning metaphors, 
which offers a clue as to his use of such terms as a blade of grass, trees, tiles, stones, fences, 
walls, stupas, images of Buddhas, and Buddhas, all of which can readily be understood as 
references to what is experienced in terms of training disciples. 


Our Highest Ancestor in India, Shakyamuni Buddha, once said, “The snow¬ 
capped Himalayas are a metaphor for the great nirvana.” You need to know that He 
is speaking metaphorically about something that can be metaphoric. ‘Something 
that can be metaphoric’ implies that the mountains and nirvana are somehow 
intimately connected and that they are connected in a straightforward manner. 
When He uses the term ‘snow-capped Himalayas’, He is using the actual snow¬ 
capped Himalayas as a metaphor, just as when He uses the term ‘great nirvana’, He 
is using the actual great nirvana as a metaphor. 


Our First Ancestor in China, Bodhidharma, once said, “Any mind and all 
minds are like trees and stones.” ‘Mind’ here means ‘mind just as it is’. It is the 
mind that encompasses the whole of the great earth. Therefore, it is the mind of self 
and the mind of other. Any mind and all minds—those of ordinary worldly 
humans, those of the Buddhas and Ancestors of the whole universe in all ten 
directions, those of celestial and demonic beings, among others—are precisely like 
trees and stones, and there is no mind apart from this. These ‘trees and stones’ are 
not made captive by the bonds of ‘existence versus non-existence’ or ‘emptiness 
versus form’. By means of this mind of trees and stones, we give rise to the Mind 
that both seeks the Way and does the practice to awaken to It, because these are the 
trees of our Mind and the stones of our Mind. With the aid of these trees and stones 
of our Mind, we bring forth what we are thinking about here and now based upon 
not deliberately thinking about anything in particular. Not until we have 


765 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 


766 


encountered what our tradition voices concerning the trees and stones of our Mind 
can we go beyond the various teachings that non-Buddhists propagate. Before then, 
we are not on the Buddha’s Way. 

djb 

The National Teacher Echu once said, “The tiles* and stones of our walls 
and fences are precisely what the mind of Old Buddhas is.” We should investigate 
in detail where, precisely, these tiles and stones of our walls and fences are, and we 
need to ask ourselves what it is that has appeared in this manner. ‘The mind of Old 
Buddhas’ is not something in the far-off fields of the Lord of Emptiness.* It is 
being satisfied with the morning gruel and being satisfied with the noontime meal. 
It is being satisfied with the grass and being satisfied with the water . 1 To treat your 
mind in this way and to sit like a Buddha and act like a Buddha is called ‘giving 
rise to the mind that seeks Buddhahood’. Speaking more generally, the causes and 
conditions for giving rise to the enlightened Mind do not come from any other 
place than the mind that seeks to be enlightened, for it is our very mind that is 
giving rise to the intention to search for Buddhahood. What we call ‘giving rise to 
the mind that seeks to be enlightened’ is the offering of a single blade of grass and 
thereby creating a Buddha, and it is the offering of a rootless tree and thereby 
creating a Scripture. It is giving alms to a Buddha by offering a handful of sand, 
and it is giving alms to a Buddha by offering rice water. It is offering a ball of rice 
to some sentient being or offering five flowers to the Tathagata. To practice some 
bit of good at the suggestion of another, and to do bows to the Buddha upon having 
been annoyed by some demon, these too are our giving rise to the mind that seeks 
to be enlightened. Not only that, it is knowing that one’s family home is not one’s 
True Home, and so forsaking home life, leaving family behind in order to enter a 
mountain monastery and practice the Way, either by relying on faith or upon one’s 
understanding. It is to fashion images of Buddhas and to fashion stupas.* It is to 
read the Scriptures and to keep the name of Buddha in mind. It is to give 
expression to the Dharma for the sake of all beings. It is to seek out a True Master 
and inquire of the Way. It is to sit in full lotus position, to bow to the Three 
Treasures, and to make “Homage to the Buddha” one’s sole invocation. 

The causes and conditions of the eighty thousand aggregates that make up 
the whole of the Dharma, as the preceding statements have expressed, are 


* See Glossary. 

1. Being satisfied with the grass and water describes a domesticated water buffalo, a metaphor 
for the contentment experienced by a well-trained and awakened trainee. 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 


767 


positively due to giving rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood. There are 
those who have given rise to the intention in their sleep while dreaming and have 
realized Buddhahood. And there are those who have given rise to the intention 
while in a drunken stupor and have realized Buddhahood. And there are those who 
have given rise to the intention and realized Buddhahood amidst flying flower 
petals or falling leaves. And there are those who have given rise to the intention 
and realized Buddhahood amidst peach blossoms or a bamboo grove. And there are 
those who have given rise to the intention and realized Buddhahood while high in 
the heavens. And there are those who have given rise to the intention and realized 
Buddhahood while deep within the ocean. In all these cases, they have given rise to 
the mind of enlightenment whilst within the enlightened Mind and have given rise 
to the mind of enlightenment whilst within body and mind. All Buddhas have 
given rise to an enlightened Mind whilst within body and mind, and They have 
given rise to an enlightened Mind whilst within the Skin and Flesh, Bones and 
Marrow of the Buddha’s Ancestor, Bodhidharma. 

Thus, our present-day fashioning of such things as stupas and images of 
Buddhas is undoubtedly due to our giving rise to our enlightened Mind; it is our 
giving rise to the intention to reach Buddhahood forthwith and without giving up 
midway. This spiritually beneficial activity is free of any attachments. It is a 
meritorious activity that is free of any striving. It enables us to see the True Nature 
of all things. This is seeing Dharma Nature. It is the meditative state that beckons 
to all the Buddhas. It is the invocation that finds all the Buddhas. It is the supreme, 
fully enlightened Mind. It is the fruition of arhathood.* It is the full manifestation 
of Buddhahood. Apart from this, there is no other method that is free of all 
attachments and free of any striving. 

At the same time, there are befuddled folks of the Lesser Course* who say: 

To fashion images of the Buddha and raise stupas is to 
undertake activities that involve attachments. We should put them 
aside and not engage in them. Bringing a halt to the functioning of the 
worldly, selfish mind and developing a tranquil spirit is what being 
free of attachments means. Being free from the cycle of arising and 
decay and being free from striving is what Reality is. Training oneself 
single-mindedly to see the Ultimate Reality of Buddha Nature is to be 
free of attachments. 

Talking in this way, they have made this their customary, worldly way of study in 
India and China in both the past and the present. Accordingly, they do not fashion 
images or raise stupas, even though they have been fostering serious breakages of 
Precepts. Caught in the thickets of sensory defilements, they sully themselves, yet 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 


768 


they fail to keep the name of Buddha in mind or to read the Scriptures. These are 
folks who have not only ruined their spiritual potential, which all humans of any 
sort have, but they have also dismissed out-of-hand the Buddha Nature of the 
Tathagata. Truly, how pitiful that at a time when they have encountered Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha, they have become sworn enemies of these Three Treasures. 
Though they have climbed on the mountain of the Three Treasures, they have 
returned empty-handed; though they have entered the ocean of the Three 
Treasures, they have returned empty-handed. Even were they to encounter a 
thousand Buddhas and ten thousand Ancestors coming into the world, there would 
be no hope of their realizing enlightenment, for they have lost the means for giving 
rise to that intention. Their situation is like this because they have not followed 
what is written in the Scriptures or followed a reliable spiritual guide. The situation 
of many people is like this because they are following non-Buddhist ways and false 
teachers. You should quickly discard views and opinions such as “Fashioning such 
things as stupas has nothing to do with attaining spiritual wisdom.” Wash your 
mind clean, wash your body clean, wash your ears clean, wash your eyes clean, 
and you will neither look at nor pay attention to such views and opinions. Just 
follow the teachings of the Buddha, follow good spiritual guides, keep coming 
back to the True Teaching, and explore through your training with your Master 
what the Buddha Dharma is. 

In the Great Way of the Buddha Dharma, the Scriptures of the whole 
universe exist within a single mote of dust, and all the Buddhas beyond measure 
exist within a single mote of dust. There is not a tree or a blade of grass that is 
separate from our body and mind. When the myriad thoughts and things do not 
arise, our whole mind also does not arise, and since this is the True Form of all 
thoughts and things, It is the true form of every single mote of dust. Accordingly, 
our whole mind is all thoughts and things, and all thoughts and things are our 
whole mind, our whole being. If there were a time when such things as fashioning 
stupas involved attachments, then the enlightenment that is the fruit of 
Buddhahood and the Buddha Nature, which is what is real, would also involve 
attachments. Because that which is real, namely, the Buddha Nature, is not 
involved in attachments, the fashioning of Buddhist images and the raising of 
stupas likewise do not involve attachments. Buddha Nature is the mind that is free 
of attachments and whose intention is to realize Buddhahood; it is the meritorious 
activity that is free of attachments and free of delusions. You should firmly trust 
and understand that such things as the fashioning of Buddhist images and the 
raising of stupas are simply a manifestation of the mind that seeks enlightenment. 
Such efforts to fulfill the wish to help rescue all sentient beings have been fostered 
over millions of eons, for they are the giving rise to the intention to realize 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 


769 


Buddhahood over millions and millions of eons. We call this encountering Buddha 
and hearkening to His Teaching. 

You need to keep in mind that gathering wood and stones, collecting up mud 
and earth, gathering gold and silver, as well as the seven precious jewels,* in order 
to fashion an image of the Buddha or to raise a stupa, and the gathering up of one’s 
whole mind in order to fashion a stupa or fashion an image are our piling the 
Boundless upon the boundless to create a Buddha, our holding aloft the Mind of 
the mind to fashion a Buddha, our piling a stupa upon the Stupa to fashion a stupa, 
our making manifest the Buddhahood of a Buddha to fashion a Buddha. This is 
why the Lotus Scripture says, “When we pay attention to such matters, all the 
Buddhas in the ten quarters appear.” Understand that when one person realizes 
Buddhahood by paying attention to such matters, all the Buddhas in the ten 
quarters appear by paying attention to such matters. And when one person realizes 
Buddhahood by one thought or thing, it is all thoughts and things realizing 
Buddhahood. 

djb 

CX) 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “When I saw the morning star emerge, I was 
enlightened simultaneously with the whole of the great earth and all its sentient 
beings.” Accordingly, giving rise to the intention, doing the training and practice, 
awakening, and realizing nirvana will be giving rise to the intention, doing the 
training and practice, awakening, and realizing nirvana, and all at the same time. 
The body and mind of which the Buddha spoke encompasses grasses and trees, 
tiles and stones, as well as wind and rain, water and fire. Finding ways to make use 
of these in order to help realize what the Buddha said is precisely what giving rise 
to the intention to realize Buddhahood is. Fashion your stupas and your images of 
Buddha by taking hold of the Unbounded, and fashion your images of Buddha and 
your stupas by using both your hands to scoop up Water from the mountain stream, 
for such actions are your giving rise to supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. 
And so, throughout hundreds of thousands of myriad eons, this is how one 
person’s giving rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood manifests, which is the 
same as doing the training and awakening to the Truth. 

At the same time, when you hear that giving rise to the intention to realize 
Buddhahood is a one-time thing, after which one does not experience the rising of 
the intention again, and that even though one’s training and practice are beyond 
measure, the fruits of awakening are a one-time event, you are not hearing the 
Buddha Dharma, you are not comprehending the Buddha Dharma, you are not 
encountering the Buddha Dharma. The intention that arises in the mind millions of 
times is, beyond doubt, an arising that is a singular arising of the intention. And the 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 


770 


arising of the intention in millions of people is a singular arising of the intention. 
And a singular arising of the intention is millions of arisings of the intention. 
Training and enlightenment, as well as turning the Wheel of the Dharma, are also 
just like this. And it is like this because, if you were unaware of such things as 
grasses and trees, how could you possibly have a body and a mind? And if you had 
no body or mind, how could you possibly know of grasses and trees? And if you 
were unaware of grasses and trees, there would be no grasses and trees for you . 2 3 
Practicing the Way by doing meditation is giving rise to the intention to realize 
Buddhahood. The arisings of the intention transcend sameness or difference. The 
instances of doing meditation transcend sameness or difference, and they transcend 
something occurring just two or three times, and they transcend being something to 
be rid of. You need to thoroughly explore each and every thing in this way. If the 
whole procedure, from beginning to end, of bringing together grasses and trees, as 
well as the seven treasures, in order to fashion stupas and Buddhist images were 
activities that involved attachments, then enlightenment would not be possible and 
the thirty-seven methods of training to realize enlightenment would also be 
activities that involve attachments. 

As to the matter of the body and mind of humans in the three temporal 
worlds—be they humble or lofty—if they were to undertake the training and 
practice whilst being all involved with attachments, it would not be possible for 
them to reach the Ultimate. Grasses and trees, tiles and stones, as well as the four 
elements* and the five skandhas,* are likewise ‘just mind’: they are likewise what 
the True Form of all things is. The whole universe in all ten quarters, as well as the 
True Nature of all things, which is Buddha Nature, are likewise manifestations of 
Truth. Within the True Nature of all things, which is Buddha Nature, how could 
there possibly be such things as grasses and trees? And how could such things as 
grasses and trees not be Buddha Nature, which is the True Nature of all things? All 
thoughts and things are not involved with attachments, nor are they free of 
attachments: they are the Real Form. The Real Form is the real form of all things 
just as they are, and being just as they are is synonymous with our body and mind 
at this very moment, here and now. By means of this body and mind of ours, we 
can give rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood. Therefore, do not despise 
treading on water or treading on rocks. While holding a single blade of grass aloft, 


2. ‘Grasses and trees’ is a Zen term for all manner of things that sprout up and flourish for a 
while. 

3. These thirty-seven methods are the topic of Discourse 70: On the Thirty-seven Methods of 
Training for Realizing Enlightenment (Sanjushichihon Bodai Bumpo). 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 


111 


we create a golden body sixteen feet high, and while holding aloft a single mote of 
dust, we construct a stupa for our dear Old Buddha. These activities are 
manifestations of our having given rise to the heart of Wisdom. It is our 
encountering Buddha, our heeding Buddha, our becoming Buddha, and our putting 
Buddha into practice. 

djb 

CX) 


Shakyamuni Buddha once said: 

You lay men and lay women who are my virtuous sons and 
daughters, make alms offerings to the Three Treasures—Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha—with the flesh of your spouses and children, 
and make alms offerings to the Three Treasures with your own flesh. 

How can all the monks who have already received the alms you’ve 
offered in good faith possibly fail to do their training? 

So, be aware that making alms offerings to the Three Treasures of such things as 
food, clothing, bedding, medicine, lodging for monks, cultivated lands, and 
woodlands is your making alms offerings of your own flesh and skin, bones and 
marrow, as well as those of your spouse and children. Having already entered the 
Three Treasure’s ocean of meritorious activity, you are therefore all of one and the 
same flavor. Because you are all of one and the same flavor, you are the Three 
Treasures. The meritorious activity of the Three Treasures has already manifested 
in the skin and flesh, bones and marrow of your own body, as well as that of your 
spouse and children, for it is your diligence in doing your utmost to practice the 
Way. Now, joining with the True Nature and form of the World-honored One, you 
should explore the Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow of the Buddha’s Way. This 
present alms offering of your very being is your giving rise to the intention to 
realize Buddhahood, so how could those monks who received your offering 
possibly fail to do the practice, and do it correctly from start to finish? 
Accordingly, no sooner does a single particle of thought arise than your Whole 
Mind will in an instant follow suit and give rise to your intention. When your 
Whole Mind arises right off, Unbounded Space will soon emerge. 

In short, even when saintly ones and arhats awaken to the Mind that gives 
rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood, they will be able, right off, to plant 
Buddha Nature’s seed . 4 Should they then do the training and practice devotedly by 
embracing the four elements and the five skandhas, they will realize the Way, or 


4. ‘Saintly ones and arhats’ refers to those doing their training within the Lesser Course. The 
terms do not imply that such persons are necessarily monastics. 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 


772 


should they then do the training and practice devotedly by embracing grasses and 
trees, fences and walls, they will realize the Way because, in both their substance 
and their inherent nature, the four elements and the five skandhas are the same as 
grasses and trees, tiles and stones, and because they are also the same in mind and 
in life, as well as in body and in function. 

Accordingly, within the assemblies of the Buddhas and Ancestors there have 
been many who did their utmost to practice the Way by taking up the mind that 
focused on grasses and trees. This is behavior arising from the Mind that seeks 
enlightenment. As a person of the Way, the Fifth Ancestor, Daiman Konin, once 
planted a pine tree. Rinzai made the effort to plant cedar and pine trees on Mount 
Obaku. And there was the old man of the Ryu clan who planted pines on Mount 
Tozan. By practicing the constancy of the pine and cypress, they scraped out the 
Eye of the Buddhas and Ancestors . 5 This displayed their ability to take pleasure in 
their living Eye, which is the Eye enlightened. 

Fashioning such things as stupas and images of Buddhas is the Eye taking Its 
pleasure. It is to taste the arising of the intention to realize Buddhahood: it is to 
make use of the arising of this intention. If there were no attaining of the Eye for 
such things as fashioning stupas, there would be no awakening to the Truth by the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. After attaining an Eye for fashioning Buddhas, one creates 
Buddhas and creates Ancestors. Were someone to say, “Such fashioned things as 
stupas are ultimately reduced to dust and dirt, and so they have no real merit, 
whereas cultivating ‘nothing arising’ is stable practice because it is not tainted by 
the dust and dirt of the world,” these would not be the words of a Buddha. If stupas 
are reduced to dust and dirt, then the state of ‘non-arising’ will also be reduced to 
dust and dirt. If the state of ‘non-arising’ is not reduced to dust and dirt, then stupas 
likewise will not be reduced to dust and dirt. Right here is where the What is! To 
give expression to having attachments is to give expression to being free of 
attachments. 

djb 

CX) 


The Tathagata said in the Avatamsaka Scripture : 

When Bodhisattvas* give rise to the intention to realize 
Buddhahood and make birth-and-death the foremost issue, they 


5. Because the pine and the cypress trees do not lose their foliage even in the severest of 
winters, they have been used in the East as a common metaphor for friends who remain 
constant in adversity. To ‘scrape out’ the Eye of the Buddhas and Ancestors means to fully 
absorb Their spiritual Teaching and to make It one’s own. 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind 


773 


wholeheartedly seek enlightened Wisdom and, being steadfast, they 
will not waver. The meritorious functioning of that single-mindedness 
is deep and vast, knowing no bounds. If I were to analyze and explain 
it, I would be unable to exhaust the topic, even if I had eons to do it. 

You need to be clear about this: using the issue of birth-and-death to give rise to 
your intention to realize Buddhahood is to wholeheartedly seek enlightened 
Wisdom. This wholeheartedness must be as a single blade of grass or a single tree, 
because it is your single moment of life and your single moment of death. Even so, 
the depth of this meritorious activity is beyond any bounds, and its vastness is also 
beyond any bounds. Even were the Tathagata to speak for eons of time describing 
this meritorious activity, He could not fully exhaust the topic even then. He could 
not fully exhaust it because one’s Mind remains after one’s death, just as the 
bottom of the sea remains after the sea has dried up. It is like seeking far and wide 
for the boundaries of this wholeheartedness, which is as boundless as the depth and 
vastness of a single blade of grass or a single tree, or of a stone or a tile. When the 
single blade of grass or the single stone is seven or eight feet tall, so such a one’s 
wholeheartedness is likewise seven or eight feet tall, and his heart that seeks the 
Way is also seven or eight feet tall. 

Thus, entering into the depths of the mountains to ponder the Buddha’s Way 
may well be easy, whereas to fashion a stupa or fashion a Buddha is ever so hard. 
Though both approaches are ripened by diligence and strenuous effort, the one 
makes use of the mind and the other is being used by the Mind, which is different 
by far. Time after time, giving rise to the enlightened Mind in this way makes the 
Buddhas and Ancestors manifest. 

Delivered to the assembly at Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province on the fourteenth day of the 
second lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (March 24, 1244). 

Copied at Eihei-ji Temple on the tenth day of the third lunar month in the second year of the 
Kdan era (April 22, 1279). 

Ejo 



68 

On the Universal Body of the Tathagata 

(Nyorai Zenshin) 

Translator’s Introduction: This short discourse is based on passages from the Lotus Scripture. 
In it, Dogen discusses the Buddha (the Awakened One) as the Tathagata (the One Who Comes 
Thus), that is, as someone who has completely dropped off self and now simply is, just as He is. 
The body of One who is a Tathagata is no longer a matter of something personal but embraces 
the whole universe and is, therefore, the Universal Body. This Universal Body incorporates all 
that the historical Buddha leaves behind, such as His relics. And His Universal Body includes 
not only these relics but also His teachings, particularly in the form of written, bound copies. 


Once when Shakyamuni Buddha was residing on Vulture Peak 
at Rajagriha, He addressed Lord Bhaisajya the Bodhisattva*- 
Mahasattva* of Healing, saying, “Lord Bhaisajya, in every place 
where this Teaching of Mine is voiced, or read, or recited aloud, or 
written down, or stored where bound copies of the Scriptures are kept, 
you should erect a seven-jeweled* stupa,* one that is especially tall, 
broad, and well adorned. There is no need to install a relic within it . 1 
And why? Because the Universal Body of the Tathagata already exists 
within this stupa. This stupa should be presented with alms, revered, 
highly honored, and eulogized by your offering all kinds of flowers 
and incense, jeweled garlands and silken canopies, banners and flags, 
music and songs of praise. If there are people who are able to catch 
sight of this stupa and thereupon bow in respect and offer alms, by all 
means you should realize that they are approaching supreme, fully 
perfected enlightenment.” 

What He called ‘bound copies of Scriptures’ are like what has been voiced, what 
has been read, what has been recited, and what has been written down. Bound 
copies of Scripture are what True Nature is. The True Nature of the seven-jeweled 


* See Glossary. 

1. A relic (J. shari; Skt. sanra) customarily consisted of some physical part of a deceased 
Buddha or Ancestor, such as ashes, bones, or hair. 


774 



Shobogenzo: On the Universal Body of the Tathagata 


775 


stupa that needs to be erected is called the Stupa. As to the ultimate measure of Its 
height and breadth, that measure is, of necessity, the measure of True Nature. The 
Universal Body of the Tathagata that already exists within this Stupa refers to the 
bound Scriptures, which is synonymous with the Universal Body. 

Accordingly, Teachings that have been voiced, read, recited, and written 
down are what the Universal Body of the Tathagata is. This is why we should 
make offerings to, revere, highly honor, and eulogize It by presenting It with all 
kinds of flowers and incense, jeweled garlands and silken canopies, banners and 
flags, music and songs of praise. Offerings may be such things as celestial flowers, 
celestial incense, and celestial canopies because these are all True Nature. Or they 
may be the choicest of flowers and incense, or kesas* and robes esteemed among 
ordinary people for these are all True Nature. Offerings of alms and offerings of 
reverence are what True Nature is. 

You should erect a Stupa, reminding yourself that there is no need to install 
a relic within It, for you know that bound Scriptures are the relics of the Tathagata 
and are part of the Universal Body of the Tathagata. Beyond doubt, these 
Scriptures are golden words that came from the Buddha’s mouth, and there can be 
no spiritually beneficial endeavor that surpasses seeing and hearing them. Be quick 
to accumulate merit and pile up virtuous acts. If there are people who bow in 
reverence to this Stupa and make an offering to It, keep in mind that they are all 
approaching supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. When we catch sight of this 
Stupa, we should, in all sincerity, respectfully bow and make an offering to It. 
Then we will all be close to supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. ‘Being close’ 
does not mean ‘being close after being separate from’, nor does it mean ‘being 
close after coming together’; ‘being close’ refers to one’s enlightenment being 
supreme and fully perfected. When we experience, here and now, the receiving and 
passing on, reading and reciting, understanding and expressing, writing and 
copying of Scriptures, it is our catching sight of this Stupa. We should rejoice, for 
we are all close to supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. 

Well now, the bound copies of the Scriptures are the Universal Body of the 
Tathagata. Bowing in respect to copies of Scripture is bowing in respect to the 
Tathagata. To have encountered copies of Scripture is to have an audience with the 
Tathagata, for copies of Scripture are relics of the Tathagata and relics of the 
Tathagata are these Scriptures. Even if you have learned that copies of Scriptures 
are relics, if you do not know that relics refers to copies of Scriptures, then you 
have not yet arrived at what the Buddha was saying. The True Nature of all things 
here and now is what copies of Scripture are. The world of humans as well as 
celestial worlds, the oceans as well as empty space, this planet of ours as well as 



Shobogenzo: On the Universal Body of the Tathagata 


776 


other worlds are all True Nature; they are all copies of Scriptures; they are all 
relics. Receiving and passing on, reading and reciting, understanding and 
expressing, writing and copying Scriptures creates relics and will open the way to 
enlightenment. This is what is meant by the phrase, ‘following the Scriptures’. 
There are the relics of former Buddhas, and the relics of present-day Buddhas, and 
the relics of pratyekabuddhas,* and the relics of Wheel-turning Lords,* and the 
relics of those who are veritable lions among men, as well as the relics of wooden 
Buddhas, and the relics of painted Buddhas, and the relics of human beings. 
Buddhas and Ancestors during the present-day generations in Great Sung China 
are letting Their relics show while They are still alive, and many are producing 
relics with Their cremation: these are all copies of Scripture. 


Once, when addressing a large assembly, Shakyamuni Buddha said, “The 
lifetime to which I succeeded by traveling the Bodhisattva Way has not even yet 
been exhausted, but will still be twice the past number of eons.” Our present 
eighty-four gallons of relics are, frankly, what the life of a Buddha is . 2 A lifetime 
of practicing the Bodhisattva Way is, from the start, not limited merely to the 
three-thousand great-thousandfold world; it can be something beyond calculation, 
as is the Universal Body of the Tathagata, and as are the bound copies of Scripture. 


The Bodhisattva Who Accumulates Wisdom said: 

I have seen Shakyamuni the Tathagata pursue the Bodhisattva 
Way without ever ceasing, doing difficult and painful practices for 
incalculable eons, and thereby accumulating merit and piling up 
virtue. When I have looked at the three-thousand great-thousandfold 
world, there is no place even the size of a mustard seed where, as a 
Bodhisattva, He has not laid down his life for the sake of others. And 
because of that He was able to fully experience the path to 
enlightenment. 

Be clear about this, this three-thousand great-thousandfold world is a single 
instance of a sincere and trusting heart, and it is a single instance of emptiness of 
self, and it is the Universal Body of the Tathagata, which does not depend on our 


2. ‘Eighty-four gallons of relics’ is an estimate of the average size of a human body. 



Shobogenzo: On the Universal Body of the Tathagata 


111 


laying down our life or on our not laying it down. Relics are beyond being 
something prior to a Buddha or after a Buddha, and they are not something that 
lines up beside a Buddha. Performing difficult and painful practices for 
immeasurable eons has been the daily activity of the Buddha’s womb and the 
Buddha’s hara ; 3 these practices are the Buddha’s Skin and Flesh, Bones and 
Marrow. As has been said of Him, “He has never ceased to be.” Even after 
becoming an Awakened One, He practiced ever more vigorously, and even though 
He has transformed our great-thousandfold world, He still goes forward. The 
everyday life of His Universal Body is no different. 

Given to the assembly at Kippo-ji Temple in the Yoshida district of Echizen Province on the 
fifteenth day of the second lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (March 25, 
1244). 


Copied while in the monks ’ quarters at Eihei Zen Temple on the twenty-third day of the sixth 
lunar month in the second year of the Koan era (August 2, 1279). 


3. The Buddha’s womb is the source from which all things are produced by one’s Buddha 
Nature. The Buddha’s hara is the place from which the Child of the Lord is bom. 



69 


On the Meditative State 
That Is the Lord of Meditative States 

(Zammai-d Zammai) 

Translator’s Introduction: A meditative state is a state of the mind in meditation. In this 
discourse, Dogen explores the ultimate form of these meditative states, one that arises when one 
understands seated meditation as more than what the mind or body experiences during formal 
seated meditation. 

Throughout this discourse he uses the tenn kekkafuza, which is traditionally rendered as ‘to 
sit in full lotus position’, but such a translation is apt to be understood only on a literal, physical 
level. By contrast, when one’s legs are folded into the lotus position, they indeed form a lotus, as 
the tenn implies. Hence one is, in effect, doing one’s meditation while seated on a lotus. 
Iconographically, this is a traditional sitting place for Buddhas, and it is, more specifically, the 
meditation seat of Vairochana, the Cosmic Buddha, whom Scriptures describe as appearing atop 
Shakyamuni Buddha’s head when He is doing seated meditation. Thus, to sit in meditation like 
Vairochana is to sit upon a lotus throne. This is true regardless of the physical posture of the 
body. To point to this non-physical aspect, the phrase kekkafuza is rendered in the present 
translation as ‘to sit as if sitting within a lotus blossom’. 

Further, as Dogen has pointed out already on a number of occasions, ‘doing seated 
meditation’ has a broader meaning than just doing fonnal meditation sittings. It also refers to 
maintaining the mind of meditation in whatever one does. Dogen expresses this broader meaning 
in the course of this discourse. 


Going beyond the whole universe at full speed and then living a valued and 
greatly honored life within the dwelling place of the Buddhas and Ancestors is 
what sitting as if sitting within a lotus blossom is all about. Leaping over the heads 
of non-Buddhists and gangs of bedevilers and then, within the inner chambers of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors, becoming someone who has realized the intent of the 
Buddha Dharma is what sitting as if sitting within a lotus blossom is all about. In 
order to go beyond the outermost limits, which is where the Buddhas and 
Ancestors are found, there is just this one method. Therefore, the Buddhas and 
Ancestors have engaged in this method without having any other practice. 

By all means keep in mind that the universe of seated meditation is 
something a long way off from other universes. Having clarified this principle, the 
Buddhas and Ancestors have undertaken to do Their utmost to give rise to the 
intention to awaken, to do the training and practice, and to realize spiritual Wisdom 


778 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State That is the Lord of Meditative States 


779 


and the freedom of nirvana. At the very moment of sitting, you should thoroughly 
explore through your training whether the whole universe is that which is vertical 
or that which is horizontal . 1 2 At the very moment of sitting, just what is that 
‘sitting’? Is it our mind doing somersaults? Or is it like a fish freely disporting in 
water? Or is it thinking about something? Or is it striving after something? Or not 
striving after anything? No, it is sitting within sitting, sitting within body and mind, 
dropping everything off within sitting and within body and mind, and just sitting! 
In this way, you need to thoroughly explore through your training the thousands of 
aspects, nay, the hundreds of thousands of aspects of just sitting. Your body should 
just sit as if you were sitting within a lotus blossom. 


My late Master, an Old Buddha, once said: 

Doing the practice of meditation is the dropping off of body and 
mind. To accomplish this, right off, is the purpose of seated 
meditation practice. “Just control yourself and sit there!” You don’t 
have to offer incense, do prostrations, chant the name of Buddha, 
repent of anything, or read Scriptures. 

It is clear that over the past four or five hundred years, only my late Master has 
scraped out the Eye of the Buddhas and Ancestors and just sat within this Eye. 
There have been few in China who stood head-and-shoulders with him. Few have 
clarified that ‘just sitting there’ was the method of the Buddha, whereas the 
Buddha Dharma is “Just sit there!” Even if some appear to understand physical 
sitting to be what the Buddha taught, they have not yet grasped that ‘sitting there’ 
means “Just sit there !” 3 Much less can they keep to and preserve the Buddha 
Dharma as the Buddha’s Teaching! 

Hence, there is the mind’s just sitting there, which is not the same as the 
body’s just sitting there. And there is the body’s just sitting there, which is not the 


1. ‘Vertical’ refers to space, which at any given moment contains everything without anything 
being added or taken away, whereas ‘horizontal’ refers to time, which is the ever-changing 
flow of moments of now, wherein all is in constant flux. These two perspectives are 
explored in depth by Dogen in Discourse 11: On ‘Just for the Time Being, Just for a While, 
For the Whole of Time is the Whole of Existence’ ( Uji), which literally translates as 
‘Existence and Time’. 

2. This is a translation of the oft-used Japanese term shikan taza. 

3. That is, neither trying to think nor trying not to think. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State That is the Lord of Meditative States 


780 


same as the mind’s just sitting. There is ‘just sitting there with body and mind 
having dropped off’, which is not the same as ‘just sitting in order to drop off body 
and mind’. To have already realized such a state is the perfect oneness of practice 
and understanding that the Buddhas and Ancestors have experienced. Maintain and 
safeguard your mind’s functions of remembering, considering, and reflecting. 
Thoroughly explore through your training what mind, intent, and consciousness 
truly are. 

djb 

CX) 


Shakyamuni Buddha, in addressing His great assembly, once said: 

If you sit as if sitting within a lotus blossom, you will 
experience a meditative state within your body and mind which will 
have such dignity and virtue that people will respect and venerate it. 

This meditative state will be like a sun illumining the whole world. It 
will eradicate sleepiness, laziness, and brooding from the mind. The 
body will become light, without creating a feeling of fatigue. And 
whatever arises as enlightenment will also be light and 
accommodating. Your sitting peacefully will be like a dragon’s 
coiling up. Just seeing a picture of someone seated within a lotus 
blossom is enough to frighten the Lord of Demons, and how much 
more so, should he actually see someone who is experiencing the 
Truth whilst sitting peacefully without any agitation? 

So, even the Lord of Demons is startled, troubled, and frightened when he 
encounters an illustration of someone seated within a lotus blossom . 4 How much 
more so were you to actually sit as if sitting within a lotus blossom, for the spiritual 
benefits from doing this cannot be measured. The joy and virtue of just sitting there 
on an everyday basis is beyond measure. 


Shakyamuni Buddha, in addressing His great assembly, continued, saying, 
“This is why we sit as if sitting within a lotus blossom.” The World-honored 
Tathagata then taught each of His disciples how they should sit in this way. Some 
non-Buddhists always stand on their tiptoes when seeking the Way, some always 
stand upright when seeking the Way, and some hike their feet up on their shoulders 


4. The Lord of Demons is often referred to as Mara and is the personification of the selfish 
self. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State That is the Lord of Meditative States 


781 


when seeking the Way. Confused and rigid minds like these sink into a sea of 
hindrances, their bodies knowing no tranquility. This is why the Buddha taught His 
disciples to sit as if sitting within a lotus blossom with their body upright. And 
why? Because when the body is upright, the mind is easy to set properly. When the 
body sits upright, the mind does not tire. Once the mind is regulated and its intent 
is proper, the mind is held to what is right before it. If the mind starts galloping off 
or becomes scattered, or if the body starts leaning or shifting about, sitting upright 
will remove these effects and bring you back. When you want to realize a 
meditative state and desire to enter into a meditative state, even if you are galloping 
off in all directions or are wildly scattered, sitting upright will bring all these 
completely back to normal. Doing the practice in this way lets you awaken to and 
enter the meditative state that is the lord of meditative states. 

Be clear about this, sitting as if sitting within a lotus blossom is what the 
meditative state that is the lord of meditative states is; it is what entering into 
spiritual realization is. All meditative states are members of the family of the 
meditative state that is the lord. Sitting as if sitting within a lotus blossom means 
keeping your body upright, and keeping your mind upright, and keeping your 
body-and-mind upright, and keeping the Buddhas and Ancestors upright, and 
keeping your training and enlightenment upright, and keeping the crown of your 
head upright, and keeping the very pulse of your lifeblood upright. 

Now, by forming a lotus with our human skin, flesh, bones, and marrow, we 
form a lotus within the meditative state that is the lord of meditative states. The 
World-honored One constantly maintained, and entrusted to us, the practice of 
sitting as if sitting within a lotus blossom, and Transmitted this ‘sitting as if sitting 
within a lotus blossom’ to His disciples, and had the practice of sitting as if sitting 
within a lotus blossom taught to ordinary people and to those in lofty positions. 
This is precisely what the Mind seal* that the Seven Buddhas* accurately 
Transmitted is. 

Shakyamuni Buddha sat Himself under the Bodhi tree as if He were sitting 
within a lotus blossom as He let pass fifty small eons, then sixty eons, then 
immeasurable eons. Whether you sit as if sitting within a lotus blossom for three 
weeks or for a few hours, it is your turning of the wondrous Wheel of the Dharma 
and your lifelong edification of the Buddha. Further, when you do not flag or 
slacken, this will be your ‘yellowed scrolls with their red scroll rods ’. 5 This is the 


* See Glossary. 

5. ‘Yellowed scrolls with their red scroll rods’ is a Buddhist reference to the Scriptures. It 
describes the form in which Scriptures were originally preserved. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State That is the Lord of Meditative States 


782 


occasion of Buddha meeting Buddha. This is the very moment when sentient 
beings become Buddhas. 


After his arrival from the West, our First Chinese Ancestor, the Venerable 
Bodhidharma, sat as if he were sitting within a lotus blossom while facing a wall at 
Shorin-ji Temple on a peak in the Su mountain range for nine autumns. From that 
time up to this very day, the Eye atop the crown of his head has spread throughout 
the whole of China. The lifeblood of our First Ancestor is, simply, being seated as 
if sitting within a lotus blossom. Before our First Ancestor arrived in China, the 
people there had not yet heard of sitting as if sitting within a lotus blossom. They 
only learned about it after our First Ancestor came from the West. 

As this is so, just control yourself and sit day and night as if you were sitting 
within a lotus blossom, for the whole of your life and for myriad lives to come, 
without leaving your monastery and without doing any other practice, for this is 
what the meditative state that is the lord of meditative states is. 

Delivered to the assembly at the Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province on the fifteenth day of the 
second lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (March 25, 1244). 

Written down in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant on the same mountain on the same night. 

Ejo 

Compared against the original and corrected on the first day of autumn in the first year of the 
Bun ’6 era (August 9, 1260). 



70 


On the Thirty-Seven Methods of Training 
for Realizing Enlightenment 

(Sanjushichihon Bodai Bumpo) 

Translator’s Introduction: These thirty-seven methods derive from early Buddhist scriptures. 
Although they have customarily been taken in a literal sense, Dogen chooses to explore deeper 
spiritual implications of these Teachings. 

Of particular notice in this discourse is Dogen’s discussion of the Noble Eightfold Path, in 
which he has added a lengthy and spirited commentary on Right Action. There are some who 
may be disturbed by the strong rhetoric that Dogen uses in this section. There are times when a 
Zen Master uses strong language, as it may be the only way for a Master to help cut through their 
disciples’ delusions so that they may reconsider what they are doing. Also, many of Dogen’s 
expressions would not have seemed as highly charged in his time and culture as they seem in 
today’s Western culture. This section focuses on the relationship between those who are lay 
trainees and those who are monastics. Dogen’s target in this section is quite clear: that flattering 
and manipulating bunch who curry worldly favors, seeking to be labeled as a Zen Master by 
some sovereign or minister of state, simply because they go around spouting that there is really 
no difference between what is going on in the mind of someone involved in affairs of state and 
what is going on in the mind of a Shakyamuni Buddha. He then endeavors to point out what the 
difference is between those who have chosen to remain in home life (J. zaike) and those who 
have chosen to leave home life behind (J. shukke ): even the best of lay trainees cannot realize 
supreme, fully perfected enlightenment (Buddhahood) unless they ultimately leave home life 
behind because the pull of secular demands is too great and time-consuming, and anything less 
than a full commitment will simply not be sufficient. He then takes up the cases of various lay 
people, specifically including Vimalakirti (J. Yuima) who had long served as a Zen Buddhist 
model for lay trainees, whom ‘that bunch’ claim had realized full Buddhahood without having to 
leave lay life behind. However, despite what may seem on first reading to be Dogen’s dismissal 
of lay trainees, with a closer reading it appears that what he is really attacking is the notion that, 
since there is no difference between the mind of a lay person and that of a monk, monastic life is 
irrelevant to the realization of Buddhahood and that, since lay people are enlightened just as they 
are, they therefore need not train. When this section of Dogen’s discourse is seen in relation to 
what he has been teaching so far, the relevance of his message for lay trainees might be summed 
up as, “Do not give up on your training, for training and enlightenment are synonymous, and do 
not do the practice in order to become a Buddha, but simply do it to fulfill your Bodhisattva vow 
to help all sentient beings, including yourself, realize their True Nature.” 

The Buddhas of old had a system of study, namely, the learning, practicing, 
and confirming of thirty-seven methods of training for realizing enlightenment. 


783 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


784 


These methods deal with the variations and stages in training and are also the 
methods used for grappling with one’s spiritual question. They are the means for 
producing all the Buddhas and Ancestors. 


The Four Abodes of Reflection 

also called the Four Focal Points of Reflection 

First, reflecting on the impurity of body 

Second, reflecting on how what our senses perceive leads 
to suffering 

Third, reflecting on the impermanence of our mental 
functions 

Fourth, reflecting on how all thoughts and things are 
devoid of a permanent, unchanging self 

‘Reflecting on the impurity of body’ means reflecting on our present fleshly body 
as being the Whole Universe in all ten quarters, because that is what our true Body 
is. The reflection that our body is impure is what springs up again and again when 
we are on the Absolute Way. Were it not to spring up, reflection upon it would not 
be possible. It would be as if we lacked a body. It would be as if doing the practice 
were impossible. It would be as if giving full expression to It were impossible. It 
would be as if fully reflecting on anything were impossible. But since you have 
already had manifestations of the possibility of reflection, you should recognize 
that it can spring up again and again. ‘The possibility of reflection’ refers to our 
everyday actions, such as sweeping the ground and sweeping the floor. Because we 
sweep the ground in any given month, and because we sweep the ground and 
sweep the floor punctually during the second lunar month, the whole of the great 
earth is just as it is . 1 

The body’s reflecting refers to your reflecting on your own body. It is not 
using the body to reflect on anything else. And this very act of reflection means 
that That Which Is Superlative has appeared. When your reflecting on your body 
has appeared, your reflecting on your Mind may be searched for but you have not 
yet made contact with It, for It has not yet appeared. Thus, when you reflect on 


1. That is, we do our daily actions, whether we are aware of what time it is or not. In the 
Japanese calendar, the second lunar month coincides with the beginning of spring. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


785 


your body, it is the manifesting of the Diamond Samadhi and the Bravely Going 
On Samadhi, and these are both reflections on the body’s not being pure. 

Speaking more generally, we call the principle of seeing the morning star in 
the middle of the night as seeing that the body is not pure. It has nothing to do with 
the issue of being clean versus being unclean. When there is a body, it is not pure; 
when bodily excretions manifest, they are not pure. To explore the Matter* in this 
way, when demons become Buddhas, they use their demon to defeat their demon in 
order to become a Buddha . 2 3 When Buddhas become Buddhas, They take up Their 
Buddha Nature to fathom Their Buddha Nature and become a Buddha. When 
ordinary humans become Buddhas, they take up their humanity to harmonize their 
humanity and become a Buddha. By all means, you should thoroughly explore the 
principle that there is a pathway to be taken up. 

For instance, it is like the method of washing clothes. The water is dirtied by 
the clothes, whereas the clothes are washed clean. Whether we use this soiled water 
to do our laundry or change this water to continue washing, we are still using water 
and still washing our clothes. If the clothes do not appear to be clean after one or 
two washings, do not stop from weariness and let the laundry pile up. If your water 
has been all absorbed, get more water; even if your robe appears clean, give it 
another rinse. When it comes to water, we use various sorts of liquids which are 
fine for washing robes. Thoroughly explore the principle that we know that water 
is unclean when there are fish in it. When it comes to robes, there are various types 
to be washed. Making such an effort out of washing your clothes is the arising of 
your koan.* However, one will get a glimpse of what cleanliness is. The underlying 
point here is that soaking your clothes in water is not necessarily your original goal 
nor is dirtying the water with your clothes your original goal. It is in washing your 
clothes by using the dirtied water that the original goal of washing your clothes 
exists. Further, there are methods of washing clothes clean by using such things as 
fire, wind, soil, water, or air. And there are methods of cleansing earth, water, fire, 
wind, and air by using earth, water, fire, wind, or air. 

The main point of the present ‘seeing that the body is not pure’ is also like 
this. Accordingly, what ‘body’ encompasses, what ‘seeing’ encompasses, and what 
‘not pure’ encompasses comprise the kesa* that your mother gave birth to. If a kesa 


2. The Diamond Samadhi is the meditative state that is like the one described in the Diamond- 
cutting Scripture, whereas the Bravely Going On Samadhi is that meditative state described 
in the Scripture of Bravely Going On (J. Shurydgon Kyd; S. Shurangama Scripture). 

* See Glossary. 

3. In Buddhism, the term ‘demon’ is often used to refer to defiling passions. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


786 


is not the kesa that your mother gave birth to, then the Buddhas and Ancestors do 
not use it—how could Shonawashu have been the only one ? 4 You should hold this 
principle in mind very carefully, exploring it through your training and dealing 
with it exhaustively. 

‘Reflecting on how what our senses perceive leads to suffering’ means that 
suffering is nothing other than a sense perception. It is beyond a matter of what we 
perceive or what others perceive, and it is beyond a matter of being attached to 
one’s own perceptions or not being attached to them. It is the sensations of a live 
body, and it is the sufferings of a live body. Say we replace a sweet, ripe melon 
with a bitter bottle-gourd. It is bitter, skin and flesh, bones and marrow. It is bitter 
to the mind of attachment and to the mind free of attachments. This type of 
reflecting is one step above spiritual abilities and above training to realize 
enlightenment. It is a spiritual ability that springs forth from the whole stem, that 
springs forth from the whole root. Thus, it has been said, “Sentient beings are 
thought to suffer, and here indeed is a sentient being who suffers.” ‘Sentient 
beings’ is beyond self and beyond other. We cannot deceive others, for ultimately 
there are sentient beings who are suffering. Sweet melons are sweet up to their 
calyx, whereas bitter gourds are bitter down to their very roots. Even so, what 
suffering is cannot easily be ferreted out. Ask yourself: precisely what is suffering? 

Concerning ‘reflecting on the impermanence of our mental functions’, the 
Old Buddha Daikan Eno once said, “Impermanence is what Buddha Nature is.” 
Thus, the various ways in which impermanence is understood are all Buddha 
Nature. Great Master Yoka Genkaku once said, “That actions are impermanent and 
that all things are empty of anything unchanging is what the Tathagata’s great, 
fully perfected realization was.” Your present day reflecting on the impermanence 
of your mental functions is itself the Tathagata’s great, fully perfected realization, 
for the great, fully perfected realization is what a Tathagata is. Even if your mind 
does not intend to reflect, it pursues whatever is going by. Thus, wherever there is 
mind, there is reflection. To generalize, upon your reaching Supreme Wisdom, that 
supreme, fully enlightened state manifests simply as impermanence and the 
reflecting mind. The mind is not necessarily constant. Because it goes beyond the 
four lines of a Scriptural verse and transcends the hundreds of ways of negating, 
the tiles* and stones of our walls and fences along with their rocks of various sizes 
is our mind itself, and impermanence itself is reflection itself. 

‘Reflecting on how all thoughts and things are devoid of a permanent, 
unchanging self’ means that whatever is long is the long Dharma body and 


4. The Third Indian Ancestor, Shonawashu, is said to have been bom wearing the kesa. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


787 


whatever is short is the short Dharma body. Because they appear in a living 
manner, they are without an unchanging self. Buddha Nature does not exist for a 
dog, and a dog has Buddha Nature. All sentient beings lack having a Buddha 
Nature, and Buddha Nature is beyond all sentient beings. All Buddhas are beyond 
ordinary sentient beings, and all Buddhas are beyond ‘Buddhas’. All Buddha 
Nature is beyond ‘Buddha Nature’, and all sentient beings are beyond being ‘a 
sentient being’. Because this is the way things are, all thoughts and things are 
beyond being ‘all thoughts and things’, which we explore through our training as 
our reflecting on how all thoughts and things are devoid of a permanent, 
unchanging self. You need to remember to let your whole being leap free from 
entanglements with self. 

Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “All Buddhas and bodhisattvas* reside 
peacefully within this Teaching, which They regard as a sacred womb.” Both 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas treat these four abodes of reflection as a sacred womb. 
You need to know that there is the sacred womb of those who have reached the 
stage of All-knowing Enlightenment and there is the sacred womb of those who 
have reached the stage of Wondrous Enlightenment . 5 There are Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas who have already reached these stages, and there are Buddhas who 
have gone beyond Wondrous Enlightenment who likewise regard this as a sacred 
womb. And bodhisattvas who have leapt beyond the stages prior to All-knowing 
Enlightenment and Wondrous Enlightenment also regard the four abodes of 
reflection as a sacred womb. Truly, the Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors are nothing other than the four abodes of reflection. 


The Four Kinds of Cutting Off Evil 

also called the Four Kinds of Right Effort 

First, endeavoring to avoid whatever gives rise to evil 
deeds 

Second, endeavoring to bring one’s evil deeds to a halt 
when they arise 

Third, endeavoring to do what produces merit 
Fourth, endeavoring to do what increases merit 


5. ‘All-knowing Enlightenment’ is the fifty-first stage of bodhisattvahood, the one before 
becoming a Buddha. ‘Wondrous Enlightenment’ is the fifty-second stage of 
bodhisattvahood, the one of becoming Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


788 


In ‘endeavoring to avoid whatever gives rise to evil deeds’, what we call ‘evil 
deeds’ do not invariably have set forms or exact definitions. They simply follow 
the customs of a country or are those established in a given land. Even so, 
preventing the arising of evil deeds that have not yet arisen is what the Buddha 
taught. It is what has been continually Transmitted accurately. It has been said that, 
according to the understanding of non-Buddhists, the self that has not yet sprouted 
up is taken to be what is fundamental . 6 7 According to the Buddha’s Teaching, it will 
not be like this. 

Let’s look into this matter a bit. In the time before evil deeds have arisen, 
where are they? Were you to say that they exist in the future, you would be on the 

n 

false path of the nihilists forever. Were you to say that the future becomes the 
present, that would not be the way that the Buddha’s Teaching put the matter, for 
you would have confused what the three temporal worlds are. If you are unclear 
about the three temporal worlds, you will become confused as to what thoughts and 
things are. If you are confused about what thoughts and things are, you will 
become confused as to what the true appearance of thoughts and things are. If you 
are confused about their true appearance, you will be confused about what the 
saying ‘each Buddha on His own, together with all Buddhas’ is pointing to. 
Therefore, we do not say that the future later becomes the present. 

Let’s look a bit further. What should we call evil deeds that have not yet 
arisen? Who has known or seen them? If they were knowable and perceivable, 
there would be a time when they had not yet existed and a time when their not yet 
having arisen had not occurred. If this were so, we could not then call them 
‘thoughts and things that have not yet arisen’. We would have to call them 
‘thoughts and things that have already passed away’. You should set aside learning 
from non-Buddhists or such persons as shravakas* who follow the Lesser Course,* 
and just focus your practice on endeavoring to avoid whatever gives rise to evil 
deeds. We call the unrestrained accumulating of evil thoughts ‘evil deeds that have 
not yet arisen’, for that is what they are. What we call ‘their non-arising’ means 
‘yesterday expressing the Dharma of Certainty and today expressing the Dharma of 
Uncertainty’. 

What ‘endeavoring to bring one’s evil deeds to a halt when they arise’ refers 
to is what has already arisen being what has completely arisen, and what has 
completely arisen being what has half arisen, and what has half arisen being what 


6. That is, the non-Buddhist view that there is a permanent, unchanging soul which exists prior 
to, and independent of, birth, the body being but a temporary abode for this soul. 

7. That is, one would be denying the Buddhist principle of causality. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


789 


is arising here and now. What is arising here and now is a hindrance that conceals 
what is arising. It is an arising that springs forth from our mind. When we make 
this effort, we bring our evil deeds to a halt. It is like Devadatta, while alive, 
entering the realm of the hells and it is like Devadatta, while alive, receiving the 
promise of Buddhahood. s It is like the living body of Shakrendra being within the 
womb of a donkey, and it is like his living body realizing Buddhahood . 9 Making 
use of such an underlying principle, you need to explore through your training the 
principle of bringing about extinction of evil deeds. Extinguishing such deeds 
treats extinction as a leaping free and puts aside the delusion of extinguishing 
them . 10 

‘Endeavoring to do what produces merit’ is synonymous with the saying, 
“Being thoroughly content with one’s countenance, just as we were before the 
duality of ‘father’ and ‘mother’ had arisen .” 11 It is the time before thoughts and 
things have sprouted up. It is the understanding that precedes the Lords of Awe¬ 
inspiring Voices. 

You need to understand that ‘endeavoring to do what increases merit’ is not 
the same as continuing to give rise to good that has already arisen. It is 
endeavoring to increase it. It is Shakyamuni Buddha Himself, once having seen the 
morning star, going on to help others see the morning star. It is one’s Eye creating 
the morning star. It is, as Baso once put it, “After an aimless life, for thirty years I 
have gone on, never lacking for salt or vinegar.” Because Shakyamuni was 
increasing merit, merit had already arisen. Thus, when the valley stream is deep, 
the handle of our dipper will be long. It is only because we already had It that 
Bodhidharma came. 


8. Due to his betrayal of Shakyamuni, Devadatta experienced hellish suffering during his 
lifetime, and, at the same time, Shakyamuni predicted Devadatta’s ultimately realizing 
Buddhahood. 

9. In Discourse 87: On Taking Refuge in the Treasures of Buddha, Dhanna, and Sangha (Kie 
Bupposo Ho), Dogen will relate the story of the deity Shakrendra, who was reborn in the 
womb of a donkey. 

10. The delusional aspect arises from thinking that once one has brought one’s wicked ways to a 
halt, one has brought them to an end for all times. 

11. ‘Being thoroughly content with one’s countenance’ refers to our complete acceptance of 
ourselves as being just what we are, without engaging in judgmentalism. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


790 


The Four Steps Towards the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities 


First, longing to help others realize their marvelous 
spiritual abilities 

Second, having a mind to make the necessary effort 
Third, being willing to keep one s focus on this goal 
Fourth, doing all these through the mind of meditation 

‘Longing to help others realize their marvelous spiritual abilities’ refers to the body 
and mind aiming to become a Buddha, to Baso’s saying, “Having finished eating 
rice, I feel content, and look to taking me a nap,” and to my Master Tendo’s saying, 
“That is why I bow to you.” In short, longing to help others realize their spiritual 
abilities goes beyond the causes and conditions of our body and mind. As Master 
Wanshi put it: 

The water is now so clear you can see to its depths, 

As fish swim by at their leisure: 

The sky is now so clear it is boundless, 

As birds fly off, leaving no trace. 

‘Having a mind to make the necessary effort’ refers to the tiles and stones of our 
walls and fences, to the great earth with its mountains and rivers. It refers to the 
various arisings of the three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form, as well as to 
the brightly polished wood of chairs and bamboo . 12 Because this mind is able to 
make the necessary effort, there is the mind of Buddhas and Ancestors, there is the 
mind of the worldly and the saintly, there is the mind of grasses and trees, there is 
the kaleidoscopic mind. Your whole mind is synonymous with having a mind to 
make the necessary effort. 

‘Being willing to keep one’s focus on this goal’ is synonymous with being 
atop a hundred-foot pole and then stepping straight ahead. Where is the top of this 
hundred-foot pole? As is said, we cannot find it without stepping straight ahead, 
and taking one step straight ahead is not something to be denied. This place is 
where the What exists, whether you explain it as advancing or as retreating. At the 
very moment when one is advancing towards spiritual abilities, the whole universe 
in all ten quarters follows upon these spiritual abilities and goes with them, and, 
following upon these spiritual abilities, we arrive. 


12. That is, the mind that is required to help is just one’s own ordinary mind, and does not 
require a mind that is somehow special or unique. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


791 


‘Our doing all these through the mind of meditation’ means that, due to the 
vastness of inherent karmic* ignorance, even all the Buddhas and Ancestors 
possess nothing upon which They can rely. There is meditating on our physical 
being, and there is meditating on our mind, and there is meditating on 
consciousness, and there is meditating on straw sandals, and there is meditating on 
one’s self as it was before there was the Kalpa* of Emptiness. 

We also call these methods the four abilities of free will. As Shakyamuni 
Buddha once said, “When someone has not moved, yet arrives, we call that the 
miraculous spiritual functioning of free will.” Thus, what is sharp is like the point 
of a needle and what has a square edge is like the side of a chisel. 

djb 

CX) 

The Five Roots of Training 

First, the root of faith in the Dharma 
Second, the root of zealous spiritual endeavor 
Third, the root of mindfulness 
Fourth, the root of concentration 
Fifth, the root of wise discernment 

Keep in mind that the root of faith in the Dharma is beyond self, beyond other, 
beyond any forcing of oneself, beyond anything contrived, beyond anything others 
have hauled up in their minds, beyond any objective rules or standards, and 
therefore it was Transmitted, unseen, from West to East. What we call ‘faith’ is a 
faith that is forged with one’s whole being. It is invariably following where faith 
goes from the perspective of Buddhahood, which is following our Self where It 
goes. Were it not based upon the perspective of Buddhahood, there would be no 
manifestation of faith. This is why it is said that we can enter the great ocean of 
Buddha Dharma by means of our faith. In sum, the place where faith manifests is 
the place where Buddhas and Ancestors appear. 

‘The root of zealous spiritual endeavor’ is being alert to just doing 
meditation. It is resting even when unable to take rest. It is taking rest when taking 
rest. It is being someone who is terribly unimportant. It is being One who is not 
unimportant. It is being both important and unimportant. It is the First Moon and 
the second moon . 13 Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “I am always zealous in my 
spiritual endeavors. That is why I was able to realize supreme, fully perfected 


13. The First Moon is Buddha Nature, whereas the second moon is the reflection of Buddha 
Nature in all things. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


792 


enlightenment.” What He called His continual zealous endeavors was His doing it 
totally—from head to tail—through the whole of past, present, and future. His 
saying, “I am always zealous in my spiritual endeavors” is His way of saying, “I 
have already realized Buddhahood.” Because it is His already having realized 
supreme, fully perfected enlightenment, it is His always being zealous in His 
spiritual endeavors. Were this not so, how could He have possibly been continually 
zealous in His endeavors? How could He have possibly already realized It? How 
can those who are academic teachers of Buddhism and those who write scholarly 
commentaries on Scriptures possibly encounter or hear about this principle, much 
less explore it through training with a Master? 

‘The root of mindfulness’ is the circle of those withered trees of living flesh, 
for what we call the circle of those of living flesh are as withered trees . 14 Withered 
trees are the root of mindfulness. When we ourselves are groping about trying to 
hit the mark, this is mindfulness. There is the mindfulness when we have a body, as 
well as the mindfulness when our mind is free of attachments. There is the 
mindfulness of an involved mind, and there is the mindfulness when we go beyond 
body. The root of life of all humans on this great earth is the root of mindfulness, 
and the root of life of all the Buddhas in the ten quarters is the root of mindfulness. 
There are many people in one moment of mindfulness and there are many moments 
of mindfulness within one person. Even so, there are those who have mindfulness 
and those who lack mindfulness. It is not a matter of human beings always having 
mindfulness, nor is it a matter of mindfulness always being associated with human 
beings. Even though this is so, there is inexhaustible merit in being able to observe 
and thoroughly investigate this topic of mindfulness. 

‘The root of concentration’ is being sparing with your eyebrow, and it is 
your lifting up your eyebrow . 15 Hence, you are not in the dark about cause and 
effect, and you are not free from causality, whereby one may enter into the womb 
of a donkey or enter the womb of a horse. You are like a jewel encased within a 
stone: one cannot say that it is all stone or all jewel. You are like a mountain 
crowning the ground: one cannot say that it is all ground or all mountain. Even so, 
you spring forth from the crown of your head and leap into It. 


14. ‘The circle of those withered trees of living flesh’ refers to the Sangha sitting together in 
meditation: they are alive, yet they are sitting as still and unaffected by what comes as a 
withered tree. 

15. A reference to the Venerable Pindola’s raising of one eyebrow which Dogen recounts in 
Discourse 57: On the Plum Blossom (Baika). The raising of one’s eyebrow was a sign of 
confirming someone else’s kensho, a practice which, according to Dogen, should be done 
sparingly. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


793 


‘The root of wise discernment’ is the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds 
not knowing They have It, and it is feral cats and white water buffaloes being 
certain that they do have It . 16 You should not ask why it is thus, for it is beyond 
putting in words. There is inhalation and exhalation through the Nose, and there 
are fingertips within a Fist. The term ‘donkey’ maintains, and relies on, there being 
a donkey. The term ‘well’ is a mutual encountering with a well. In sum, a Root is 
the Dharma heir of a Root. 

djb 

CX) 


The Five Strengths 

First, the strength of faith in the Dharma 
Second, the strength of zealous spiritual endeavor 
Third, the strength of mindfulness 
Fourth, the strength of concentration 
Fifth, the strength of wise discernment 

‘The strength of faith’ is being deceived by oneself and having no place to escape 
to. It is being called to by someone and having to turn one’s head around. From 
birth to old age, it is simply being just This. It is stumbling seven times, then 
getting up and going on. It is eight times falling down and making use of it. Thus, 
faith is like a jewel, crystal clear as water. It is considering the Transmitting of the 
Dharma and the Transmitting of the robe to be acts of faith, as are the Transmitting 
of Buddhas and the Transmitting of Ancestors. 

‘The strength of zealous spiritual endeavor’ is thoroughly expressing in 
words what cannot be put into practice and thoroughly putting into practice what 
cannot be put into words. Thus, being able to explain a little bit is nothing more 
than being able to explain a little bit. And being able to put into practice one line of 
Scripture is nothing more than being able to put into practice one line of Scripture. 
Getting strength from within one’s strength is the strength of zealous spiritual 
endeavor. 

‘The strength of mindfulness’ is the great slayer pulling someone by the 
nose. Thus, it was the Nose pulling the person. The strength of mindfulness is 
also our relinquishing the jewel and redeeming the jewel, and it is also our 


16. ‘Feral cats and white oxen’ is descriptive of certain types of trainees who are heavily 
deluded. 

17. An allusion to Meditation Master Shakkyo Ezo yanking the nose of Master Seido Chizo. 
Shakkyo was a great ‘slayer’ of the false self, who taught his fellow monk Seido the 
meaning of the True Self (one’s Nose). It was Shakkyo’s True Self that did the pulling. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


794 


relinquishing a tile and redeeming a tile. Further, it also means thirty blows for not 
having relinquished them. No matter how much we human beings may make use of 
the strength of our mindfulness, it will never erode. 

‘The strength of concentration’ is like a child getting its mother and like a 
mother getting her child. And it is like a child getting ‘child’ and a mother getting 
‘mother’. Be that as it may, it is not exchanging our head for a face, nor is it buying 
gold with gold. It is simply our chanting from our concentration growing ever 
louder. 

The strength of wise discernment’ is ever deeper and far-reaching as the 
years and generations pass. It is like ferrying a boat’s crossing to the Other Shore. 
This is why in ancient times someone said, “It is like the crossing was getting a 
ferry.” The heart of what this is saying is, “The crossing, beyond question, is the 
ferry.” A crossing that does not get in the way of a crossing we call ‘a ferry’. In 
spring, the ice dissolves of itself. 

djb 

CX) 


The Seven Branches Associated with Awakening 

First, awakening to a preference for the Dharma 

Second, awakening to being zealous in one s endeavors 

Third, awakening to a delight in the Truth 

Fourth, awakening to eliminating one’s rough edges 

Fifth, awakening to equanimity 

Sixth, awakening to concentration 

Seventh, awakening to mindfulness 

‘Awakening to a preference for the Dharma’ is synonymous with Kanchi Sosan’s 
saying, “Let but a hair’s breadth of discriminatory thought arise and you have 
made Heaven and Earth strangers to each other.” Thus, as he also said, “The Way 
to the Ultimate is not hard; simply give up being picky and choosy.” 

‘Awakening to being zealous in one’s endeavors’ is synonymous with never 
having endorsed robbing others in the marketplace. Whether buying for one’s own 
sake or selling for one’s own sake, both have their fixed price, and there is 
recognition of one’s worth. Even if we seem to be bending over backwards in 
recommending others, a blow to our body does not break us. In never ceasing to 
offer anyone a trigger word, you will encounter the Trader who offers you, on His 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


795 


part, the turning around of your heart . 18 So, before you have finished doing your 
donkey work, go about doing horse work . 19 

‘Awakening to a delight in the Truth’ is synonymous with the sympathy your 
grandma had when your blood was dripping from a cut. Leave the thousand hands 
and eyes of the Great Compassionate One to do their business. Plum blossoms are 
beginning to peep through the wintry snow—news of the coming spring. A great 
Master may still be cold, but even so, he will be freely swimming about, disporting 
like a fish, and overflowing with gales of laughter. 

‘Awakening to eliminating one’s rough edges’ means, when looking within 
yourself, not getting all absorbed in yourself, and, when looking outside yourself, 
not getting all absorbed in others. It means ‘what I have gotten, you have not yet 
gotten.’ It is ardently expressing It while going forth amidst all manner of beings. 

‘Awakening to equanimity’ means that even though I have brought It, others 
may not accept It. It is just as the Chinese, when barefooted, learn to walk like 
Chinese, and as the Persians who go hunting for ivory tusks in the South Seas. 

‘Awakening to concentration’ means before taking the initiative, preserving 
the Eye that exists before taking the initiative. It is our blowing our own nose. It is 
taking hold of our own tether and leading our own self. And, nevertheless, it is 
being able to let our domesticated water buffalo graze on its own. 

‘Awakening to mindfulness’ means a pillar* of the temple going forth, 
walking the sky. Thus, even though we say that someone’s mouth resembles a 
mallet and someone’s Eye is like an eyebrow, still, this is a matter of burning 
sandalwood in a sandalwood forest or of a lion roaring in a lion’s den. 


The Eight Branches of the Right Path 

also called the Noble Eightfold Path 

First, the branch of Right View 
Second, the branch of Right Thought 
Third, the branch of Right Speech 
Fourth, the branch of Right Action 


18. A trigger word is some remark which serves another as a trigger, or catalyst, for an 
awakening to the Truth. 

19. Donkey work is the day-to-day plodding through one’s training. While still training, one 
should also do the horse work, which is one’s going forth wherever needed to help all 
sentient beings realize the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


796 


Fifth, the branch of Right Livelihood 
Sixth, the branch of Right Effort 
Seventh, the branch of Right Mindfulness 
Eighth, the branch of Right Concentration 

‘The branch of Right View’ is our cherishing the Eye of our True Self, which 
resides within. At the same time, prior to our body’s arising, we were already 
endowed with the Eye. Even though this view was magnificently realized in the 
past, it is our own spiritual question coming forth and it will be experienced 
intimately in the future. In short, if one does not cherish the Eye of one’s True Self, 
such a person is not an Ancestor of the Buddha. 

‘The branch of Right Thought’ is the coming forth of all the Buddhas in the 
ten quarters when we cultivate this mode of thinking. As a result, the coming forth 
of the ten quarters and the coming forth of the Buddhas is what the time when we 
cultivate this mode of thinking refers to. When we cultivate this mode of thinking, 
we are beyond self and transcend other. Even so, at the very moment that we are 
completely involved in thinking about the Matter, we have directed our course 
towards Varanasi. The place where this mode of thinking exists is Varanasi. The 
Old Buddha Yakusan once said, “What I was thinking about was based on not 
deliberately thinking about any particular thing.” A monk then asked, “How can 
what anyone is thinking about be based on not deliberately thinking about 
something ?” The Master replied, “It is a matter of ‘what I am thinking about’ not 

being the point.” This is a matter of right thinking and right thought. Breaking your 

21 

meditation pillow is what right thought is about. 

‘The branch of Right Speech’ is our Mute Self not being a mute. Those who 
are mutes among humans are not yet able to speak. Those in the realm of the Mute 
are not mutes. They do not admire themselves as saints, nor do they pile something 
spiritual upon themselves. It is their thoroughly exploring the Matter by hanging 
their mouths up on the wall. It is all the mouths being hung up on all the walls. 

‘The branch of Right Action’ is our leaving home life behind and entering 
the Meditation Hall. It is our entering a mountain monastery to procure a 
realization. As Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “The thirty-seven methods of 
training are the actions of a monk.” The actions of a monk go beyond the Greater* 
and Lesser Courses. There are various types of monks, such as Buddha monks, 


20. Varanasi, nowadays called Benares, was the place where the Buddha first gave voice to the 
Dharma after His awakening. 

21. ‘Breaking one’s meditation pillow’ is a metaphor for working hard at one’s meditation 
practice. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


797 


bodhisattva monks, and shravaka monks. Those who have not yet left home life 
behind do not succeed to the inheritance of the Right Action of the Buddha’s 
Dharma. They have not received the authentic Transmission of the Great Course of 
the Buddha’s Dharma. Even though those who have remained in home life may 
have done some study of the Way as lay men and women, they have not left behind 
any traces of having become expert in the Way. Whenever anyone has become 
expert in the Way, that person has invariably left home life behind. How can those 
folks who are not up to leaving home life behind possibly devote themselves to 
attaining the rank of Buddha? 

At the same time, for the past two or three hundred years, there have been 
many in Great Sung China who call themselves monks of the Zen tradition, saying, 
“Those who have remained in home life to study the Way and those who have left 
home life behind to study the Way are just the same.” That bunch have turned 
themselves into dogs just for the sake of making the excrement and urine of lay 
people their food and drink. Sometimes they say to rulers of countries and their 
ministers, “Your mind when conducting the affairs of state is exactly the same as 
the mind of Ancestors and Buddhas, for there is no other mind.” Rulers and 
ministers, still ignorant of what real Teaching and genuine Dharma are, take great 
delight in bestowing such titles as Master upon them. Monks who talk like this are 
veritable Devadattas. They come out with such wild and childish drivel just so they 
can feed off the chirping and spitting of such lay folk—better to call it a child’s 
whimpering. They are not of the family of the Seven Buddhas,* but are a band of 
devils and beasts. They do not know what ‘body and mind’ refers to, nor do they 
explore the Matter through training with a Master, nor do they understand what it 
means to leave home life behind both in body and in mind. They are in the dark 
about the politics of rulers and ministers, and it is as if they had never encountered 
the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors even in their dreams. 

The lay practitioner Vimalakirti* resembled the Buddha when He was in the 
world, yet there were many ways in which what he taught was not yet complete, 
and there were a number of points which he had not yet fully mastered. The lay 
practitioner Hoon had a history of training under several Ancestors, but he was not 
permitted entrance into Yakusan’s inner chambers, and he was never the equal of 
Baso, his ultimate teacher. His name is said to be linked with the term ‘exploring 
through training’, but his exploring through training was not real. With others, such 


22. In this context, ‘excrement and urine’ is a derogatory metaphor for ‘words and opinions’, 
that is, for what the judgmental mind excretes. In Japanese, this tenninology does not carry 
the vulgar sense that it has in English. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


798 


as Ri Fuba and Yo Bunko, each thought he was tranquilly residing within his 
spiritual awakening, but neither had yet partaken of sugar dumplings, much less of 
a painted rice cake, or even less, of the rice gruel of the Buddhas and Ancestors, for 
they still did not possess a monk’s alms bowl. Sad to say, their whole life as a skin 
bag* was in vain. 

What I am universally recommending to sentient beings in lofty positions, to 
ordinary beings, to erudite scholarly beings, and to all other types of sentient 
beings in all ten quarters is that they follow the Tathagata’s ways from the distant 
past by quickly leaving home life behind and training in the Way, so that they may 
attain the rank of Buddha and the rank of Ancestor. Do not listen to the 
incompetent words of those so-called ‘Zen Masters’ and their ilk. Because they do 
not understand what body is or what mind is, they speak such words. As likely as 
not, they are utterly lacking in compassion for sentient beings and have no thought 
of adhering to the Buddha Dharma. Only desiring to devote themselves to feeding 
off the urine and excrement of those who remain in home life, they are like vicious 
dogs—dogs with human faces, dogs in human hides. Thus they speak as they do. 
Do not sit down with them, do not converse with them, do not stop to train under 
them. While their human bodies are still alive, they have fallen into the world of 
the animals. If someone who has left home life behind had urine and excrement in 
abundance, these dogs would say that such a monk was preeminent. But they talk 
as they do because the urine and excrement of monks does not come up to the 
standards of these animals. Over more than two thousand years, there has been no 
trace appearing in the texts of the more than five thousand scrolls of the Canon 
which says that the intentions of those who remain in home life and of those who 
have left home life behind are exactly the same, either in theory or in practice. No 
Buddha or Ancestor has ever proclaimed such a thing in over fifty generations of 
our lineage and during the more than forty ages . 23 Even if there were a person— 
one who had left home behind—who broke or neglected the Precepts, or did not 
keep to the Teaching, or was lacking in wise discernment, such a one would 
surpass the discernment and the keeping to the Precepts of one who had remained 
in home life, because becoming a monk is Wisdom itself, realization Itself, the Way 
Itself, and the Dharma Itself. Even though those in home life may have good 
spiritual roots and are behaving quite meritoriously, they may well overlook the 
good spiritual roots and meritorious behavior of a monastic’s body and mind. 
During the Buddha’s whole lifetime of teaching, not one person in lay life fully 


23. The fifty generations are from Makakasho through Tendo Nyojo, whereas the more than 
forty ages are from the first of the Seven Buddhas up through Daikan Eno and beyond. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


799 


realized the Way. This was due to their home life not being a suitable place for 
them to learn the Way of the Buddha and because their worldly distractions were so 
many. 

When we explore the body and mind of that bunch who assert that a mind 
which is engaged in myriad affairs of state and the mind of an Ancestral Teacher 
are the same, it is obvious that they never encountered the mind and body of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, nor was the Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors ever Transmitted to those folks. Sad to say, even though 
they were encountering the True Teaching of the Buddha, they nevertheless became 
beasts. 

Because this is the way things are, Eno, the Old Buddha of Sokei, 
immediately took leave of his mother in order to seek a Master: this was Right 
Action. Before he heard the Diamond-cutting Scripture and gave rise to the 
intention to realize Buddhahood, he lived at home, working as a woodcutter. After 
hearing the Diamond-cutting Scripture, he was infused with Its lingering fragrance. 
So, dropping off his heavy burden of wood, he left home life behind. Keep in mind 
that once body and mind become so infused with the Buddha Dharma, it is said 
that remaining in home life is no longer possible. It has been the same for all the 
Buddhas and Ancestors. That bunch who say that one does not need to leave home 
life behind are committing an offense even more serious than those of the five 
treacherous deeds* and they are even more savage than Devadatta. Know that what 
they are doing is even worse than what the six male monastics, the six female 
monastics, as well as the eighteen monastics did during the Buddha’s time, so do 
not converse with them. A whole lifetime is not that long. You do not have the 
time to converse with such devils and beasts. And what is more, you received these 
human bodies and minds of yours as a result of seeds from encountering and 
hearing the Buddha Dharma in past lives. They are like temple tools for public use. 
They are not to be turned into a band of devils, nor are they to be aligned with any 
band of devils. Do not forget your deep obligation to the Buddhas and Ancestors 
by listening to the baying of these ferocious dogs, but protect and preserve the 
virtue of the milk of the Dharma. And do not sit or sup with these wicked dogs. 

When Our Founding Ancestor, the Old Buddha of Mount Suzan , 25 left far 
behind the western Buddhist country of India to come east to the remote land of 
China, the True Teaching of the Buddhas and Ancestors was Transmitted through 


24. These three groups were comprised of monks who had difficulties with their training, and 
therefore left the assembly of the Buddha. 

25. That is, Bodhidharma. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


800 


his person. If he had not left worldly life behind in order to realize the Way, such a 
thing would not have been possible. Before he came from the West, human beings 
of all stations had never encountered or heard of the True Teaching. So, you should 
keep in mind that the true Transmission of the true Teaching was made possible 
due to the spiritually beneficial action of his having left home life behind. 

Our Great Master, the revered Shakyamuni, graciously set aside the rank of 
his father the king and did not succeed him as his heir, but not because the king’s 
rank was not valued. Rather, it was done that He might succeed as heir to the most 
precious rank of Buddha. The rank of Buddha is the rank of someone who has left 
home life behind. It is a rank which those in the three worlds of desire, form, and 
without form—both those in lofty positions and ordinary human beings—all bow 
to out of deepest respect. It is not a place whose seat is to be shared with a Lord 
Brahma or a Lord Shakra. How much less is it a rank whose seat is to be shared 
with earthly human rulers or scholastic lords of erudition, for it is the rank of 
supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. Those of this precious rank can give 
expression to the Dharma that carries beings to the Other Shore and can send forth 
their radiance which manifests auspicious signs. The actions of those who have left 
home life behind are the very stuff of Right Actions; they are the actions long- 
cherished by Buddhas, including the Seven Buddhas. It is a place that is not fully 
realized if it is not done by ‘each Buddha on His own, together with all Buddhas’. 
Those who have not yet left home life behind should show their respect to those 
who have already left home life behind and serve them. They should bow their 
heads in homage to them and offer them alms, setting aside both body and life. 

Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “To leave home life behind and accept the 
Precepts is to be the seed of a Buddha, for such a one has already become 
enlightened.” So, keep in mind, what we call ‘becoming enlightened’ means 
leaving home life behind. Someone who has not yet left home life behind is, sad to 
say, one sunk in misery. In short, I cannot say how often during the Buddha’s 
lifetime He praised the merits of leaving home life behind. Our honored 
Shakyamuni sincerely voiced this, and all Buddhas have certified it. Those who 
have left home life behind and who are breaking Precepts and failing to explore the 
Matter with their Master have realized the Way, whereas those who have remained 
in home life have not yet realized the Way. When royalty respectfully bow to male 
or female monastics, these monastics do not return the bow; when those in lofty 
positions bow to the ones who have left home behind, both the male and the female 
monastics never return the bow. This is because the merit of leaving home life 
behind is unsurpassed. It is like this because, if they were to receive bows from 
male and female monastics—that is, those who have left home life behind—the 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


801 


mansions and palaces of those in lofty positions would instantly fall into min and 
decay, along with all their resplendence and good fortune. 

In sum, as the Buddha Dharma gradually progressed eastward, there were 
those who realized the Way by leaving home life behind; they have been as 
common as rice and flax plants, bamboo and reeds. But there was not even one of 
them who realized the Way whilst remaining in home life. Once the Buddha 
Dharma reached their eyes and ears, they immediately engaged themselves in 
leaving home life behind. I have come to realize clearly that remaining in home life 
is not a place for the Buddha Dharma to reside. At the same time, that bunch who 
say that the body and mind of those who are engaged in conducting affairs of state 
is exactly the same as the body and mind of the Buddhas and Ancestors have never 
encountered or heard the Teaching of the Buddha. They are criminals in the darkest 
of hells. They are foolish people who have not even seen or heard what they 
themselves are saying. They are traitors to their land. Their attempt to equate a 
mind that is engaged in worldly affairs with the mind of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors is done just for the delight of rulers; it is an attempt undertaken because 
of the preeminence of the Buddha Dharma. You need to remember that the Buddha 
Dharma is what is preeminent. Now, it may happen that the mind engaged with 
worldly affairs is temporarily in the same state as the mind of the Buddhas and 
Ancestor—and quite naturally—but whenever the body and mind of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors spontaneously resembles the body and mind of someone engaged 
with worldly affairs, Theirs will not be the body and mind of one engaged with 
worldly affairs. ‘Zen Masters’ and their like who say that the mind of someone 
engaged in worldly affairs is completely equivalent to the mind of Buddhas and 
Ancestors do not have a clue as to how the human mind works. And as to the 
working of the mind of Buddhas and Ancestors, well, they haven’t seen that even 
in their dreams! 

Speaking more broadly, Lord Brahma, Lord Shakrendra, human rulers, 
erudite lords of scholarship, demon lords, and the like—each and every one of 
them—need to give up their obsession with good fortune within the three worlds of 
desire, form, and beyond form, leave their home life behind, accept the Precepts, 
and then put into practice the Way of the Buddhas and the Ancestors, for this will 
be a cause for Buddhahood to be realized over vast eons. Do you not see? If old 
Vimalakirti had left home life behind, he would have encountered a monastic 
Vimalakirti who was even superior to the lay Vimalakirti. Today, it would be hard 
to encounter a Subhuti, or a Shariputra, or a Manjushri,* or a Maitreya,* let alone 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


802 


half a Vimalakirti, much less three, four, or five Vimalakirtis ! 26 Should it be the 
case that you are not encountering or coming to know three, four, or five 
Vimalakirtis, well, we are not encountering, or knowing, or supporting, or relying 
upon even one Vimalakirti. If we are not yet supporting or relying upon one 
Vimalakirti, then we are not encountering Vimalakirti as a Buddha. When we do 
not encounter Vimalakirti as a Buddha, Vimalakirti does not yet exist as a 
Manjushri, or as a Maitreya, or as a Subhuti, or as a Shariputra, to say nothing of a 
Vimalakirti being the great earth with its mountains and rivers, or his being grasses 
and trees, tiles and stones, or wind and rain, water and fire, or his being, past, 
present, and future! The reason that Vimalakirti’s luminosity and meritorious 
virtues are not apparent is because he had not left home life behind. Had 
Vimalakirti left home life behind, he would have shown those meritorious virtues. 
The so-called ‘Zen Masters’ of the T’ang and Sung Dynasties and their like had 
never arrived at this point, so they vainly considered Vimalakirti as being right in 
whatever he did. These folks, sad to say, did not know the spoken Teaching and 
were in the dark about the Buddha Dharma. 

Furthermore, many of that bunch went so far as to say that the words and 
ways of Vimalakirti and the Venerable Shakyamuni were equal. These too have 
never considered, much less known, the Buddha Dharma or the Way of the 
Ancestors, nor did they even know Vimalakirti himself They say that what 
Vimalakirti’s silence was pointing out to bodhisattvas by his not using words was 
comparable to the Tathagata’s not using words for some person’s sake. I would say 
that they are greatly ignorant of the Buddha Dharma and have little ability for 
studying the Way. The Tathagata’s use of words was already different from that of 
others, and his not using words must also not be likened to that of others. Thus, the 
Tathagata’s moment of utter silence and Vimalakirti’s moment of silence should 
not even be considered analogous. When we explore the abilities of that bunch who 
imagine that the words Vimalakirti spoke to convey the Dharma were different 
from those of the Tathagata, but the silences of the two were undoubtedly the same, 
we see that they have not even come close to where the Buddha is. Sad to say, 
these people have not yet seen His form or heard His voice, much less have they 
experienced the glorious light that leaps forth from His form and voice. And even 
less do they know that they must learn what the Silence within silence means, to 
say nothing of their even hearing It! Generally speaking, people’s understanding of 
movement and silence differ, so how can they say that the Venerable Shakyamuni 
is like any of these types or even different from them? That bunch who have not 


26. Subhuti and Shariputra were two of the Buddha’s most preeminent disciples. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


803 


explored the Matter within the inner quarters of the Buddhas and Ancestors talk 
like this. 

Again, many wrong-headed people fancy that spoken teachings and physical 
expressions are what is provisionally true, whereas silence and physical quietude 
are the real truth. This kind of talk is also not the Buddha Dharma. It is what those 
who pass on what they have heard about of the Scriptures and of the teachings of 
Brahma or Ishvara or their like speculate about. How could the Buddha’s Teaching 
ever be mixed up with ‘movement versus stillness’? Through your training you 
need to explore that there is movement and stillness within the Buddha’s Way, and 
there is no movement and stillness therein! And that there is our encountering 
movement and silence, and there is movement and silence encountering us! You 
veteran trainees of this very moment, do not slacken! 

When we look at Great Sung China today, those folks who are exploring the 
Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors through their training are all but extinct; 
there may not even be two or three left. There are just those who believe that 
Vimalakirti was right and as a result, he had total silence, whereas we today are 
lacking in total silence and therefore are far inferior to Vimalakirti. Moreover, such 
folks lack the vital, absolute Way. Likewise, there are those who hold to the 
opinion that Vimalakirti’s total silence is in no way different from the Venerable 
Shakyamuni’s utter silence. They completely lack the light of illuminating 
discernment. We must admit that none of the folks who say things like this have 
ever encountered, heard, or explored the Buddha Dharma through their training. 
Do not think that since they are people of Great Sung China, what they assert must 
be the Teaching of the Buddha. The reason for this can be easily clarified: Right 
Action means the actions of a monk, which is something that is beyond the ken of 
those who write scholarly commentaries on Scriptures and those who teach 
academic Buddhism. What we call ‘the actions of a monk’ is our doing our utmost 
whilst in the Meditation Hall, it is our bowing in deepest gratitude whilst in the 
Buddha Hall, and it is our washing our face in the wash-up shed. Furthermore, 
bowing with hands in gassho,* burning incense, and heating water are all Right 
Action. Not only is it exchanging your tail for your head, it is exchanging your 
head with your Head, exchanging your mind with your Mind, exchanging ‘the 
Buddha’ with Buddha, exchanging ‘the truth’ with Truth, for these are all 
branchings of the Path of Right Action. If you mistakenly engage in just talking 
about Buddha Dharma, His eyebrows will droop down and His countenance will 
sadden. 

‘The branch of Right Livelihood’ is early morning gruel and midday rice. It 
is staying in the monastery grounds and delighting in single-minded pursuit of the 
Way. It is the Master sitting on the wooden Dharma seat and directly pointing to 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


804 


the Truth. The fewer than twenty trainees in the assembly of old Joshu is a 
manifestation of Right Livelihood. And Yakusan’s assembly of less than ten was 
the lifeblood of Right Livelihood. And Fun’yo’s assembly of seven or eight was 
also a place where Right Livelihood was anchored, because everyone there had 
kept clear of false livelihood. 

Shakyamuni Buddha once remarked that shravakas—those who hear the 
Dharma and do not heed it, but seek a rigid code—have not yet attained Right 
Livelihood. Thus, the teachings, practice, and realizations of shravakas are still not 
Right Livelihood. At the same time, there are commonplace people of recent days 
who say, “We should not separate shravakas from bodhisattvas, but should adopt 
both their behavior and their precepts and monastic regulations.” Using the 
standards of the shravakas of the Lesser Course, they pass judgment on the 
everyday behavior and practices of the bodhisattvas of the Greater Course. As 
Shakyamuni Buddha once said, “A shravaka’s keeping of a precept is a 
bodhisattva’s acting contrary to a precept.” Thus, what shravakas consider to be 
their keeping of the precepts, when viewed from the perspective of the Bodhisattva 
Precepts, are all preceptual breakages of the shravaka precepts. The other everyday 
practices of maintaining one’s concentration and applying one’s wise discernment 
are just the same. For instance, even though a Precept like ‘cease from killing 
whatever lives’ naturally appears to be the same for a shravaka and a bodhisattva, 
there is certainly a difference between them, one which surpasses the separation of 
the heavens and the earth . 27 And how much less could the principles genuinely 
Transmitted from Buddha to Buddha and Ancestor to Ancestor possibly be the 
same as those of the shravakas! Not only is there Right Livelihood, there is also 
Pure Life. So, by exploring the Matter through training with an Ancestor of the 
Buddha, yours will become Right Livelihood. Do not adopt the opinions and 
explanations of such people as scholarly commentators. Because theirs is not yet 
Right Livelihood, they do not live an enlightened life. 

‘The branch of Right Effort’ is the daily conduct of dredging out your whole 
being. And through dredging out your whole being, you fashion a truly human 
countenance. It is your entering the Buddha Hall, riding upside down on a water 
buffalo, doing one lap around the hall, two laps, three, four, five laps, so that nine 
nines comes out to eighty-two . 28 It is your repaying your indebtedness to others 


27. The difference lies in the shravaka’s practice of limiting understanding of the Precepts to the 
literal, whereas the bodhisattva understanding goes far beyond just the literal, taking the 
Precepts on the broadest and deepest levels possible. 

28. That is, being willing to undertake what seems impossible or inconceivable. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


805 


thousands of myriad times over. It is your turning your head left and right, up and 
down. It is your changing your countenance as it goes left and right, up and down. 
It is your entering your Master’s private quarters and your going to the Dharma 
Hall. It is your mutually encountering your true Master in Boshu Pavilion, and 
your mutually encountering your true Master on Useki Peak . 30 It is your mutually 
encountering your true Master within the Buddha Hall. It is just like saying, “When 
seeing one person reflected in two facing mirrors, there are three figures.” 

‘The branch of Right Mindfulness’ is our being aware that eighty or ninety 
percent of the time we are deluding ourselves. Learning to give rise to wise 
discernment within mindfulness is to abandon our father and run away from home. 
To study that wise discernment arises effortlessly within mindfulness is to tie 
oneself up in knots. To say that Right Mindfulness means being blank-minded is 
non-Buddhist. Also, you should not regard the spirits of earth, water, fire, and wind 
as forms of mindfulness, nor should you consider the turning upside down of the 
mental functions of consciousness, thought, and perception to be mindfulness. 
Remember, “You have gotten what my Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow are” is 
Right Mindfulness. 

‘The branch of Right Concentration’ is the dropping off of ‘Buddha’ and 
‘Ancestor’. It is the dropping off of ‘Right Concentration’. It is what others can 
rejoice in. It is your making a Nose by cutting open the crown of your head. It is 
the raising aloft the udumbara blossom within the Treasure House of the Eye of the 
True Teaching. Within the udumbara blossom are Makakashos, their faces broken 
wide with smiles, on hundreds of thousands of petals. Having been made continual 
use of throughout His life for ever so long, Shakyamuni’s wooden paddle finally 
broke. That is why He spent six years, dropping off whatever sprouted up, until 
that one night when His flower blossomed. When the conflagration at kalpa’s 
ending is blazing up and the three-thousand great-thousandfold world is being 
totally consumed, we just follow upon what arises and go forth. 


29. Entering the Master’s private quarters to hear a Dharma talk and to do private interviews 
with the Master is a privilege for Transmitted monks, whereas all trainees, including 
Transmitted monks, are expected to go to the Dhanna Hall to hear the Master’s Dharma 
talks for the community. 

30. Boshu Pavilion and Useki Peak are two scenic places on Mount Seppo used as meditation 
sites. 



Shobogenzo: On the 37 Methods of Training for Realizing Enlightenment 


806 


djb 

CX) 

These thirty-seven methods of training to realize enlightenment are the very 
Eyes and Nose of the Buddhas and Ancestors, Their Skin and Flesh, Bones and 
Marrow, Their Hands, Feet, and Countenances. The Buddhas and Ancestors 
continually explored through Their training these thirty-seven methods of training 
to realize enlightenment, one by one. At the same time, they are the one thousand 
and sixty ways our spiritual question manifests: they are our methods of training to 
realize enlightenment. We should sit until we break through them, and then let 
them drop off. 


Given to the assembly at Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province on the twenty-fourth day of the 
second lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (April 3, 1244). 

Copied by me in the office of the Abbot s assistant in the same temple on the ninth day of the 
third lunar month in the same year (April 17, 1244). 

Ejo 



71 

On Turning the Wheel of the Dharma 

(Tembdrin) 

Translator’s Introduction: The main point of this discourse is that even if a Buddha or an 
Ancestor quotes a line from a work of questionable authenticity, it may still be valid Teaching if 
it results from, and with, a turning of the Wheel of the Dhanna. 


My late Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, once began a Dharma talk by 
saying, “The World-honored One once remarked, ‘When someone gives rise to 
Truth by returning to the Source, the whole of space in all ten quarters falls away 
and vanishes.”’ My Master, commenting on this quote, made the following 
remarks: 

This is what was expounded long ago by the World-honored 
One, but His Teaching has not escaped from people’s capacity to 
create thoroughly strange and wondrous interpretations of It. I, Tendo, 
am not like that. When someone gives rise to Truth by returning to the 
Source, that ‘begging child’ will have broken his rice bowl . 1 2 The 
Venerable Abbot Goso Hoen once said, “When someone gives rise to 
Truth by returning to the Source, he will keep bumping up against the 
Space in all the ten quarters.” The Venerable Abbot Bussho Hotai 
once said, “When someone gives rise to Truth by returning to the 
Source, for him the whole of space in the ten quarters will simply be, 
for him, the whole of space in the ten quarters.” Meditation Master 
Engo Kokugon once said, “When someone gives rise to Truth by 
returning to the Source, he will embellish the whole of Space in the 
ten quarters with his brocaded flowerings.” 

I, Dogen, of Daibutsu-ji Temple would put it this way, “When someone 
gives rise to Truth by returning to the Source, the whole of space in the ten quarters 
gives rise to Truth by returning to the Source.” What has initially been quoted as, 


1. That is, such a one no longer needs to beg for the Truth. 

2. That is, having awakened to the Truth, he will keep encountering Buddha Nature, no matter 
which way he may turn. 


807 



Shobogenzo: On Turning the Wheel of the Dharma 


808 


“When someone gives rise to Truth by returning to the Source, the whole of space 
in all ten quarters falls away and vanishes,” is a verse from the Shurangama 
Scripture. This verse has been cited by various Buddhas and Ancestors alike. Up to 
this very day, this verse is truly the Bones and Marrow of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors. It is the very Eye of the Buddhas and Ancestors. As to my intention in 
saying so, there are those who say that the ten-fascicle Shurangama Scripture is a 
spurious scripture, whereas others say that it is a genuine Scripture: both views 
have persisted from long in the past down to our very day. 3 There are older 
translations and there are newer translations, but the one considered spurious is the 
doubtful translation made during the Chinese Shenlung era (705-706). Be that as it 
may, the Venerable Abbot Goso Hoen, the Venerable Abbot Bussho Hotai, and my 
late Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, have just now recommended this verse. So, 
this verse has already been set in motion by the Dharma Wheel of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors; it is the turning of Their Dharma Wheel. As a result, this verse has 
already set Them in motion; it has already given voice to Them. Because it is set in 
motion by Them and sets Them in motion, even were the Scripture a spurious one, 
if They continue to offer its turning, then it is a genuine Scripture of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors, as well as the Dharma Wheel intimately associated with Them. For 
instance, even tiles and stones, even yellow leaves, even udumbara blossoms, even 
robes of gold brocade, once they have been held aloft by a Buddha or an Ancestor, 
they become the Dharma Wheel of the Buddha. They are the Buddha’s Treasure 
House of the Eye of the True Teaching. 

You need to keep in mind that when sentient beings transcend a genuine 
awakening, 4 they are an Ancestor of the Buddha, they are the teachers and 
disciples of the Buddhas and the Ancestors, and they are the Skin and Flesh, Bones 
and Marrow of the Buddhas and Ancestors. They no longer consider sentient 
beings who were their brothers to be their brothers, but treat the Buddhas and 
Ancestors as their brothers. Likewise, even if this verse were from a text 
considered to be spurious, it is the verse for the present moment, it is the verse of a 


3. A spurious scripture is one that purports to be a genuine translation of a Sanskrit original, 
but is not considered canonical because it contradicts fundamental Buddhist doctrine. In this 
discourse, ‘a genuine Scripture’ refers to one that was originally composed in Chinese, but 
one that does not contradict basic Buddhist teaching. 

The Shurangama Scripture discussed here should not be confused with the three-fascicle 
and unequivocally genuine Shurangama Samadhi Scripture, translated by Kumarajlva from 
the Sanskrit. 

4. That is, having dropped off body and mind, one then drops off ‘dropping off’. 



Shobogenzo: On Turning the Wheel of the Dharma 


809 


Buddha and the verse of an Ancestor, and it should not be grouped with other 
phrases or verses from that particular Scripture. Even if there are other verses in 
that Scripture that far surpass this verse, you should not consider each and every 
passage to be absolutely, or even provisionally, a saying of the Buddha or the 
words of an Ancestor, nor should you treat them as the Eye for exploring the Great 
Matter. * 

There are many reasons why you should not compare this particular verse 
with the other verses. Let’s take up just one of them. What is called ‘the turning of 
the Wheel of the Dharma’ is a matter for Buddhas and Ancestors. There have not 
been any Buddhas or Ancestors who have not turned the Wheel of the Dharma. 
Some will turn the Wheel of the Dharma by using sound and form to free Their 
disciples from attachment to sound and form, and some will turn the Wheel of the 
Dharma by Their leaping free of sound and form, and some will turn the Wheel of 
the Dharma by scraping out Their Eyes, and some will turn the Wheel of the 
Dharma by holding Their Fist aloft. And there are times when the disciple 
comprehends what his Nose is or comprehends what the Unbounded is, which are 
instances of the Wheel of the Dharma naturally turning Itself. To comprehend what 
this verse is about is to grasp what the morning star is about, what one’s Nose is 
about, what the plum blossom is about, and what the Unbounded is about. It is 
comprehending what Buddhas and Ancestors are about and what the Wheel of the 
Dharma is about. The underlying principle of these is, clearly, what the turning of 
the Wheel of the Dharma is about. 

‘Turning the Wheel of the Dharma’ means doing your utmost to explore the 
Matter through your training with your Master without leaving the temple 
throughout the rest of your life. I call it sitting with others on the long meditation 
benches and asking for the Master’s benevolence whilst doing your utmost to train 
in the Way. 

Delivered to the assembly on the twenty-seventh day of the second lunar month in the second 
year of the Kangen era (April 6, 1244), whilst in Echizen Province at Kippo-ji temple. 

Copied by me on the first day of the third lunar month in the same year (April 8, 1244), whilst in 
the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant in the same temple. 

Ejo 


* 


See Glossary. 



72 

On the Meditative State of One’s True Nature 

(Jisho Zammai) 


Translator’s Introduction: In the first part of this discourse, Dogen explores what the proper 
attitude of mind is for one who is serious about coming to know what one’s True Nature is and 
how It functions. 

In the latter part of the discourse, Dogen devotes considerable time to presenting stories 
concerning the Rinzai Master Daie, who is credited with introducing the method of koan study 
that is particular to the Rinzai tradition. Dogen’s purpose seems to be to describe someone who 
exemplifies the failure to realize the meditative state of his True Nature. Because what is 
happening in these stories is not always easily grasped and the significance of the exchanges 
may not be immediately apparent, it has seemed worthwhile to supply more extensive footnotes 
for the sake of modem readers. 


What has been authentically Transmitted by the Buddhas from the Seven 
Buddhas* on is that the meditative state of one’s training is identical with one’s 
inherent enlightenment. In other words, we sometimes submit ourselves to what a 
good spiritual friend advises and sometimes we submit ourselves to what Scriptural 
texts advise, for these are both the Eye of the Buddhas and Ancestors. This is why 
the following dialogue occurred. 

The Old Buddha Daikan Eno once put the question to a monk, 
asking, “And is this a substitute for training and enlightenment?” 1 

The monk replied, “It is not that there is no training and 
enlightenment, but rather, there is nothing to be had that will stain It.” 

So, keep in mind that one’s training and enlightenment being unstained by 
attachments is a characteristic of Buddhas and Ancestors. It is the meditative state 
of the Buddhas and Ancestors being experienced like a flash of lightning, like a 
gust of wind, like a roll of thunder. 


* See Glossary. 

1. The monk in question was Eno’s Dhanna heir, Nangaku Ejo. Eno’s question was in response 
to Ejo’s statement, “Were I to try to put the One Matter into words, they would miss the 
mark.” 


810 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


811 


At the very moment when we submit ourselves to what a good spiritual 
friend advises, sometimes we see half of each other’s Countenance, sometimes we 
see half of each other’s Body, sometimes we see the whole of each other’s 
Countenance, and sometimes we see the whole of each other’s Heart and Mind. 
And there are times when we both see half of our own self and times when we both 
see half of each other’s self. There are times when we become aware that a deity’s 
head is enveloped in hair and times when we notice that a demon’s countenance 
has sprouted horns. There are times when we come, attending on others so that we 
might rescue all manner of beings from their suffering, and there are times when 
we go, transforming ourselves amongst those with whom we live. In situations like 
these, we do not know how many thousands of myriad times we have discarded 
our sense of self for the sake of the Dharma. And we do not know for how many 
billions of eons we have sought the Dharma for the sake of our own self. This is 
our basing our life upon submitting ourselves to what a good spiritual friend 
advises, and it is the state of our exploring through our training what Self is and 
how we may submit ourselves to that Self. There was the occasion when 
Makakasho broke out into a smile when he saw the twinkle in Shakyamuni’s eye. 
And Eka bowed to Bodhidharma in deepest respect upon realizing the latter’s 

■j 

Marrow, which is connected with Eka’s having ‘cut off his arm’. 

In summary, from the sequence of the Seven Buddhas down though the 
Sixth Chinese Ancestor and beyond, good spiritual teachers who have encountered 
the Self have been more than just one or two. And good spiritual teachers who 
could see It in others are not limited to the past nor are they limited to the present. 

When we submit ourselves to Scriptural Writings, we thoroughly explore 
Their Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow. When we let go of our own skin and 
flesh, bones and marrow, the Peach Blossom is seen jutting out from our Eye, and 
the sound of the Bamboo is heard thundering in our Ear. 

In general, when we are following the path of studying Scriptures, Scriptures 
truly come forth. What we call Scriptures are the whole world of the ten quarters, 
the great earth with its mountains and rivers, grasses and trees, self and other. And 
They are our eating meals, putting on our clothes, and doing our daily activities. 
When we study the Way by submitting ourselves to each of the Scriptural texts, 


2. That is, there are times when the Master seems to resemble a lay person, just as there are 
times when the Master seems like a raging bull. 

3. The Second Chinese Ancestor, Taiso Eka, is said to have cut off his arm in order to find the 
Truth. This ‘severing’ may refer to giving up one’s attachments rather than to a literal, 
physical act. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


812 


one by one, the thousands of myriad volumes of Scriptures that we have not yet 
encountered are emerging right in front of us. Fortunately, They contain verses 
stating the Matter* with words of affirmation and poems clearly stating It with 
words of negation. 4 When we have succeeded in encountering Them, we employ 
our body and mind to explore Them through our training, exhausting long eons and 
making use of Them over long periods of time. Through this, we ultimately reach 
our goal of understanding Them thoroughly. When we explore Them by letting go 
of body and mind, we scrape out all traces of duality and leap beyond the first 
signs of anything arising, while, at the same time, we inevitably realize the merits 
of accepting and retaining the Scriptures. 

The Sanskrit texts of India that have been translated into Chinese books of 
Dharma number barely five thousand scrolls. Among these are the three vehicles, 
the five vehicles, the six divisions, and the twelve divisions. All these are 
Scriptural texts that you should study and follow. Even if we were to attempt to 
stay aloof from Them, we could not. Thus, sometimes They are ‘the Eye’ and 
sometimes They are what ‘my Marrow’ is. 5 When horns on the head are right, then 
a tail will be right. 6 Whether we receive Them from others or impart Them to 
others, They are just one’s Eye springing to life as we drop off self and other. They 
are simply the conferring of ‘my Marrow’ as we free ourselves from the delusion 
of self and other. Because both the Eye and ‘my Marrow’ are beyond self and 
beyond other, the Buddhas and Ancestors have continued to accurately Transmit 
Them and confer Them from the distant past, to this present moment, and to the 
next present moment. There is the traveling staff* as a Scripture, which gives free 
expression to the Dharma in every conceivable way, spontaneously breaking up 
‘emptiness’ and breaking up ‘existence’. And there is the ceremonial hossu* as a 
Scripture, as it sweeps away snow and sweeps away frost. And there are the one or 
two sessions of seated meditation as Scriptures. And there is the kesa* as a 
Scripture, which has ten scrolls per volume. These are what Buddhas and 
Ancestors safeguard and keep to. Following such ‘Scriptures’ as These, we awaken 
to training and realize the Way. And there are times when we bring forth into 
existence the face of someone in a lofty position or the face of some ordinary 


4. That is, some statements express what the Matter is, whereas other statements express what 
the Matter is not. 

5. ‘Eye’ refers to spiritual ‘seeing’ as the Master ‘sees’, and ‘my Marrow’ refers to what one 
‘sees’, which is completely in accord with one’s Master. 

6. To paraphrase, in either case the Scriptures are right from beginning to end. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


813 


person, and times when we bring forth the countenance of the Sun or the 
countenance of the Moon, as we do our utmost to realize our pursuit of Scriptures. 

At the same time, whether people are following a good spiritual teacher or 
following the Scriptures, all such persons are following their True Self. The 
Scriptural texts are, naturally, the Scriptural texts of Self, and good spiritual 
teachers are, naturally, good spiritual teachers of Self. Thus, you should investigate 
through your training that thorough training means thoroughly training oneself, 
that studying the hundreds of things which sprout up like grass means studying 
oneself, that studying the myriad things that take root and branch out like trees 
means studying oneself, and that this self is, of necessity, synonymous with 
making such an effort. By exploring like this through your training, you drop off 
self and you promise enlightenment to yourself. 

Accordingly, in the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors there are tools 
for awakening to one’s True Self and for realizing what that Self truly is. If there 
were no Buddhas or Ancestors who were genuine Dharma heirs, there would be no 
genuine Transmission. But there are tools that Dharma heir after Dharma heir has 
received, for were there not the Bones and Marrow of the Buddhas and Ancestors, 
there would not be a genuine Transmission. 

Because we explore the Matter in this way, when we pass on the 
Transmission for the sake of others, we confer it by saying such things as “You 
have gotten what my Marrow is” and “I have the Treasure House of the Eye of the 
True Teaching which I confer on Makakasho.” Expressing It for someone’s sake 
does not necessarily depend on self and others. To express It for the sake of others 
is to express It for one’s own sake. It is one’s Self and another’s Self harmoniously 
hearing and expressing the same thing. One ear is hearing and one ear is 
expressing: one tongue is expressing and one tongue is hearing. The same holds 
true for the sense organs of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind, as well as for 
their forms of consciousness and their sense objects. Further, there is one Body and 
there is one Mind, and there is enlightenment and there is training. It is the hearing 
and expressing of one’s ears, and it is the hearing and expressing of one’s tongue. 
Even though we may have expressed an exception to the rule yesterday for the sake 
of others, today we are expressing the established rule for our own sake. In this 
way, the faces of the sun line up one after another, as do the faces of the moon. 

To give expression to the Dharma for the sake of others and to put the 
Dharma into practice for oneself is to hear the Dharma, to clarify what It is, and to 
realize It for many lives. Even in this life, if we are sincere in giving expression to 
It for the sake of others, it will be easy for us to realize the Dharma. If we help 
others to hear and promote the Dharma, we will establish good causes for our own 
learning of the Dharma. We will establish good causes both physically and 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


814 


mentally. Should we hinder others from hearing the Dharma, then we ourselves 
will be hindered in hearing the Dharma. To express the Dharma, as well as to hear 
It over many lives in many bodies, is to hear the Dharma over many generations. It 
is to hear It once more in this generation as well as hearing the Dharma that has 
been genuinely Transmitted to us from the past. We are born in the Dharma and we 
die in the Dharma, and so, having had the Dharma genuinely Transmitted to us 
whilst being within the whole universe of the ten quarters, we listen to It in life 
after life and train with It in body after body. Since we have made life after life 
manifest in the Dharma and have made body after body into Dharma, we bring 
together each molecule of dust and the whole realm of thoughts and things, and we 
help them to realize the Dharma. 

Thus, having heard a verse whilst in eastern regions, when we come to some 
western region, we should give expression to it for someone’s sake. This means 
that we do our utmost, first and foremost, to listen to it and give expression to it in 
our own way and that we simultaneously practice and experience our eastern self 
and our western self. In any case, we should delight in having our own body and 
mind keep close company with the Buddha’s Teaching and with the words and 
ways of the Ancestors, to say nothing of our hoping and intending to do so, and to 
our putting Them into practice. We should extend our practice from an hour to a 
whole day until we have extended it from a year to a whole lifetime. We should 
give free rein to the Buddha Dharma as our very essence. In this way, we will not 
pass through life after life in vain pursuits. 

At the same time, if you have not yet fully clarified the Matter, do not think 
that you cannot express It for someone’s sake. Were you to wait until you had fully 
clarified It, you would not be equal to the task even for immeasurable eons. Even if 
you clarify what a human Buddha is, you will need to clarify what a celestial 
Buddha is. Even if you clarify what the heart of a Mountain is, you will need to 
clarify what the heart of the Water is. Even if you clarify what the causes and 
conditions are for the arising of thoughts and things, you will need to clarify what 
makes the causes and conditions for the arising of thoughts and things an irrelevant 
issue. Even if you clarify what the environs of the Buddhas and Ancestors are, you 
will need to clarify what is above and beyond Buddhas and Ancestors. If you are 
aiming at first completely clarifying these within your lifetime and only then acting 
for the benefit of others, you are not doing your utmost, nor are you being stout¬ 
hearted, nor are you exploring the Matter through your training with your Master. 

In short, as someone who is studying the words and ways of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors, after you have explored through your training a single method or a 
single model, you then enthusiastically let your intention to help others rise to the 
very heavens. Accordingly, we let go of ‘self and other’. Further, if you thoroughly 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


815 


awaken to your Self, you will have thoroughly awakened to others. And if you can 
thoroughly awaken to others, you will have thoroughly awakened to your Self. 
Even though we call the model of a Buddha ‘One who has been bom wise’, if such 
a person has not received the Teaching through a Master, that person cannot realize 
It through direct bodily experience. If those born wise have not yet encountered a 
Master, they do not know what is beyond being born wise and they do not know 
what the Unborn and Unknowing is. Even though we speak of those who have 
been born wise, that does not mean that they will know the Great Way of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors; only by exploring It through their training with their 
Master will they come to know It. Being thoroughly awakened to one’s Self and 
being thoroughly awakened to the Self of others is the Great Way of the Buddhas 
and Ancestors. They just need to turn their attention to exploring their own 
beginner’s mind and do the same with exploring the beginner’s mind of others. In 
bringing out from that beginner’s mind the harmonization of self and other, they 
will be able to arrive at harmonization with the Ultimate and they will be able to 
promote the diligent efforts of others just as they do their own. 

At the same time, upon hearing such phrases as ‘awakening to one’s Tme 
Self’ and ‘realizing what that Self truly is’, mde and boorish people think that they 
do not need to receive Transmission from a Master, but need only to do self-study. 
This is a great mistake. Those who erroneously consider everything to be based on 
their personal mminations and discriminations and have not received the Teaching 
through a Master are non-Buddhist followers of Indian naturalism. 7 How could 
that bunch who do not understand this possibly call themselves persons of the 
Buddha’s Way? What is more, upon hearing the phrase ‘awakening to one’s Tme 
Self’, they reckon that it refers to the accumulation of the five skandhas,* and so 
equate it with the self-discipline of the Lesser Course.* There are many folks who 
do not understand the difference between the Greater Course* and the Lesser 
Course, and many of them call themselves offspring of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 
Even so, what bright-eyed person would be deceived by such folks? 


During the Shaohsing era (1131-1162) in Great Sung China, there was a 
certain Soko, later known as Meditation Master Daie of Mount Kinzan. He was 
originally a scholastic student of Scriptural texts and commentaries. During his 
travels from teacher to teacher, he became a follower of Meditation Master Shori in 
Hsuanchou Province, with whom he studied Ummon’s comments on koan* stories, 


7. Indian naturalism is the belief that everything arises spontaneously, without a cause. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


816 


as well as Setcho’s verse and prose commentaries on koan stories, which was the 
beginning of his formal training under a Master. Failing to grasp Ummon’s turn of 
mind, he eventually went to train under Abbot Tozan Dobi, but Dobi did not permit 
Soko to enter his private quarters. Abbot Dobi was a Dharma heir of Abbot Fuyo 
Dokai; he was head-and-shoulders above those idle ones who seat themselves in 
the back row. Even though ‘Meditation Master’ Soko did the training for a rather 
long time, he did not succeed in getting hold of his Master’s Skin and Flesh, Bones 
and Marrow, much less did he even know that there is an Eye amidst the dust 
motes of defiling passions. 8 

And then there was the time when he had just heard of the practice in the 
Way of the Buddha’s Ancestors of burning incense on one’s elbow whilst 
requesting the Record of Transmission. 9 All eager, he begged Abbot Dobi for the 
Record of Transmission. However, Abbot Dobi refused his request. 

In time, the Abbot said to Soko, “If you want to receive the 
Record of Transmission, do not be in such a hurry. Just by all means 
do your utmost to be diligent in your training here and now. What you 
are asking the Buddhas and Ancestors for is never given 
indiscriminately. It is not that I am unwilling to bestow It. It is simply 
that you are not yet equipped with the Eye.” 

Soko now responded, “Having been endowed with genuine 
eyes from the first, I have awakened to my True Self and have realized 
what that Self truly is, so how can you be so arbitrary and not give It 
to me?” 

Abbot Dobi laughed and left it at that. 


Later, Soko went to train under Abbot Tando Bunjun. 

One day Tando asked Soko, “And why are you lacking half 
your nose today?” 10 


8. Since Soko was the name given to Daie upon being ordained as a novice monk, Dogen’s 
referring to him as Meditation Master Soko is clearly sarcastic, implying Daie’s propensity 
for putting himself above his teachers, a trait that becomes more evident in what follows. 

9. This was apparently a symbolic reenactment of Eka’s offering up his arm when requesting 
Transmission from Bodhidhanna. 

10. Tando is asking in effect, “Why don’t you let go of that arrogant attitude of yours, so that 
you can realize the fullness of your innate True Nature?” 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


817 


Soko replied, “I am a disciple in the monastery of the Hobo 
Peak.” 11 

Tando responded, “Inaccurate, and far from the mark!” 

Once when Soko was reading a Scripture, Tando asked him, 
“What Scripture are you reading?” 

Soko replied, “The Diamond-Cutting Scripture.” 12 

Tando then asked him, “It says in that Scripture, ‘This Teaching 
is impartial; there is no higher or lower,’ so why is Mount Ungo 
exalted and Mount Hobo devalued?” 13 

Soko responded, “This Teaching is impartial, without high or 
low.” 14 

Tando responded, “You have certainly succeeded in making 
yourself into a full-fledged scholastic,” and had him go do seated 
meditation. 15 

On another occasion, Tando was watching a government 
official placing adornments on figures of the Ten Lords who preside 
over the ten hells. He asked Soko, who was still a novice who had not 
yet been Chief Junior, 16 “What is this official’s family name?” 

Soko responded, “His family name is Ryo.” 


11. Hobo Peak is the mountain on which Tando’s monastery lies, and by extension is a reference 
to Abbot Tando himself. In effect, Daie is holding the Abbot responsible for his not having 
fully realized his True Self—an extremely rude remark. 

12. This is the Scripture that Daikan Eno heard being recited, which triggered his kensho. 

13. Mount Ungo was a Soto monastery, whereas Mount Hobo was a Rinzai monastery. Tando is 
trying to point out to Soko his arrogant, judgmental way of thinking. 

14. Soko’s response is merely a mouthing of Scripture. He does not see the relevance of his 
Master’s remark to his koan of intellectual arrogance. 

15. In Zen contexts, the term translated here as ‘a full-fledged scholastic’ is a strong rebuke, 
implying that someone is content to merely pursue intellectual interests, which he is not all 
that good at in the first place, rather than to do the practice needed to resolve the One Great 
Matter. 

16. The Chief Junior is a novice monk who as been given the responsibility to oversee the 
behavior of junior monks for a variable period of time, in accordance with the guidance of 
the senior officers of the temple. A novice who has not yet done his stint in this position is 
considered to be still quite new to the ways of monastic life. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


818 


Tando, stroking his own head with his hand, said, “My family 
name was Ryo, so how come I lack a hat like his?” 

Soko replied, “Even though you lack a hat, your nose closely 
resembles his.” 

Tando remarked, “You are wide of the mark!” 17 

One day, Tando said to Soko, “Veteran novice Soko, you have 
been able to comprehend at once what my ‘meditate here and now’ 
means. Were I to let you explain it, you could put it in your own 
words. Were I to let you demonstrate how to do it, again, you could 
demonstrate it. Were I to let you compose comments on it in verse or 
prose, expound it to trainees, give the monks informal talks on it, or 
request teaching from a Master, you could also do any of these. But 
there is just one thing that you do not yet have in place. Do you know 
what it is?” 18 

Soko responded, “What is that thing that 1 do not yet have in 
place?” 

Tando answered, “There is just one bit of understanding that 
you lack: HAH! 19 If you are lacking this one bit of understanding, 
then whenever we are in my private quarters and I give teaching for 
your sake, you have the mind of meditation, but as soon as you leave 
my quarters, it is completely gone. Whenever you are clearly 
pondering the Matter, you have the mind of meditation, but as soon as 
you do the least bit of drifting off into sleep, it is completely gone. If 
that is the way you are, how can you possibly be up to handling the 
matter of life and death?” 

Soko replied, “That is precisely what Soko is suspicious of.” 

After a few years had passed, Tando showed signs of illness. 
Soko asked him, “Venerable Abbot, a hundred years from now who 


17. Soko’s remark is ambiguous, but it sounds as if he were saying, ‘The only difference 
between you and some government official is that you lack a fancy hat.” 

18. This question has a double meaning, the other being “Do you know what It is?” 

19. HAH! represents the spontaneous sound made upon realizing what It truly is. It is also what 
is known as a kwatz, a sudden shout by a Master, used to interrupt the flow of intellectual 
thought in a disciple. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


819 


should I rely upon that I may resolve this Great Matter of life and 
death?” 20 

Tando responded to his request by saying, “There is a Master 
by the name of Engo Kokugon. He is from the State of Pa. I do not 
know him personally. Even so, if you meet him, I am sure you will be 
able to resolve this Matter. Once you have met him, do not go around 
visiting other Masters. In generations yet to come, explore the mind of 
meditation through your training.” 

When we examine just this one part of the stories, it is clear that Tando still had not 
endorsed Soko. Even though time and time again Tando aimed at opening Soko up, 
the latter ultimately kept missing that one experience, and there is no way of 
compensating for that, for one cannot omit that experience. Obviously, we can trust 
to Abbot Dobi’s clearly seeing Soko’s makeup by his denying him the Record of 
Transmission yet continuing to encourage him, saying that there was still 
something that needed doing. Soko did not thoroughly explore his own statement, 
“That is precisely what Soko is suspicious of,” nor did he drop it off, or break it 
open, or give rise to the Great Doubt, or break through that doubting. 21 In fact, his 
impertinence in asking for the Record of Transmission was his attempt to rush past 
his exploring the Matter with his Master. It was the utmost limit of a mind for 
which there was no such thing as Truth. It was an extreme lack of respect for the 
ancients. We must say that it was not only lacking in discretion, it was lacking in 
the markings of the Way. It was the height of negligence in the practice. Greedy 
for fame, craving personal gain, he attempted to crash his way into the private 
quarters of the Ancestors of the Buddha. It is so pitiful how he failed to understand 
what the Ancestors of the Buddha were saying to him in their talks and writings. 
He did not grasp that to study and train is to awaken to one’s True Self. He did not 
hear that to delve deeply into the writings of myriad generations is to come to 
realize what that Self truly is. Without proper study, there are errors like these and 
there is self-deception like his. Because this was the way ‘Meditation Master’ Soko 
was, in his assembly there was not a single disciple, or even half a one, who had a 
trustworthy nose ring, but there were many who were pretend monks. Failure to 


20. The phrase ‘a hundred years from now’ was a polite way of saying ‘after you are dead’, as it 
implies that the Master will surely live for another century. 

21. The Great Doubt is “I could be wrong.” 

22. A nose ring is used in training a water buffalo. The tenn is often used in Zen contexts to 
refer to the practice of mastering self-control. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


820 


intuitively grasp what the Buddha Dharma is and failure to intellectually 
understand what the Buddha Dharma is are both just like this. Beyond any 
question, novice trainees here and now should explore the Matter in detail with 
their Master. Do not be negligent out of pride. 


After Tando’s passing, Soko, in accord with Tando’s 
recommendation, went to train under Meditation Master Engo at 
Tennei Temple in the capital city. One day, upon Engo’s entering the 
Dharma Hall, Soko reported to Engo that, thanks to Engo, he had had 
a spiritual awakening. Engo said, “Not yet. Even though a disciple’s 
state may be like what you describe, nevertheless, you have still not 
clarified what the Great Dharma is.” 

On another day, whilst giving a Dharma talk, Engo quoted the 
words of the Venerable Abbot Goso Hoen on asserting existence and 
non-existence. Upon hearing this, Soko grasped a principle that 
brought him great comfort. Once again, he reported his understanding 
to Engo. Engo laughed and said, “It is not I who has deluded you!” 

This is the story of how ‘Meditation Master’ Soko subsequently trained under 
Engo. 

While in Engo’s assembly, he served in the post of Abbot’s Secretary, but 
there is no visible evidence of his attaining any understanding before or after that. 
Even when he was giving formal or informal talks, he offered nothing of what he 
had grasped. You need to know that his biographer speaks of his having had a 
spiritual awakening and records that he had grasped a principle that brought him 
great comfort, but there is nothing to support this. Do not think of him as 
someone of prominence, for he was simply another person who was training under 
a Master. 

Meditation Master Engo was an Old Buddha, as venerable as anyone within 
all ten quarters. Not since Obaku had there been one so worthy of veneration as 
Engo, for he was an Old Buddha who would be rare in any other world. Even so, 
ordinary folks and those in lofty positions who have recognized this are few, for 
the everyday world is a sad place indeed. 


23. That is, his biographer quotes what Soko said he had experienced, but he does not record 
Engo’s responses. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


821 


Now when we examine Old Buddha Engo’s giving voice to the Dharma and 
investigate Soko’s Dharma talks, it is clear that the latter still did not have wise 
discernment that came up to that of his Master, nor did he have wise discernment 
that resembled that of his Master, and what is more, he never realized wise 
discernment that surpassed that of his Master even in his dreams. So, you need to 
recognize that ‘Meditation Master’ Soko did not have abilities that even equaled 
half those of his Master. He merely parroted lines from texts like the Avatamsaka 
Scripture and the Shurangama Scripture , but he never grasped what ‘the Bones 
and Marrow of the Buddhas and Ancestors’ means. From Soko’s point of view, he 
considered the Buddha Dharma to be merely the opinions supported by the greater 
and lesser hermits—those who are led by the spirit that permeates grasses and 
trees. 24 If this is what he imagined the Buddha Dharma to be, then clearly he did 
not know what the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors is. After Engo, he did 
not wander off to other temples or seek out good spiritual friends, but as head of a 
large temple, he functioned haphazardly as the monk who greets incoming 
novices. The sayings he has left behind do not even approach the outskirts of the 
Great Dharma. At the same time, folks who do not recognize this are apt to think 
that it is not shameful to classify ‘Meditation Master’ Soko with the ancients, 
whereas those who see and know have decisively concluded that he was not 
enlightened. Ultimately, he had not clarified what the Great Dharma is and just 
irresponsibly babbled on. 

Thus, you need to recognize that, in truth, Abbot Dobi of Mount Tozan had 
clearly made no mistake in what he saw in Soko’s future. Folks who trained under 
‘Meditation Master’ Soko ultimately became jealous and resentful of Abbot Dobi, 
and have not stopped being so even to this very day. All Abbot Dobi did was to 
refuse to acknowledge Soko’s claim. Abbot Tando’s refusals to acknowledge 
Soko’s claims were far stronger than Dobi’s, for he found fault with Soko every 
time he encountered him. Even so, Abbot Tando is not resented by Soko’s 


24. ‘Hennits’ in this context refer to those who have removed themselves from worldly ways of 
thinking. The greater hennits were those who resided among ordinary folks, practicing the 
Bodhisattva vows. The lesser hermits were those who resided in mountains and forests, 
practicing to acquire merit which they could then transfer to all sentient beings. ‘The spirit 
that permeates grasses and trees’ is an allusion to the Buddha Nature that is innate in all 
things that ‘sprout up and grow tali’. 

25. That is, despite his being nominal head of a large temple, he was unable to spiritually lead 
novices beyond the level of newcomers. 



Shobogenzo: On the Meditative State of One s True Nature 


822 


followers. Oh, how embarrassed we should feel for those who have been resentful 
in the past and are still so in the present! 

In general, offspring of the Buddhas and Ancestors in Great Sung China 
have been many, but trainees who have learned what Truth is have been few, so 
there are few who teach what is true. You should clearly recognize this principle in 
these stories. It was no different in Soko’s Shaohsing era. The present is 
incomparably worse than that era. Today, folks who do not even know what the 
Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors is have become the masters for novices. 

You need to realize that the genuine passing on of the Record of 
Transmission in India and China by Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after 
Ancestor is the genuine Transmission that has come down from Seigen’s mountain. 
After it came down from Seigen’s mountain, it was naturally Transmitted to Tozan, 
which is something unknown to any but ourselves throughout all the ten quarters. 
Those who know this are all offspring of Tozan and they bestow their fame upon 
their trainees. Still, throughout his life, ‘Meditation Master’ Soko did not 
understand what the phrases ‘awakening to one’s True Self’ and ‘realizing what 
that Self truly is’ meant. How much less could he have penetrated his own spiritual 
question through his training! And even less, how can any present-day trainees 
who are descendants of Zen veteran Soko possibly understand the words 
‘awakening to one’s True Self? 

Hence, the word ‘self and the word ‘other’ as used by the Buddhas and 
Ancestors refer to the Body and Mind of the Buddhas and Ancestors: they are the 
Eye of the Buddhas and Ancestors. And because they are the Bones and Marrow of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors, they transcend what ‘getting the skin’ would mean to 
those of ordinary mind. 

Delivered to the assembly in Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province on the twenty-ninth day of the 
second lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (April 8, 1244). 

Copied by me whilst in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant at the foot of Kippo-ji Peak in 
Echizen Province on the twelfth day of the fourth lunar month of the same year (May 20, 
1244). 

Ejo 



73 

On the Great Practice 

(Daishugyd) 


Translator’s introduction: ‘The Great Practice’ refers to the training and practice of someone 
who is following the Greater Course and is functioning as a morally good spiritual friend and 
guide for others, a fully perfected Master who is doing the Great Practice. By contrast, ‘a wild 
fox’ refers to someone who gives false teaching. 

This discourse is one of the more difficult ones to follow, in part because Dogen spends a 
considerable amount of time in refuting the many ways in which others have interpreted the story 
that he is commenting on. In addition, he calls into question the accuracy of various aspects of 
the story. 

This particular story has been the center of much controversy. The core question is whether 
or not someone who has realized fully perfected enlightenment and is doing the Great Practice is 
freed from causality or is still subject to cause and effect. Dogen will ultimately argue that both 
views, though seemingly contradictory, are accurate. That is, someone who has realized fully 
perfected enlightenment is not subject to causality because such a person is living in total accord 
with the Precepts, and at the same time, such a person, as a sentient being, is subject to the causal 
consequences of being a sentient being. 

Something that is not explicitly stated but is implied by Dogen’s commentary is that the old 
man in the story may be one of Hyakujo’s past lives, the karma from which Hyakujo cleanses by 
helping the old man turn his thinking around. 

Hyakujo Ekai was a Dharma heir of Baso. Whenever people 
came to hear him give a public Dharma talk, there was an old man 
who always came into the Dharma Hall immediately following those 
in the monastic assembly. He always listened to the Dharma talk and 
then, when the monks would leave the hall, he would leave at the 
same time. Then one day, he lingered behind. Thereupon, the Master 
asked him, “You who are standing here, who are you?” 

The old man replied, “To speak truly, I am a non-human being. 

Long ago during the eon of Kasho Buddha, 1 I dwelt upon this 
mountain as Abbot. Then, one day, a trainee asked me, ‘Is even the 
one who does the Great Practice still subject to cause and effect?’ I 


1. Among the Seven Buddhas, the One whose eon directly preceded that of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. 


823 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


824 


replied that such a one is no longer subject to cause and effect. After 
that, as a consequence, I was reduced to being reborn as a wild fox for 
five hundred lives. I now beseech you, O Venerable Monk, say 
something that will turn me around, for I long to rid myself of this 
wild fox’s attitude of mind.” 

Thereupon, he asked the Master, “Is even someone who does 
the Great Practice subject to cause and effect?” 

The Master replied, “Such a one is not blind to causality.” 

Upon hearing these words, the old man had a great awakening. 
Prostrating himself before the Master, he said, “Since I have already 
shed the outer trappings of a wild fox, I have taken to dwelling on the 
far side of this mountain. Dare I ask the Venerable Abbot to perform 
for me a monk’s funeral service?” 

The Master had the senior monk who supervises the Meditation 
Hall strike the wooden gong to signal the monks to assemble so that 
he might tell them that, after their meal, there would be a funeral 
service for a deceased monk. The whole assembly was at ease with 
this, though they wondered about it, since there was no sick person in 
the temple infirmary. After the meal, the Master simply led the 
assembly up to the base of a rock on the other side of the mountain, 
where they saw him use his traveling staff to point out the corpse of a 
wild fox. They cremated the remains in accordance with the 
appropriate procedure. 

At nightfall, the Master went to the Dharma Hall where he gave 
the monks a talk on the preceding events. His Dharma heir Obaku 
then asked him, “In the past, the man said the wrong thing to turn his 
disciple around and, as a consequence, was reduced to being a wild 
fox for five hundred lives. Suppose he had not made this mistake, 
what would have become of him?” 

The Master said, “Come up close and I will tell you.” 

Thereupon, Obaku went on up and gave the Master a slap. The 
Master clapped his hands and laughed, saying, “I’ve always thought 
that the beards of foreigners were red, and here is a red-bearded 
foreigner.” 

The spiritual question that is arising here in this story is precisely what the 
Great Practice is all about. Just as the old man had said, during the eon of Kasho 
Buddha there was an Abbot of Mount Hyakujo in Hungchou Province, and in the 
eon when Shakyamuni Buddha existed there was an Abbot of Mount Hyakujo in 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


825 


Hungchou Province. These are key phrases in describing what has occurred. 
Although this is the case, the Abbot of Mount Hyakujo in the past during the eon 
of Kasho Buddha and the Abbot of Mount Hyakujo during the present eon of 

Shakyamuni Buddha are not one and the same person, nor are they different from 

2 

each other, nor are they ‘three and three before that, or three and three after that’. 
The one who became the Abbot of Mount Hyakujo in the past did not become the 
Abbot of Mount Hyakujo later on, any more than the later Abbot of Mount 
Hyakujo was the preceding Abbot of Mount Hyakujo during the eon of Kasho 
Buddha. Even so, there is the old man’s spiritual question of ‘having dwelt upon 
this mountain as Abbot’. What he said for the benefit of his disciple is like what 
Hyakujo was now saying for the benefit of the old man. And the question that the 
disciple asked is like the question the old man was now asking. While setting forth 
one explanation, we cannot set forth a second, for if we let pass what is primary, 
we will get all involved with what is secondary. 

The trainee in the long past is asking, “Is even ‘that one’ on Mount Hyakujo 
who is doing the Great Practice still subject to cause and effect ?” 2 3 Truly, this 
question cannot be readily or easily grasped. And what is the reason for that? For 
the first time since the Buddha Dharma advanced eastwards during the Chinese 
Yung-p’ing era in the Later Han dynasty , 4 and since our Ancestral Master 
Bodhidharma came from the West during the Chinese P’u-t’ung era of the Liang 
dynasty, we are now able to hear the question of that trainee of the past due to what 
that old wild fox said. It is a condition that did not exist previously. So we can 
assert that it was rarely heard of. 

When we search for, and find, the Great Practice, this will be the Great 
Cause and Effect. Because this Cause and Effect is invariably the full perfection of 
the cause and the complete fulfillment of the effect, there is nothing to debate 
concerning ‘being subject to’ or ‘not being subject to’, and there is nothing to 
discuss concerning ‘being blind to’ or ‘not being blind to’. If ‘not being subject to 
cause and effect’ is a mistaken view, then ‘not being blind to cause and effect’ 
might also be a mistaken view. Even if we were to say that this is adding a mistake 
atop a mistake, still there was the old man’s being reduced to the life of a wild fox 
and there was his dropping off of the life of a wild fox. It may appear reasonable 


2. That is, instances of people fully realizing their Buddha Nature are beyond count, so 
awakened people can only see just so many around them, just so many having come before 
them, and just so many coming after them. 

3. ‘That one’ refers to the enlightened Abbot of Mount Hyakujo in the long past. 

4. This time period is concurrent with the introduction of Buddhist Scriptures into China. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


826 


that, even though ‘not being subject to cause and effect’ may have been a mistaken 
view in the past during the eon of Kasho Buddha, it may not be a mistaken view in 
the present during the eon of Shakyamuni Buddha. And it may also appear 
reasonable that, even though ‘not being blind to cause and effect’ during the 
present Shakyamuni Buddha’s eon may have rid the old man of the attitude of a 
wild fox, it would not necessarily have done so during Kasho Buddha’s eon. 

In the old man’s saying that he had been reduced to being reborn as a wild 
fox for five hundred lives, how, pray, did such a thing come about? There is no 
evidence that there was a wild fox who was enticing the earlier Abbot of Hyakujo 
and thereby causing him to be reduced to such a state, nor could there have been a 
former Abbot of Hyakujo who was a wild fox all along. It would be non-Buddhist 
to assert that the spirit of the former Abbot of Hyakujo came out and jumped into 
the skin bag* of a wild fox. And a wild fox could not have come along and 
swallowed up the former Abbot of Hyakujo. If we were to say that the former 
Abbot of Hyakujo had once more become a wild fox, he would have had to rid 
himself of the body of a former Abbot of Hyakujo, so that he could subsequently 
reduce himself to the state of a dead wild fox. An Abbot of Mount Hyakujo cannot 
turn himself into the body of a wild fox! How could ‘cause and effect’ possibly be 
like that? Cause and effect is not something inherent, nor is it something that 
someone initiates, nor is cause and effect something idly awaiting the action of 
some person. 

Now, let’s deal with the old man’s response, “Such a one is no longer 
subject to cause and effect.” Even though he was mistaken, he would not 
necessarily have been reduced to the state of a wild fox for that. If being reduced to 
the state of a wild fox was the inevitable consequence of answering a trainee’s 
question inaccurately, then how many thousands of myriad times would the 
Rinzais and Tokusans of more recent times, along with their disciples, have been 
reduced to being wild foxes as a consequence? And apart from them, senior monks 
who have made mistakes over the past two or three hundred years would certainly 
have become innumerable foxes. Yet, we have not heard of their having been 
reduced to being wild foxes as a consequence. If there had been many, then there 
would have been more than enough for us to encounter or hear about them. Even 
though you might well say that they have not made such a serious mistake, there 
are many indeed who have given even more dubious responses than “Such a one is 
not subject to cause and effect.” And there have been many monks whom we 
cannot place even on the outskirts of the Buddha Dharma. You need to spot them 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


827 


by using the Eye of your training and practice, for if your Eye is not yet 
functioning, you may well not be able to discern them. So, you need to know that 
we cannot assert that someone who answers badly turns himself into a wild fox, 
whereas someone who answers well is not reduced to being a wild fox. In this 
story, it does not say what it is like after someone has rid himself of the attitude of 
a wild fox, but no doubt it will be that of a real gem of a trainee doing his best 
within a bag of skin. 

As a rule, those who have never encountered or heard about the Buddha 
Dharma say, “After he had completely rid himself of the wild fox, he returned to 
the ocean of his Original Nature. Even though he was reduced to being a wild fox 
for a while due to his delusion, after he had had a great awakening, he shed being a 
wild fox and returned to his Original Nature.” They mean by this that he returned 
to some innate, unchanging self which non-Buddhists speak of. Furthermore, this 
is not the Buddha Dharma. If they were to say that a wild fox is devoid of Original 
Nature or that a wild fox has no innate enlightenment, such would not be the 
Buddha Dharma. Were they to say, “When a person has a great awakening, such a 
one has let go of the mental attitude of a wild fox and has rid himself of it,” then it 
would not have been the wild fox’s great enlightenment, and being a wild fox 
would have served no purpose. So, do not assert such things. 

You need to be clear about the point that the wild fox, which the former 
Abbot of Hyakujo had been for five hundred lives, forthwith dropped off being a 
wild fox by virtue of the triggering words concerning causality spoken by the later 
Abbot of Hyakujo. If you were to say, “When someone who was a bystander spoke 
a triggering phrase concerning causality, that freed another from the mind of a wild 
fox,” well, the great earth with its mountains and rivers has already been giving 
forth innumerable triggering expressions concerning causality and is continually 
doing so. But even so, the old man had not yet dropped off the mind of a wild fox 
in the past, and he only dropped it off due to the later Abbot’s triggering words 
concerning causality. This was the old man’s killing off his doubt. If you were to 
say that the great earth with its mountains and rivers has never yet given expression 
to the triggering words concerning causality, then the later Hyakujo ultimately 
might not have been able to open his mouth. 

Further, there are many old worthies who have contended that saying ‘not 
being subject to’ and ‘not being blind to’ are essentially the same, but they have 
not yet directly experienced how ‘not being subject to’ and ‘not being blind to’ are 
related. Consequently, they have not explored through their training the skin, flesh, 
bones, and marrow of falling into the body of a wild fox, nor have they explored 
through their training the skin, flesh, bones, and marrow of dropping off the mind 
of a wild fox. If you don’t get the beginning right, you’ll never get the end right. In 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


828 


the old man’s remark, “I was reduced to being reborn as a wild fox for five 
hundred lives,” what is it that was reborn and what was that reduced to? At the 
very moment when he was reborn as a wild fox, what form did his previous 
universe now take on? How is the phrase ‘not being subject to causality’ related to 
his being reborn five hundred times? And where did the pelt that was now lying 
beneath a rock on the other side of the mountain come from? He was reborn as a 
wild fox for giving another the phrase ‘not subject to causality’ and he dropped off 
the mind of a wild fox upon hearing the words ‘not being blind to causality’. Even 
though there was a ‘being reduced to’ and a ‘dropping off of’, they were still the 
causal consequences of his being a wild fox. 

At the same time, some of old have said, “Because the old man answered, 
‘Not subject to causality’, he seemed to be denying causality.” This assertion is 
beside the point and is something that people who are in the dark say about 
causality. Even if there had once been a former Abbot of Hyakujo who said that he 
was not subject to being a wild fox, he could not possibly deceive someone of the 
Great Practice, since such a one will not deny causality. On the other hand, there 
are those who say, “Not being blind to cause and effect means not being blind to 
causality, and because the Great Practice is transcendent Cause and Effect, such a 
trainee has dropped off the mind of a wild fox.” This is truly eighty or ninety 
percent of the Eye for exploring the Matter .* 5 Be that as it may, the old man might 
well have said in verse: 

In the eon of Kasho Buddha 
I dwelt on this mountain, 

In the eon of Shaky amuni Buddha 
I dwell there now. 

My former self and my present self 
Face of Sun and face of Moon, 

Intercept the wild fox s ghost 
And reveal the wild fox s spirit. 


How could a wild fox have possibly known of its five hundred lives? If you 
say that it knew of its five hundred lives by using the wiles of a wild fox, well, the 


5. This is Dogen’s way of confirming the validity of someone’s statement. Such statements are 
described as being eighty or ninety percent, which means that there are still other ways of 
saying exactly the same thing, since there is no single, absolute way of stating the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


829 


wiles of a wild fox did not yet fully know the whole of the wild fox’s life, and its 
whole life had not yet been stuffed into a wild fox’s hide. The wild fox certainly 
knew that he had been reduced to being reborn for five hundred lives, because 
those lives were the manifesting of his spiritual question. But it did not fully know 
the whole of its life: there is that which it knew and that which it did not know. 
Unless what it knew arose and departed simultaneously with its body, it could not 
have calculated what ‘five hundred lives’ was. Since it could not make such a 
calculation, the words ‘five hundred lives’ must be a fabrication. Were you to say 
that the wild fox knew it by using information other than what the wild fox knew 
directly, then it would not have been something that the wild fox personally knew 
to be so. But over the generations, who could have known this on the wild fox’s 
behalf? Without having any clear path through what we know and what we don’t 
know, we cannot say that the old man was reduced to being a wild fox. If he was 
not reduced to being a wild fox, there could not be any dropping off of the mind of 
a wild fox. If there were neither a ‘being reduced to’ nor a ‘dropping off of’, there 
could not have been a former Hyakujo, and if there were no former Hyakujo, there 
could not be a later Hyakujo. Do not treat this lightly, for it needs careful study. 
Grasping this underlying principle, you need to see through and expose the 
mistaken opinions which have been voiced over and over again throughout the 
Liang, Chen, Sui, T’ang, and Sung Dynasties. 

To return to the story, the old non-human being said to the later Hyakujo, 
“Dare I ask the Venerable Abbot to perform for me a monk’s funeral service?” He 
should not have spoken like this. Since Hyakujo’s time, a number of virtuous 
spiritual friends and guides have had no doubt about these words nor have they 
been surprised by them. But the main point is this: how could a dead fox become a 
dead monk, since it has never taken the Precepts, or attended a summer retreat, or 
kept to the everyday behavior of a monk, or held to the principles of a monk? If 
such a creature may arbitrarily undergo the funeral ceremony for a dead monk, 
then any dead person who has never left home life behind would have to be 
accorded the funeral rites of a dead monk too. If there were any male or female lay 
Buddhists who had requested it upon their demise, they, like the dead wild fox, 
would have to be accorded the funeral rites of a dead monk. When we look for an 
example of someone being accorded these rites, there is none, nor do we hear of 
one. Such a rite has never been Transmitted in Buddhism. Even if we thought we 
should do it, it should not be done. 

Now there is the statement that Hyakujo cremated the remains in accordance 
with the appropriate procedure. This is not clear. Perhaps it is a mistake. You need 
to keep in mind that all the funeral rites for a dead monk are prescribed, from our 
efforts upon entering his sick room to our practicing the Way upon reaching the 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


830 


burial garden—nothing is done arbitrarily. Even though the former Hyakujo 
referred to himself as a dead fox at the base of a rock, how could this possibly be 
the usual way great monks behave? How could it have been the bones and marrow 
of an Ancestor of the Buddha? Who is there to prove that it was the former 
Hyakujo? Do not treat with arrogance the Dharma standards of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors by vainly taking as real the transformations of the spirit of some wild 
fox. As offspring of the Buddhas and Ancestors, you should treat with importance 
the Dharma standards of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Never leave matters up to 
what others request, as Hyakujo did. It is hard enough encountering the One Great 
Matter and the whole of the Dharma. Do not be hauled about by worldly desires or 
dragged hither and yon by human sentimentality. 

As for here in our nation of Japan, it has been difficult to encounter the 
standards of the Buddhas and Ancestors or even to hear of them. Nowadays, 
hearing about them or encountering them is rare indeed, so we should prize them 
more deeply than the jewel that the king of old took from his topknot . 6 Those who 
lack our good fortune have hearts that are irreverent and shallow in their trust. Sad 
to say, this is due to their never having known what is or is not important in their 
affairs. They lack the wise discernment of the past five hundred years or so. Be that 
as it may, we should be industrious with ourselves and should help others go 
forward. If you receive the genuine Transmission of even one prostration or one 
meditation period from an Ancestor of the Buddha, you will feel such joy at having 
encountered that which is difficult to encounter. Folks lacking this attitude of mind 
will not be able to obtain any merit or even a single benefit, though they may have 
encountered a thousand Buddhas after having left home life behind. They will 
simply be non-Buddhists who have vainly latched onto the Buddha Dharma. 
Although they may claim to be learning the Buddha Dharma, they cannot 
genuinely expound the Buddha Dharma in their own words. 

So, if someone who has not yet become a monk—even if it were a ruler of a 
nation or one of his ministers, even if it were Brahma or Indra—comes and 
requests that you perform the funeral rites of a deceased monk for his sake, do not 
permit it. Tell him that he should come back after he has left home life behind, 
accepted the Precepts, and become a full monk. Those in the three worlds of desire, 
form, and beyond form who so crave rewards for their deeds that they do not seek 


6. An allusion to a passage in the “Conduct That Eases the Way” chapter of the Lotus 
Scripture, in which a king bestows upon his servant the Jewel of the Dharma. One 
translation of this can be found in Buddhist Writings on Meditation and Daily Practice, 
(Shasta Abbey Press, 1994), pp. 18-20. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


831 


after the venerable status of the Triple Treasure of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, 
may come bringing you a thousand corpses to bury as monks, thereby seeking to 
defile and act contrary to the funeral rites for deceased monks, but such an action 
on their part would merely be a serious transgression. It would certainly not 
produce any merit. If they wish to form good links to the merits of the Buddha 
Dharma, then, in accord with the Buddha’s Teaching, they will need to be quick to 
leave home life behind, to accept the Precepts, and thereby to become full monks. 


At nightfall, the Master went to the Dharma Hall where he gave 
a talk on the preceding events. 

The underlying principle of this account is extremely dubious. Just what is it 
getting at? Hyakujo seems to be saying that the old man had already brought five 
hundred lives to an end and had now rid himself of his former body as a fox. Are 
the five hundred lives that are being spoken of here to be reckoned as they would 
be in the world of humans, or should they be counted as a wild fox would 
experience them, or are they to be counted as a Buddha would refer to them? And 
what is more, how could the eyes of an old wild fox possibly have caught sight of 
what a Hyakujo is? Those who have been spotted by a wild fox must have the spirit 
of a wild fox; those who have been spotted by a Hyakujo are Ancestors of the 
Buddha. This is why Meditation Master Koboku Hojo composed the following 
verse: 

Hyakujo once had a face-to-face encounter with a wild 
fox 

Who sought instruction from him because the Master was 
one with a tough-talking mind. 

So now I dare ask each of you trainees, 

'‘Have you also spit out all of your fox drivel? ” 

So, the wild fox was the Eye with which Hyakujo had his face-to-face encounter. 
Even if you spit out half your fox drivel, it will be your sticking out your long, 

n 

broad tongue to say a word that will transform others. At the very moment when 
you do this, you will get free of the body of a wild fox, free of the body of a 
Hyakujo, free of the body of an old, non-human being, and free of the body of the 
whole universe. 


7. A long, broad tongue is one of the thirty-two distinguishing marks of a Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


832 


djb 

CX) 

Obaku then asked Hyakujo, “In the past, the man said the 
wrong thing to turn his disciple around and, as a consequence, was 
reduced to being a wild fox for five hundred lives. Suppose he had not 
made this mistake, what would have become of him?” 

Now, this question is a manifestation of what Buddhas and Ancestors ask. Among 
the venerable senior monks in the lineage of Nangaku, there is none like Obaku, 
either before or after him. At the same time, the old man never said that his 
response to his disciple was inaccurate, nor did Hyakujo ever say that the old 
man’s response was inaccurate. So, why did Obaku arbitrarily say that the old man 
gave the wrong response which produced this transformation? If Obaku is asserting 
that Hyakujo is saying that it all depends on what the mistake is, then Obaku has 
not yet been able to grasp Hyakujo’s greater intent. It would be as if Obaku had not 
thoroughly explored not only responses that are wrong but also responses that go 
beyond being right or wrong, which are what the Buddhas and Ancestors articulate. 
You need to learn through your explorations with your Master that in this 
particular story neither the former Hyakujo nor the later Hyakujo said that it was an 
inaccurate response. 

Rather, by using five hundred wild fox pelts, each three inches thick, he kept 
dwelling on this mountain, speaking for the sake of his disciples. In that the stubble 
of a wild fox’s coat had fallen away, the later Hyakujo had the stinking skin bag of 
a human being, which, when we take the measure of it, is half a wild fox’s skin 
striving to get free. There is the former Hyakujo’s being reduced to a certain 
mental state and there is the later Hyakujo’s getting free of it. And also, there is the 
cause and effect that comes about through a Master’s words turning things around 
for others, and doing so without making a mistake. Beyond question, these are the 
Great Practice. 

Were Obaku to come here now and ask, “Suppose he had not made a 
mistake and was able to turn things around for his disciple, what would have 
become of him?” I would reply, “He would still have been reduced to being reborn 
as a wild fox.” If Obaku were then to ask, “Why so?” I would reply, “O you 
embodiment of a wild fox’s ghost!” And even then, it would not be a matter of 
Obaku having made a mistake or not having made a mistake. Do not concede that 
Obaku’s question is the correct one to ask. And also, when Obaku asked, “What 
would have become of him?” I could answer, “Are you able to grope about for 
your hide and face yet?” And also, I could say, “Have you been reduced to being 
reborn as a wild fox yet?” And also, I could say, “Would you have replied to that 
disciple that you are not subject to cause and effect?” 



Shobogenzo: On the Great Practice 


833 


However, Hyakujo’s saying, “Come up close and I will tell you,” already 
embraces the issue of what would have become of him. Obaku came up, dead to 
the past and oblivious to the future . 8 His giving Hyakujo a slap is his doing a bit of 
foxy transformation. 

The Master clapped his hands and laughed, saying, “I’ve 
always thought that the beards of foreigners were red, and behold, 
here is a red-bearded foreigner .” 9 

This way of putting It does not capture the spirit one hundred percent, but is, in 
effect, a mere eighty or ninety percent of it. Even if we were to concede that it was 
eighty or ninety percent of it, it would still not be eighty or ninety percent accurate. 
And even if we were to concede that it was a hundred percent accurate, still it is 
something that is not eighty or ninety percent accurate . 10 Though this is the way 
things are, I would express it as follows: 

What Hyakujo said permeates the whole universe. 

And even so, he had not yet left the wild fox s den. 

Obaku s feet were on solid ground, 

And even so, he still seems attached to the mantis’s 

11 

way. 

With a slap on the face and a clap of the hands there 
is the one of them, not the two of them: 

The beards of foreigners are red, and a red-bearded 
one is a foreigner. 


Delivered to the assembly at the old temple of Kippo-ji in Echizen Province on the ninth day of 
the third lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (April 17, 1244). 

Copied by me in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant in the same temple on the thirteenth day of 
the third lunar month of the same year (April 21, 1244). 

Ejo 


8. That is, Obaku had dropped off everything and was living fully in each moment. 

9. That is, ‘the beards of foreigners are red’ and ‘there are red-bearded foreigners’ are two 
ways of saying the same thing. 

10. That is, even if a way of putting the Matter is right on target one hundred percent, it is not 
the only way of putting the Matter, and hence is less than one hundred percent, or even 
eighty or ninety percent. 

11. That is, Obaku has his feet on the ground, but he still tended to be cautious—like the 
movements of a praying mantis preparing to strike—as if fearful of making a mistake. 



74 

On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 

(Menju) 


Translator’s Introduction: This discourse is divided into three parts, the first two having their 
own postscripts. This suggests that Dogen added material later based on questions from his 
disciples that he felt needed further clarification, particularly concerning the ways in which doing 
one’s training, having a kensho (that is, the experience of one’s Buddha Nature), being 
Transmitted, and being certified as a Dharma heir interrelate. 

In addition, there is a seeming contradiction in this discourse which may perplex some 
readers. Early on, where Dogen describes how the Face-to-Face Transmission had been passed 
on through the generations from Shakyamuni Buddha down to Dogen himself, he seems to imply 
that the Transmission can only occur between a disciple and his or her Master while the Master is 
still alive. Later, he cites several cases where there is a claim of monks’ having been transmitted 
in some sense, but not physically face-to-face with the one who was his Master. However, as 
Dogen makes clear towards the end of the discourse, the bottom line is that whatever someone 
may feel has been either a kensho or a Face-to-Face Transmission, the experience must be 
confirmed by a living Master, either the monk’s own or another’s. 


At the time when Shakyamuni Buddha was with His assembly atop the 
Divine Vulture Peak in India, and while amidst the millions gathered there, He 
plucked an udumbara flower and held it aloft, His eyes atwinkle. At that moment, 
the countenance of the Venerable Makakasho broke out into a smile. Shakyamuni 
Buddha said, “Since I too possess the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana, I have conferred It upon 
Makakasho.” 

This is the very principle of Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after 
Ancestor conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission of the Treasure House of the 
Eye of the True Teaching. Having been genuinely Transmitted by the Seven 
Buddhas,* It came down to the Venerable Makakasho. Through twenty-eight 
Transmissions from the Venerable Makakasho, it came down to the Venerable 
Bodhidharma. The Venerable Bodhidharma himself came to China and gave the 
Face-to-Face Transmission to the Venerable Eka, who is a Great Ancestor of our 


* See Glossary. 


834 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


835 


authentic tradition and a Fully Enlightened Great Master. Through five more 
Transmissions, It came down to Great Master Daikan Eno of Mount Sokei. 
Through seventeen more conferrings, It came down to my late Master, the Old 
Buddha Tendo Nyojo of Mount Tendo in Keigen Prefecture in Great Sung China. 
On the first day of the fifth lunar month in the first year of the Pao-ch’ing era in 
Great Sung China (June 8, 1225), I, Dogen, offered incense in the Abbot’s quarters 
and bowed in respect to my Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, who is now 
deceased. This Old Buddha who was my former Master met me for the first time. 
At that time, he led me by the hand through the Teaching and gave me the Face-to- 
Face Transmission, saying: 

I have revealed to you the Dharma Gate of the Face-to-Face 
Transmission which Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor 
has conferred. This is the holding aloft of the flower on the Divine 
Vulture Peak. It is Eka on Mount Suzan realizing Bodhidharma’s 
Marrow. It is Daiman Konin’s Transmitting the robe. It is Tozan’s 
conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission. These are the Buddha’s 
Ancestors conferring the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching through a Face-to-Face Transmission. It exists only within 
our monastic family and is something that others have not yet 
encountered even in their dreams. 

When it comes to the principle underlying this conferring of the Face-to- 
Face Transmission, because Kasho Buddha personally gave the Face-to-Face 
Transmission to Shakyamuni Buddha when He was in that Buddha’s assembly, and 
because Shakyamuni safeguarded It, It is the very face of an Ancestor of the 
Buddha. Had there been no Face-to-Face Transmission from the face of the 
Buddha, there would not have been all the various subsequent Buddhas. It is 
intimately connected with Shakyamuni Buddha’s personal encounter with the 
Venerable Makakasho. Although Ananda was His cousin and Rahula was His son, 
neither attained the intimate connection with Him that Makakasho had. Even 
though there were various great bodhisattvas* in His assembly, none attained the 
intimate connection with Him that Makakasho had, nor could they sit in the 
Venerable Makakasho’s seat. That the World-honored One and Makakasho arrived 
at sitting in the same seat and wearing the same kesa* is taken to be the behavior of 
Buddhas of one and the same generation. The Venerable Makakasho had 
personally received the Face-to-Face Transmission of the World-honored One. This 
was the conferring of His Face, the conferring of His Mind, the conferring of His 
Body, the conferring of His Eye. Makakasho made alms offerings in veneration 
and prostrations in homage to Shakyamuni Buddha. Who knows how many 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


836 


thousands of myriad transformations He had been through, breaking His bones and 
shattering His body to bits in His efforts? His own Countenance is beyond face and 
eyes, for He had been given the Face and Eyes of a Tathagata for a countenance. 
Shakyamuni Buddha looked directly at the Venerable Makakasho, and the 
Venerable Makakasho looked directly at the Venerable Ananda, and the Venerable 
Ananda personally bowed in respect to the Buddha Countenance of the Venerable 
Makakasho, for this was his Face-to-Face Transmission. The Venerable Ananda 
resided in, and kept to, this Face-to-Face Transmission, and, having connected with 
Shonawashu, gave him the Face-to-Face Transmission. The Venerable 
Shonawashu, while directly attending on the Venerable Ananda out of respect, 
experienced the Face on his own, together with all Faces, as the conferring of the 
Face-to-Face Transmission and the accepting of the Face-to-Face Transmission. 

In this way, Ancestral Masters, as successive heirs for generation after 
generation, have passed on the Face-to-Face Transmission. This was done in 
accord with a disciple being ‘seen’ by a Master and the Master ‘recognizing’ the 
disciple. 1 If even one Ancestor, or one Master, or one disciple had failed to confer 
the Face-to-Face Transmission, there would not be Buddha after Buddha or 
Ancestor after Ancestor. For instance, by letting the waters of many rivers gather 
and irrigate the roots, They have caused the branches of our tradition to grow long. 
And by Their keeping the Light going, Its brightness has been made constant. And 
by Their having done so in millions of billions of ways, the trunk and its branches 
are one and the same. And there have also been swift and nimble moments as 
mother hen and chick, the one without and the other within, cheep and peck the 
eggshell open. As a consequence, keeping true to Shakyamuni Buddha as though 
He were right before Them, They have let the days and nights throughout Their life 
pile up, and letting Themselves be illumined by the countenance of the Buddha, 
They have let the days and nights of Their whole life accumulate. We do not know 
for how many eons beyond measure this has gone on. Just quietly thinking about 
this should fill us with heartfelt gratitude. 

By bowing down in respect to the Face of Shakyamuni Buddha and by 
transferring the Eye of Shakyamuni Buddha to our own eyes, we will have 
transferred our eyes to the Eye of Buddha. Ours will be the very Eye and Face of 
Buddha. Without even one generation’s break, that which has been conferred face- 
to-face right up to the present by the mutual Transmission of this Buddha Eye and 


1. That is, the person occupying the position of Master sees that the one occupying the position 
of disciple appears as ‘a vessel for the Dharma’ and is therefore ‘such a person’, one suitable 
for Transmission. 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


837 


Buddha Face is this very Face-to-Face Transmission. These successive heirs over 
some dozens of generations are instances of face after face being the Face of 
Buddha, for they have received the Face-to-Face Transmission from the original 
Buddha Face. Their bowing down in respect to this conferring of the Face as the 
genuine Transmission is their respectful bowing down to the Seven Buddhas, 
including Shakyamuni Buddha, and it is their bowing in respect and making 
venerative offerings to the twenty-eight Indian Ancestors of the Buddha from 
Makakasho on down. This is what the Face and Eye of an Ancestor of the Buddha 
is like. To encounter this Ancestor of the Buddha is to meet Shakyamuni Buddha 
along with the other Seven Buddhas. It is the very instant when an Ancestor of the 
Buddha personally confers the Face-to-Face Transmission upon himself: it is a 
Buddha of the Face-to-Face Transmission conferring the Face-to-Face 
Transmission upon a Buddha of the Face-to-Face Transmission. Using that which 
entwines like the vines of kudzu and wisteria, He confers the Face-to-Face 
Transmission as an entwining, without any disruption. Opening his Eye, he confers 
the Eye-to-Eye Transmission and receives the Eye-to-Eye Transmission. Revealing 
his Face, he confers the Face-to-Face Transmission and receives the Face-to-Face 
Transmission. The conferring of the Face-to-Face Transmission is both receiving 
and giving from the place of the Face. When it comes to explaining Mind, He 
confers the Mind-to-Mind Transmission by means of Mind. When it comes to 
manifesting Body, He confers the Body-to-Body Transmission by means of Body. 
In other places and in other nations, such a one as this is treated as the Original 
Ancestor. In China and eastwards, the conferring and receiving of the Face-to-Face 
Transmission exists only in our monastic family of the Buddha’s authentic 
Transmission. Moreover, it is the mutual passing on of the Genuine Eye with 
which we see the Tathagata. 

When I bow in respect to the Face of Shakyamuni Buddha, I, as one in the 
fifty-first generation, do not stand side-by-side with the Seven Buddhas and the 
Ancestors of our tradition, nor do I stand in a line with Them; rather, a conferring 
of the Face-to-Face Transmission takes place with all of us at the same moment. If 
someone does not encounter a Master even once in a lifetime, that person is not a 
disciple: if someone does not encounter a disciple, that person is not a Master. 
When they have finally met each other and recognized each other, and when the 
conferring of the Face-to-Face Transmission and the passing on of the Dharma to 
the successor have taken place, that is the manifesting of what is called the 
conferring of the Face-to-Face Transmission in our Ancestral tradition. This is why 
their faces have taken on the radiance associated with that of the Tathagata. 
Accordingly, no matter how many thousands or tens of thousands of years or how 
many hundreds or millions of eons may pass, this conferring of the Face-to-Face 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


838 


Transmission is what is meant by Shakyamuni Buddha’s conferring the Face-to- 
Face Transmission right here and now before our very eyes. 

When this state of manifesting as an Ancestor of the Buddha in the here-and- 
now has been realized, it is a transformation of the World-honored One, of 
Makakasho, of the fifty-one generations, and of the seven founding Ancestors of 
our tradition, all of which is done for the sake of helping sentient beings. It is the 
Light manifesting before our very eyes, and it is Body manifesting before our very 
eyes, and it is Mind manifesting before our very eyes, and it is what comes from 
the ends of our toes to the tip of our nose. Even though not a single word has been 
grasped nor half a sentence understood, yet the Master has already seen the back of 
the disciple’s head, for the disciple has already bowed his head in respect to the 
Master: this is a conferring of the Face-to-Face Transmission, which is the genuine 
Transmission. We should deeply respect a conferring of the Face-to-Face 
Transmission done in this manner. Merely leaving traces of one’s mind on the mind 
field of another is hardly a greatly respected or valuable way to live. The changing 
of one’s countenance or the turning of one’s head whilst the Face-to-Face 
Transmission is being conferred may be a matter of the skin of one’s Face being 
three inches thick or the skin of one’s Face been ten feet thin. And this very skin of 
one’s Face may well be the Great Round Mirror of the Buddhas. Because the Great 
Round Mirror is taken to be the skin of the Face, neither inside nor outside have 
any flaws, nor is the Face blurred over. And Great Round Mirrors have customarily 
conferred the Face-to-Face Transmission to Great Round Mirrors. 

Those who have truly had Transmitted to them the Eye of the True Dharma 
with which they personally see a Shakyamuni Buddha appearing before them will 
have a more intimate connection with that Dharma than with Shakyamuni Buddha 
Himself. Sharp of eye, they will see innumerable Shakyamuni Buddhas appearing, 
lined up both in front of them and behind them. Accordingly, those who esteem 
Shakyamuni Buddha, who have lost their heart to Shakyamuni Buddha, should 
esteem and revere this genuine Face-to-Face Transmission and should bow down 
in deepest respect to that which is hard to come by, hard to encounter. It is their 
bowing down in reverence to the Tathagata: it is their having the Face-to-Face 
Transmission conferred on them by the Tathagata. Moreover, when those who are 
reverently exploring the True Transmission through their training are fortunate 
enough to encounter the Tathagata who is conveying the Face-to-Face 
Transmission, they will be loath to be apart from this Self and will protect and keep 
to It, whether the Tathagata is the Self that they think of as their own True Self or 
as the Self of another. 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


839 


djb 

In speaking of the Genuine Transmission in our monastic family, those who 
bow in respect to the eight stupas* are delivered from hindrances resulting from 
their wrongdoings and come to realize the fruition of the Way. These stupas mark 
the route that Shakyamuni Buddha took in His life. They were erected at such 
places as where He was bom, where He first turned the Wheel of the Dharma, 
where He realized the Way, and where He entered nirvana. Another reliquary 
remains at Kanyakubja and one was kept in Ambapali Grove. Yet another became 
the Great Earth while the eighth became the vast Great Sky. And by our doing 
reverential bows to whatever has been treated as a stupa—based on some sound, 
smell, taste, touch, substance, palpable form, or the like—the fruition of the Way 
manifests before our very eyes. Reverentially bowing at these eight stupas is a 
diligent practice throughout India, and householders as well as monks, crowds of 
those of lofty position as well as crowds of ordinary people, vie to make reverential 
bows and venerative alms offerings. This is a veritable scroll of Scripture: it is just 
the way it is in Buddhist Scriptures. And what is more, by Shakyamuni Buddha’s 
using thirty-seven methods as His training and practice, and thereby bringing the 
Way to Its fruition in every moment of His life, the ever-present traces of His 
practice and discipline can be seen scattered about here and there along the 
pathways of old. And because He made these traces plain enough to see, we can 
realize the Way. 

Keep in mind that the frosts and flowers have returned ever so many times to 
these multi-storied eight stupas. The winds and rain, time and again, have 
encroached upon them, yet they have put their mark in space and they have put 
their mark in form. 2 3 4 The spiritual benefits which they lavish upon people of the 
present day have not diminished. And when we now attempt to make the roots, 
strengths, realizations, and paths of these thirty-seven methods into our training 
and practice, even though defiling passions exist along with the hindrances created 
by our delusions, nevertheless, as we train and experience an awakening, the power 
of these methods will still be like new today. 


2. The eight stupas are the places where Shakyamuni’s ashes, which were divided into eight 
parts, are said to have been enshrined. 

3. Dogen discussed these methods in detail in Discourse 70: On the Thirty-seven Methods of 
Training for Realizing Enlightenment (Sanjushichihon Bodai Bumpo). 

4. That is, despite erosion from wind and rain over time, enough remains of them that they can 
still be seen towering into the sky, and their form as stupas is still recognizable. 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


840 


The spiritually beneficial activity of Shakyamuni Buddha was no different. 
What is more, the present conferring of the Face-to-Face Transmission today 
should not be compared with those stupas and methods. The thirty-seven ancillary 
methods for realizing enlightenment have as their source the Buddha Face, the 
Buddha Mind, the Buddha Body, the Buddha Speech, the Buddha Brightness, the 
Buddha Tongue, and so on. The mass of meritorious virtues of those eight stupas 
also have as their foundation the Buddha Face, and so forth. Now, when we, as 
fellow explorers of Buddhahood, conduct ourselves day-by-day in accord with the 
Absolute Path to liberation, we should, in the calmness and tranquility of our days 
and nights, make the effort to consider these matters deeply, and should take 
pleasure in, and cherish, the opportunity to do so. 5 

The ‘Country’ we call ours surpasses all others for our Way alone is 
unsurpassed. In other places, there are many who are not like us. I speak of our 
Country and our Way as being unsurpassed and solely held in veneration because, 
even though the multitudes who had assembled on the Divine Vulture Peak went 
forth and instructed others throughout the ten directions, only Bodhidharma, the 
authentic successor at Shorin-ji Temple, was truly the religious head in China, and 
the descendants of Daikan Eno of Mount Sokei have passed on the Face-to-Face 
Transmission right up to the present day. Today is a good time for the Buddha 
Dharma to once again ‘be taken into the mud and into the water’. 6 If you have not 
realized a genuine fruition by this time, at what time will you realize a genuine 
fruition? If you have not cut off your delusions by this time, at what time will you 
cut them off? Should you not have become Buddha by this time, at what time will 
you become Buddha? Should you not be sitting as a Buddha at this time, at what 
time will you practice being a Buddha? Do your utmost to examine this in detail. 

When Shakyamuni Buddha graciously conferred the Face-to-Face 
Transmission upon the Venerable Makakasho, He said, “Since I possess the 
Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching and the Wondrous Heart of 
Nirvana, I have conferred them upon Makakasho.” While in the assembly on 
Mount Suzan, the Venerable Bodhidharma pointed directly to the Second Ancestor 
and said, “You have realized what my Marrow is.” 


5. ‘The Absolute Path’ is a translation of a Buddhist technical tenn for the spiritual path of 
training that not only takes us to the point of realizing our True Nature but also takes us 
through the remainder of our life. 

6. ‘To be taken into the mud and into the water’ is a common Zen Buddhist metaphor for going 
to whatever lengths are necessary to help sentient beings realize the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


841 


Be very clear about it: when someone Transmits face-to-face the Treasure 
House of the Eye of the True Teaching by saying, “You have realized what my 
Marrow is,” this is plainly an instance of conferring the Face-to-Face 
Transmission. At that very moment when you let go of your everyday notions of 
what ‘bones and marrow’ means, there will be the Face-to-Face Transmission of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors. The Face-to-Face Transmission of the great Full 
Enlightenment and the Mind seal* will involve a particular moment in a definite 
place. Even though it may not be the Transmission of everything, do not probe into 
your training with the assumption that something is still lacking. 

In summary, the Great Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors is simply one face 
conferring and one face accepting, the accepting of the Face and the conferring of 
the Face, and further, there will be nothing in excess and nothing lacking. We 
should take the opportunity to delight in, and have confidence in, the countenance 
of someone who has encountered this Face-to-Face Transmission, proffering our 
services to that person. 

On the first day of the fifth lunar month of the Pao-ch’ing era in Great Sung 
China (June 8, 1225), I, Dogen, for the first time bowed in deepest respect to my 
late Master Tendo, the Old Buddha, who conferred on me the Face-to-Face 
Transmission. I was then permitted to enter his private chambers. I had barely 
dropped off body and mind before returning to Japan and, since then, I have 
maintained and relied upon this Face-to-Face Transmission. 

Given to the assembly in the training hall of Kippo-ji Temple in Yoshida Prefecture, Echizen 
Province, on the twentieth day of the tenth lunar month in the first year of the Kangen era 
(December 3, 1243). 


Among those people who have never encountered or heard about, or 
explored through their training with a Master the principle that the Face-to-Face 
Transmission of the Way of the Buddha is like this, there was one called 
Meditation Master Joko of Sempuku-ji Temple, who was alive during the Chinese 
Ching-yu era (1034-1037) in the reign of the great Sung emperor Jen-chung. 7 
Upon entering the Fecture Hall, he said the following: 


7. Sempuku Joko (dates unknown) resided near the stupa of Meditation Master Uminon 
Bun’en (864-949). Though already a Meditation Master, Joko, upon reading the recorded 
sayings of Ummon, felt he had finally fully awakened and consequently claimed that he was 
Ummon’s Dhanna heir. 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


842 


The Great Master Ummon Bun’en is actually present here right 
now. Do all of you also see him? If you are able to see him, then you 
are a fellow trainee, one who is the equal of this mountain monk. Do 
you see him? Do you see him! You need to pierce directly to the 
bottom of this matter, then, straight off, you will realize what is true 
and right, and will no longer be able to delude yourselves. 

Let us consider for the moment the case of Obaku of olden 
days. Upon hearing his Master, the monk Hyakujo, relate the story of 
his own Master, Great Master Baso, giving forth with a sudden shout 
to startle and awaken his disciples, Obaku appeared to have entered a 
state of deep reflection, so Hyakujo asked him, “From now on, don’t 
you wish to be an heir of the Great Master?” Obaku replied, 
“Although I know of the Great Master, to put it simply, I did not meet 
the Great Master. I dare say I would gladly forfeit having descendants 
of my own, if only I could have heard the Great Master name me as 
his heir.” 

O members of this great assembly here, not five years had gone 
by since Great Master Baso had passed on, yet Obaku said of himself 
that he had never met the Great Master. You should by all means 
realize that Obaku’s viewpoint had not fully matured; in short, he still 
possessed only one eye. 

This mountain monk is not like that. I have not only been able 
to know about Great Master Ummon, I have been able to see Great 
Master Ummon, and safe to say, I have heard Great Master Ummon 
name me as an heir of his. Yet given that it is already a hundred or 
more years since Ummon entered nirvana, how can I possibly make 
the assertion that the two of us had an intimate encounter? Safe to say, 
those who are sophisticated in the ways of the world and those who 
can see beyond surface appearances will attest to my having the 
radiance of direct experience, whereas those who are cynical or small- 
minded will give rise in their minds to doubts and criticisms. Those 
who have been able to see do not talk about it, and those who have not 
yet seen, should they not look right now? Since you have been 
standing here for some time without asking any questions, I now wish 

o 

that you may take good care of yourselves. 


8. This statement is a typical way in which a Zen Master might bring a meeting of the 
assembly to an end. 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


843 


Now Joko, even if you had known all about Great Master Ummon and had 
seen Great Master Ummon, has Great Master Ummon seen you? If Great Master 
Ummon has not met you, it would not be possible for you to hear Great Master 
Ummon name you as an heir of his. Because Great Master Ummon has not yet 
certified you, even you yourself dare not assert, “Great Master Ummon has met 
me.” It is obvious that you and Great Master Ummon have never met each other. 
Among the Seven Buddhas, along with all the other Buddhas of the past, present, 
and future, is there any Ancestor of the Buddhas who has been heir to the Dharma 
without Master and disciple having met each other? 

Joko, do not assert that Obaku’s viewpoint had not fully matured. How can 
you possibly gauge Obaku’s daily behavior or fathom Obaku’s words and phrases? 
Obaku was an Old Buddha. His exploration of inheriting the Dharma was 
thorough. You have not even seen, or heard, or dreamt of, much less studied 
through your training what the principle of being heir to the Dharma is. Obaku 
inherited the Dharma from his Master, and he held to and relied upon our Ancestor 
Baso. Obaku had an audience with his Master and saw his Master. You, Joko, have 
not seen the Master, nor have you known the Ancestor, nor did you know your 
Self, much less have you met your Self. There is no Master who met you, nor have 
you ever experienced the Eye of a Master being opened. The truth of the matter is 
that you are the one whose viewpoint has not matured: it is your inheritance of the 
Dharma that is not complete. 

Didn’t you know in what sense Great Master Ummon really is a Dharma 
descendant of Obaku? 9 How could you possibly sound the depths of what Hyakujo 
and Obaku were talking about? You still haven’t fathomed what Great Master 
Ummon was talking about. Those who have explored through their training with a 
Master what Hyakujo and Obaku were talking about will pick up on it; those who 
have reached the place where everything has dropped off, which is what is being 
directly pointed to here, will be able to fathom it. You, Joko, have not explored the 
Matter* with a Master, nor have you reached the place where everything has 
dropped off, so you cannot understand it or gauge its depths. 

You have said, “Not five years had gone by since Great Master Baso had 
passed on, yet Obaku said of himself that he had never met the Great Master.” 
Truly, that is not worth a laugh. Someone who is capable of being an heir to the 


9. Dogen’s question is rhetorical, not literal. Ummon was a Dharma heir of Seppo and 
Tokusan, whereas Obaku’s lineage goes back to Nangaku. Obaku died in 850 and Ummon 
was born in 864, so there was no physical interaction between them. Dogen will explain 
what he means in the ensuing sentences. 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


844 


Dharma can inherit the Dharma even after countless eons. Were there someone 
who was incapable of inheriting the Dharma, that person could not inherit the 
Dharma even in half a day or half a minute. Joko, you are someone in the dark, 
befuddled and ignorant, one who has not seen the Face of the Sun and the Face of 
the Moon which Buddhas speak of. 

You say that even though it was already some one hundred years earlier that 
Great Master Ummon had entered nirvana, you had heard him name you as an heir 
of his. Is it due to some formidable power of yours that you have heard Ummon 
name you as an heir? You are more whimsical than a three-year-old child! People a 
thousand years from now who hope to inherit the Dharma from Ummon may well 
have abilities ten times yours. 

We will all come to your rescue by exploring with you for a bit the account 
of Hyakujo and Obaku. Hyakujo’s remark, “From now on, don’t you wish to be an 
heir of the Great Master?” is not saying, “Go inherit the Dharma from Great 
Master Baso.” While taking a bit of time to explore the topic of a lion, in all fury, 
dashing off after some prey and the topic of a black turtle climbing a tree 
backwards, you should also thoroughly investigate progressing along the Absolute 
Path step-by-step. 10 You have the ability to explore through your training this step- 
by-step approach to inheriting the Dharma. Obaku’s words, “I dare say I would 
gladly forfeit having descendants of my own,” have all proved beyond your grasp. 
Do you know what he meant by ‘my own’ and who his descendants are? You 
needed to explore this carefully through your training. Obaku has fully stated the 
principle, concealing nothing and revealing all. 

However, a certain Meditation Master named Bukkoku Ihaku, out of 
ignorance of how the Buddhist Ancestors inherit the Dharma, listed Joko among 
Ummon’s Dharma heirs. 11 This is surely a mistake. As trainees of a later time, do 
not imagine, out of ignorance, that Joko may also have been doing his training with 
a Master. 

Copied by me in the quarters of the Abbot’s assistant at Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province, on 
the seventh day of the sixth lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (July 13, 
1244). 

Ejo 


10. That is, find the middle way in your training by progressing step by step, rather than by 
trying to dash ahead or by poking behind, thus doing your training the hard way. 

11. Bukkoku helped in the preparation of one of the records of Zen monastic practitioners and 
Dharma heirs. 



Shobogenzo: On Conferring the Face-to-Face Transmission 


845 


djh cfip cfip 

CX? CX) (X> 

Joko, if, as you claim, it is possible to inherit the Dharma by relying on 
written words, then do all those who have given rise to enlightenment by reading 
Scriptures inherit the Dharma from Shakyamuni Buddha Himself? That is never 
the case. An enlightenment experience brought about by encountering Scriptural 
writings always requires certification by a genuine Master. 

Joko, you have still not read the records of Ummon’s sayings, as you have 
claimed. Only those folks who have truly read Ummon’s words have inherited the 
Dharma from Ummon. You have never seen Ummon with your own eyes, nor have 
you seen Ummon with Ummon’s eyes, nor have you seen yourself with Ummon’s 
eyes. There are many things like this that you have not thoroughly explored 
through your training. And what is more, you will need to buy new straw sandals 
time and again should you go seeking for a genuine Master from whom to inherit 
the Dharma. Do not say that you have inherited It from Great Master Ummon. If 
you go around claiming such things, then you will just be a type of non-Buddhist. 
Even if Hyakujo himself were to speak as you have done, it would be a huge 
mistake. 



75 

On The Unbounded 

(Koku) 


Translator’s Introduction: While the title of this discourse may be translated as ‘space’, 
‘emptiness’, or ‘the void’, these renderings tend to imply something that is negative, whereas 
koku is a technical Buddhist term for That which is devoid of any obstructions: the Unbounded. 

This was apparently the first formal talk that Dogen gave in his new temple, originally called 
Daibutsu-ji and later renamed Eihei-ji. 


Because right here is where the What exists, It causes Buddhas and 
Ancestors to find ways to express It. And because the ways that the Buddhas and 
Ancestors have expressed It have naturally been passed on from Dharma heir to 
Dharma heir, They have made their whole being their Master’s Skin and Flesh, 
Bones and Marrow, so that it hangs suspended within the Unbounded. That which 
is Unbounded transcends categories such as the twenty types of emptiness. For, 
altogether, how could the Unbounded be limited to a mere twenty types of 
emptiness, since there are at least eighty-four thousand types of emptiness? And 
indeed there may be many more. 

djb 

CX) 


Meditation Master Shakkyo Ezo of the Fuchou region once 
asked Meditation Master Seido Chizo, “Coming back to the topic, do 
you know how to grab hold of Space?” 

Seido replied, “Of course I know how to grab hold of space.” 

The Master said, “And just how do you grab hold of Space?” 

Seido made a gesture with his hand as if gathering up a handful 
of something. 

The Master said, “You do not know how to grab hold of Space.” 

Seido responded, “My elder monastic brother, you who are a 
Master, just how do you grab hold of space?” 

Thereupon, the Master grabbed hold of Seido’s nose and gave it 
a yank. 


846 



Shobogenzo: On The Unbounded 


847 


Trying to suppress a yelp, Seido exclaimed, “How awful of you! 
Pulling a person’s nose like that! Fortunately, I’ve been able to get 
free, quick enough.” 1 

The Master said, “If you could have grabbed hold of me like 
this, you would have grasped It right from the start.” 

Shakkyo’s question, “Coming back to the topic, do you know how to grab hold of 
Space?” is asking, “Is your whole being, through and through, hands and eyes?” 2 

Seido’s reply, “Of course, I know how to grab hold of space,” meant for him 
that Space was like a lump of something. But once It is understood in that way, It 
becomes stained, and after Space has become stained, It is brought down to earth. 3 

Shakkyo’s saying, “And just how do you grab hold of Space?” meant “As 
soon as you call that Reality, it has already completely changed. But even so, by 
going along with change, you are going towards Reality, following the Tathagata.” 

The statement, “Seido made a gesture with his hand as if gathering up a 
handful of something,” meant that even though he might know how to ride the 
tiger’s head, he did not yet know how to grab hold of the tiger’s tail. 4 

Shakkyo’s saying, “You do not know how to grab hold of Space,” was not 
simply a matter of his stating that Seido did not have an intellectual understanding 
of what ‘grabbing hold of Space’ meant, for Seido was at a place where he had not 
yet encountered the Unbounded even in his dreams. Even though that was the way 
things were with Seido, Shakkyo did not want to end up trying to describe It to 
him. 

Seido’s asking, “My elder monastic brother, you who are a Master, just how 
do you grab hold of space?” meant “My elder brother, express what it is in a verse 
or a word. Do not leave it totally up to me to get it.” 

Thereupon, Shakkyo grabbed hold of Seido’s nose and gave it a yank. We 
need to explore this through our training: Shakkyo has stuck his whole being up 
Seido’s Nose and Seido fully revealed that he had been grabbed by the Nose. Even 


1. That is, he awoke to the Truth. 

2. The second question here is a reference to the koan story in Discourse 32: On Kannon, the 
Bodhisattva of Compassion (Kannon). 

3. That is, once the Unbounded is thought as being some thing, It becomes tainted with 
intellectualizing and is reduced to a worldly understanding. 

4. That is, even though Seido might know how to do the training, he still had not grasped the 
Essential Matter. 



Shobogenzo: On The Unbounded 


848 


though this was how things were, the Unbounded is of a whole and It is ‘stones 
bumping up against stones’. 5 

Seido, trying to suppress a yelp, said, “How awful of you! Pulling a person’s 
nose like that! Fortunately, I’ve been able to get free, quick enough.” Earlier he 
had wished to encounter a True Person, but what he suddenly encountered was his 
True Self. At the same time, it was not that he could not have stained his True Self, 
it is that he had to train himself. 

Shakkyo said, “If you could have grabbed hold of me like this, you would 
have grasped It right from the start.” Well, it is not impossible that Seido could 
have grasped It right from the start. Even so, Shakkyo did not lend his own 
strength to Seido, because Seido could not have grasped It by Shakkyo’s extending 
a helping hand to Shakkyo, nor could he have grasped It by the Unbounded’s 
extending a helping hand to the Unbounded. 6 

To put the matter in broader terms, the universe has no gaps to put ‘space’ 
into. Even so, this one account has long made Space resound with Its thunder. 
Since the time of Shakkyo and Seido, there have been many trainees who have 
called themselves masterly teachers within the five traditional families—Soto, 
Ummon, Rinzai, Hogen, and Igyo—but few of them have encountered, or heard of, 
much less fathomed, what Space is. Before and after Shakkyo and Seido, there has 
been the occasional one who has played around with what Space is, but few have 
grabbed hold of what It is. 

Shakkyo had taken hold of It, but Seido had not caught sight of It. As Abbot 
of Daibutsu-ji Temple, I would like to have said to Shakkyo, “At that time when 
you grabbed hold of Seido’s nose, if you had wanted to grab hold of Space, you 
should have grabbed hold of your own Nose. And you should have understood 
how to grab hold of your Fingertips with your fingertips.” Even so, Shakkyo knew 
a bit about a monk’s everyday behavior of grabbing hold of Space. Even if you are 
a good hand at grabbing hold of Space, you need to explore through your training 
with your Master the ins and outs of Space. And you need to explore through your 
training the killing off of ‘Space’ and the revitalizing of It, and you need to know 
the relative importance of ‘Space’. You need to preserve and rely upon the 
grasping of Space, which is, namely, your doing your utmost to train in the Way, 
your giving rise to the intention to realize that one’s training and enlightenment are 


5. That is, even though the Unbounded is totality. It is not static. 

6. That is, Seido had to rely on doing his own training, rather than depend on the Master or the 
Buddha Nature to do the training for him. 



Shobogenzo: On The Unbounded 


849 


identical, and your listening to what Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after 
Ancestor have put forth. 

djb 

My late Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, once said the following, “My 
whole being is like the mouth of a bell suspended in empty space.” 7 Clearly, you 
need to recognize that the whole body of space hangs in Space. 


The eminent scholar, Abbot Seizan of Hungchou Province, once 
paid a visit to Baso. Baso asked him, “What Scripture do you lecture 
on?” 

Seizan replied, “The Heart Scripture.” 

Baso then asked him, “And what do you use to lecture on It with?” 

Seizan replied, “I use my mind with which to lecture on It.” 

Baso then said, “The mind is like the starring actor, our will is like 
its supporting player, with the six senses playing the accompanying cast. 

How can these possibly comprehend how to lecture on a Scripture?” 

Seizan responded, “Were the mind unable to give a lecture, surely 
empty space could hardly do it!” 

Baso said, “On the contrary, it is Space that is able to give a 
lecture.” 

With a dismissive swish of his sleeve, Seizan departed. 

Baso called after him, “Learned monk!” Seizan turned his head 
around. Baso said, “From birth to old age, It is ever thus.” 

Thereupon, Seizan caught It. Eventually, he went into hiding on 
Mount Seizan,—whence his name—and nothing more was heard from 
him. 8 

Accordingly, Buddhas and Ancestors alike are persons who expound the Scriptures 
and They invariably use Space in expounding these Scriptures. Were it not for 
Space, They would not be able to expound even one Scripture. Whether They 
expound on the mind as Scripture or expound on the body as Scripture, in either 
case They do the expounding by means of Space. By means of Space, They 


7. The opening line of a poem by Tendo Nyojo, quoted in Discourse 2: On the Great Wisdom 
That Is Beyond Discriminatory Thought ( Makahannya-haramitsu ), p. 28. 

8. When someone who is erudite has an awakening, it is not uncommon for such a one to drop 
off his addiction to learning and ‘disappear from public sight’. 



Shobogenzo: On The Unbounded 


850 


manifest what They are deliberately thinking about as well as what goes beyond 
deliberate thought. Not only have They achieved the wise discernment from having 
a Master and the wise discernment that goes beyond having a Master, They have 
also developed Their innate intelligence, as well as Their learned intelligence, for 
all of these are due to Space. Their becoming Buddha and Their becoming an 
Ancestor must likewise have been due to Space. 


Our Twenty-first Ancestor, the Venerable Bashubanzu, once said the 
following, “Our physical being is the same as the realm of Space, and this 
proclaims the Teaching that it is equal to Space. When someone is able to awaken 
to Space, there is no ‘absolutely right’ nor is there any ‘absolutely wrong’ way.” 
To be precise, at the very moment when there is the mutual encountering and 
mutual recognition between a person facing the wall and the Wall facing a person, 
the realm of Space can be described as the mind of ‘fences and walls’ and the mind 
of ‘a withered tree’. For those who need to be saved in accord with their own 
bodily form, Avalokiteshvara* will forthwith manifest in that form and give 
expression to the Dharma for the sake of that person. This is what is meant by 
pointing to the principle of ‘being like Space’. For those who need to be saved in 
accord with some other bodily form, Avalokiteshvara will forthwith manifest in 
that form and give expression to the Dharma for the sake of that person. This too is 
what is meant by pointing to the principle of ‘being like Space’. Whether you are 
being controlled by the twenty-four hours of any day or are in control of the 
twenty-four hours of any day, in either case, they are both times when you can 
awaken to the Unbounded. 

When a stone is large, it is large just as it is, and when a stone is small, it is 
small just as it is. This is the principle of things being beyond ‘right’ and ‘wrong’. 
This is simply the way, at this very moment, to thoroughly explore the Unbounded 
as the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, which is the Wondrous 
Heart of Nirvana. 

Delivered to the assembly on the sixth day of the third lunar month in the third year of the 
Kangen era (April 4, 1245) at Daibutsu-ji Temple in Echizen Province. 

Copied by me on the seventeenth day of the fifth lunar month in the second year of the Koan era 
(June 27, 1279), while at Zenko-ji Temple in the same land. 

Giun 


* See Glossary. 



76 

On a Monk’s Bowl 

(Hatsu ’u) 


Translator’s Introduction: ‘A monk’s bowl’ (hatsu ’u) refers not only to the physical object 
that is given to novices upon their being ordained and which is to serve as their mealtime bowl 
from then on, but also to the monk’s willingness to accept of whatever is placed in one’s ‘bowl’, 
be it physically or spiritually. It is therefore a symbol of the practice of all-acceptance. 


Prior to the Seven Buddhas,* there was the Essential Matter* which was 
genuinely Transmitted to the Seven Buddhas. It was genuinely Transmitted from 
each of the Seven Buddhas down through each of the Seven Buddhas, so that It 
was genuinely Transmitted from the Seven Buddhas as a whole to the Seven 
Buddhas as a whole. It was genuinely Transmitted from the Seven Buddhas down 
through twenty-eight generations of Indian Ancestors. The twenty-eighth 
generation Ancestral Master, our Founding Ancestor Bodhidharma, personally 
went to China and genuinely Transmitted It to the second Ancestor in China, our 
great Ancestor Eka. It passed on through six generations from Bodhidharma until It 
reached Eno. What has been passed on from India through the Eastern lands for a 
total of fifty-one Transmissions is the Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching , 1 which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana: It is a monk’s kesa* and a 
monk’s bowl. Buddhas of the past have taken great care to genuinely Transmit 
them to other Buddhas of the past. This is the way that Buddha after Buddha and 
Ancestor after Ancestor have accurately Transmitted them. 

At the same time, each and every one of Them has had Their way of 
expressing what Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow mean, as well as Fist and Eye, 
which They employed to explore through Their training what Buddhas and 
Ancestors are. Some have explored through Their training that a monk’s bowl is 
the trusting heart of the Buddhas and Ancestors. And some have explored through 
Their training that a monk’s bowl is a receptacle for what nourishes Buddhas and 
Ancestors. And some have explored through Their training that a monk’s bowl is 


* See Glossary. 

1. There are fifty-one Transmissions counting from Makakasho through Dogen. 


851 



Shobogenzo: On a Monk s Bowl 


852 


the very Eye of Buddhas and Ancestors. And some have explored through Their 
training that a monk’s bowl is the very luminosity of Buddhas and Ancestors. And 
some have explored through Their training that a monk’s bowl is the True Body of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors. And some have explored through Their training that a 
monk’s bowl is the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching, which is the 
Wondrous Heart of Nirvana. And some have explored through Their training that a 
monk’s bowl is the place where Buddhas and Ancestors have turned Themselves 
around. And some have explored through Their training that the Buddhas and 
Ancestors are the rim and bottom of a monk’s bowl. The principle underlying the 
exploring that such monastics do is expressed by each in his or her particular way, 
and there is something deeper to be explored. 


On the day in the first year of the Pao-ching era of Great Sung China (1225), 
when my late Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, assumed the role of Abbot of 
Tendo, he entered the Dharma Hall and said the following: 

I remember a story. A monk once asked Hyakujo, “What is this 
thing about something being miraculous?” Hyakujo replied, “It is 
your sitting all by yourself on Daiyu Peak.” 2 3 

You in this great assembly should not be disturbed by this. Just 
let the Old Fellow kill Himself with sitting! If someone here today 
should suddenly ask me what a miracle is, I would simply say to that 
person, “What is miraculous in the first place?” Ultimately, what else 
is there? I have brought my monk’s bowl with me from Jinzu Temple 

'l 

to eat my meals from. 

You need to know that what is miraculous is done for the sake of those who are 
already miraculous. For that which is miraculous, you need to use a miraculous 
tool, since this is a miraculous occasion. Accordingly, what manifests as something 
miraculous is the miraculous bowl of a monk. Thereby, you should call on the Four 
Guardian Kings to protect it and the various dragon lords to defend it, since this 
bowl is what we dedicate to the Buddhas and Ancestors and what They have 
entrusted to us. 

Those folks who do not explore the Matter through their training within the 
private quarters of an Ancestor of the Buddha are given to saying that a Buddhist 


2. Daiyu Peak was the site of Hyakujo’s temple. 

3. Before being invited to be Abbot of Tendo, Nyojo was serving as Abbot of Jinzu Temple. 



Shobogenzo: On a Monk s Bowl 


853 


monk’s kesa is something that is made of silk, or of cotton, or of some other spun 
material, or to saying that a Buddhist monk’s bowl is something made of stone, or 
of porcelain, or of metal. They talk like this because they are not yet equipped with 
the Eye for training with a Master. The Buddha’s kesa is a kesa for a Buddha. 
Further, you should not look upon it as being of silk or cotton. Considering it to be 
of such things as silk or cotton is an outmoded perspective. A Buddhist monk’s 
bowl is a bowl for a Buddhist monk. Again, do not speak of it as being of stone or 
porcelain, or of metal or wood. 

To speak more generally, a Buddhist monk’s bowl is not something that is 
manufactured, nor is it something that arises only to later pass away, nor is it 
something that comes or goes, nor is it something subject to gain or loss. It does 
not span the new and old, nor is it connected with what is of the past or of the 
present. Even if the robe and bowl of the Buddhas and Ancestors have been 
brought into existence by the collective efforts of novices, they are beyond the 
delusions that snare and entrap novices, and even if they are brought into existence 
by the springing up of myriad helpful laity, they are beyond the delusions that 
snare and entrap lay folk. The underlying principle of this is that water is water as a 
result of its bringing together a varied assembly, and clouds, in turn, are clouds as a 
result of their bringing together a varied assembly. 4 What brings together clouds 
are ‘clouds’ and what brings together water are ‘waters’. A monk’s bowl is one 
that is simply composed by a varied assembly, a bowl that is simply composed of 
all their hearts, a bowl that is simply composed of Emptiness, a bowl that is simply 
composed of monks’ bowls. A monk’s bowl is restricted by ‘a monk’s bowl’; a 
monk’s bowl is tainted by ‘a monk’s bowl’. 5 

The monk’s bowl that novices now receive is the monk’s bowl that the Four 
Guardian Kings offered to the Buddha. If the monk’s bowl were not that which the 
Four Guardian Kings offered, it would not be the one that appears right before our 
eyes. The monk’s bowl that has now been genuinely Transmitted everywhere by 
the Buddha’s Ancestors who have received the Buddha’s Treasure House of the 


4. There is a word play here that is lost in translation. Novices were known as unsui, literally 
‘water and clouds’, because they would flow like water or drift about like clouds, going 
from monastery to monastery in search of the teacher they would come to regard as their 
Master. Coming into a monastery—particularly during the summer retreat period—they 
would bring their assembled talents into action by taking up collective projects, such as 
making bowl sets and monastic robes. 

5. That is, if we think in tenns of something called ‘a monk’s bowl’, we tend to limit its 
meaning to its most literal sense. 



Shobogenzo: On a Monk s Bowl 


854 


Eye of the True Teaching is the monk’s bowl that is beyond past and present. As a 
consequence, now that we have spotted, and broken free from, the old views held 
onto by men of iron will, we no longer need to be wedded to the opinion that this 
monk’s bowl of ours is simply something made of wood. And we have gone 
beyond the view that it is something constructed from the bits and pieces that our 
sense organs pick up. And it does not hinder the mind that distinguishes rocks from 
jewels. Do not speak of it as being of jade or of tile. 6 Do not speak of it as being 
but a bit of carved wood. By not speaking thus, we affirm what a monk’s bowl 
really is. 

Given to the assembly at Daibutsu-ji Temple in Echizen Province on the twelfth day of the third 
lunar month in the third year of the Kangen era (April 10, 1245). 

Copied by me in the office of the Abbot s assistant at Daibutsu-ji Temple on the twenty-seventh 
day of the seventh lunar month in the third year of the Kangen era (August 20, 1245). 


Ejo 


6. ‘Jade and tile’ is a metaphor for what is polishable and what is not polishable. 



77 

On the Summer Retreat 

(Ango) 


Translator’s Introduction: This discourse, dated at the end of summer, puts forth the purpose 
and methods of holding a ninety-day summer retreat, as Dogen had just conducted it at Eihei-ji, 
his new temple in Echizen Province. 

Whereas some who have studied the writings of Dogen have understood certain of his 
remarks in Discourse 81: On Leaving Home Life Behind (Shukke) as rejecting lay and female 
discipleship, Dogen is unequivocal about the issue in the latter part of this discourse, where he 
says, “Keep in mind that male and female lay trainees can also do the retreat,” a retreat that 
Dogen considered fundamental to the practice of a Buddhist monastic. 


My late Master, the Old Buddha of Tendo, once recited a poem of his during 
an informal session at the beginning of a summer retreat: 

Set your bones upright upon level ground, 

And to seclude yourself, scoop out a cavern in space. 

Pass forthwith beyond the gate of dualities, 

Only taking with you a darkness as dark as a black- 
lacquered pail. 

Accordingly, since you already have that nose ring of yours in place and have not 
avoided eating food, stretching out your legs, or taking a snooze, you will remain 
so for the rest of your life. 1 Since this is the way things are, you have not slackened 
and wasted your time by putting down your tools. Those tools include the ninety- 
day summer retreat, which is the very crown and countenance of Buddha after 
Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor, all of Whom have continually experienced it 
intimately in Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow. Taking up the Eye and the head 
crown of the Buddhas and Ancestors, we make them into the days and months of 
ninety days of summer. One summer retreat is therefore something equivalent to 
Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor. The summer retreat, from 
beginning to end, is what an Ancestor is. Beyond this, there is not a single 
additional inch of ground, nor is there a great earth. 


1. ‘The nose ring in place’ is a reference to having learned how to train oneself, just as one 
goes about domesticating a water buffalo. 


855 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


856 


The gatepost for the summer retreat is beyond the new and beyond the old, 
and it is beyond coming and beyond going. The measure of this retreat is measured 
by the Fist, and its form has been in the form of a nose ring. Even so, because we 
began a summer retreat, it came, filling all space, without excluding anything in all 
the ten quarters. And because we ended the summer retreat, it has gone, having tom 
asunder the whole universe, until not an inch of ground remains. For this reason, 
when the summer retreat began, it resembled your giving rise to your spiritual 
question. And when it came to an end, it resembled your having torn asunder the 
nets and cages of your delusions. Even though this is how it was, there are some of 
you who may well have personally experienced it as hindering you from beginning 
to end. Well, for ten thousand miles there has not been an inch of grass, so come 
on, pay me back for ninety days’ board! 


The venerable monk, Oryu Shishin, once said, “For thirty-some years I have 
tread the mountain paths as a mendicant monk. With ninety days I make me a 
summer. I cannot add even a single day to that, nor can I subtract one either.” So, 
what the Eye of a wanderer of thirty-some years has penetrated is simply that a 
summer retreat is comprised of ninety days. Were he to add a single day, the other 
days would vie to be that extra day, and were he to fall one day short, his other 
days would vie not to be that missing day. Furthermore, he was unable to leap free 
from his cavernous snare of delusion. This leaping free is simply a springing up 
from this ninety-day pit by using one’s own hands and feet. 

Treating a single summer as comprised of ninety days is a tool among us, but 
because this is not something that was first concocted by some Ancestor of the 
Buddha all on His own, it has come down to us this very day as a natural 
endowment from Buddha after Buddha, Ancestor after Ancestor, and Dharma heir 
after Dharma heir. Hence, to do a summer retreat is to see Buddhas and Ancestors, 
as well as to meet Them, for a summer retreat has, for ever so long, created 
Buddhas and Ancestors. 

Even though this worldly, temporal measurement of ‘one summer is 
comprised of ninety days’ is a measurement that the mind thinks up, it is not 
simply one eon or ten eons, nor is it simply hundreds of thousands of 
immeasurable eons. Ordinary times are used up by hundreds of thousands of 
immeasurable eons, whereas these ninety days of a summer retreat use up hundreds 
of thousands of immeasurable eons. As a result, even though immeasurable eons 
resemble the ninety days wherein you meet a Buddha, these ninety days do not 
necessarily depend on there being any eons. Thus, you should explore through 
your training that the one summer comprised of ninety days is simply a 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


857 


measurement of one’s Eye. This is how one who attends the retreat in both body 
and mind is. 

Both making use of acting freely and leaping beyond making use of acting 
freely have their origins and their foundations. Even so, our summer retreat has not 
come from some other place or from some other time, nor has it arisen just in this 
particular place at this particular time. When we get hold of what the origin of 
these ninety days is, they immediately come forth, and when we grope for what the 
foundation of ‘ninety days’ is, it immediately comes forth. Ordinary folk, as well as 
the saintly, treat them as a comfortable cave for them to reside in, but these ninety 
days go far, far beyond the realm of the ordinary and the saintly. These ninety days 
cannot be reached by thinking about them, nor can they be reached by not thinking 
about them, nor are they simply something that is unreachable by thinking about or 
not thinking about them. 

djb 


When the World-honored One was residing in the country of 
Magadha, He once gave a Dharma talk for those assembled. At that 
time, He was intent on performing a pure summer retreat. 
Accordingly, he spoke to Ananda, saying, “If I am continually giving 
expression to the Dharma, my senior disciples, as well others in the 
four classes—male and female monastics and male and female laity— 
will not give rise to respect for It. So I am now going to enter 
Shakrendra’s Cave and sit for the ninety days of summer. 2 When 
people suddenly show up and ask for Teaching, say to them on My 
behalf, ‘All thoughts and things are beyond arising, and all thoughts 
and things are beyond decay.’” Having spoken thus, He concealed 
Himself within the cave and sat in meditation. 

Since then, two thousand ninety-four years have already passed—it being now the 
third year of the Japanese era of Kangen. Many of His descendants who did not 
have entry into the private quarters of their Master would see the Buddha’s 
sequestering Himself as a form of expressing the Dharma without using words. 
That wrong-minded bunch today merely think: 

The Buddha went into the cave and to meditate for the summer 
because using words to express It is not completely the Truth but is 
merely a virtuous expedient means. To reach the Truth, one cuts 
oneself off from using the spoken word and lets the intellective 


2. Shakrendra’s Cave is a cave on Vulture Peak that was used as a place for meditation. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


858 


function die out. This is because going beyond words and going 
beyond intellect are how one reaches the Truth, since having words 
and having thoughts is entirely different from the Truth. This is why 
the Buddha cut Himself off from human beings during the ninety 
summer days that He sat within the cave. 

What these folks are saying runs counter to the World-honored One’s intention as a 
Buddha. If such people are going to say that His intention was to cut off speech 
and let the mind’s functions die out, then all productive human activities and 
undertakings would involve cutting off speech and letting the mind’s functions die 
out. To speak of ‘cutting off speech’ means all speech, and to speak of ‘letting the 
mind’s functions die out’ means all functions of the mind. And what is more, this 
account about Him was never given for the sake of esteeming the absence of 
words. In all earnestness, He dragged His whole being through mud and water, and 
went amidst the weeds that had sprouted up, never shrinking from giving voice to 
the Dharma in order to help human beings reach the Other Shore, never failing to 
turn the Wheel of the Dharma to help rescue them. If any of the bunch of you who 
call yourselves His offspring were to say that His sitting through the ninety days of 
the summer was advocating silence, then I must say to you, “Give me back the 
ninety days that you spent sitting here this summer!” 

The Buddha enjoined Ananda to say on His behalf, “All thoughts and things 
are beyond arising, and all thoughts and things are beyond decay.” Do not lightly 
pass over what the Buddha was doing. In short, how could His sequestering 
Himself in a cave and sitting in meditation for the summer possibly be beyond 
speaking or beyond expressing the Teaching? Let’s suppose for the moment that 
Ananda had asked the World-honored One, “How am I to express the meaning of 
‘All thoughts and things are beyond arising, and all thoughts and things are beyond 
decay’? Even were I to try to express It like this, how am I to go about doing so?” 
Having spoken thus, he would have listened carefully to the World-honored One’s 
reply. Speaking more generally for the moment, the Buddha’s behavior is the 
foremost expression of turning the Wheel of the Dharma. It is not the paramount 
evidence of silence. Further, do not take it to be evidence of wordless Teaching. 
Should you take It to be wordless Teaching, you would be just like Mr. To, who, 
sad to say, mistook the three-foot Dragon Spring Sword for a weaving shuttle and 
hung it on the wall of his humble abode. 

Accordingly, the ninety-day summer sitting is the ancient turning of the 
Wheel of the Dharma and it is the ancient practice of Buddhas and Ancestors. In 
the present account, there is the phrase, “At that time, He was intent on performing 
a pure summer retreat.” Keep in mind that what He practiced was ninety days of 
sitting in a summer retreat. Those who try to evade this are non-Buddhists. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


859 


To speak more generally, when the World-honored One was in the world, He 
sometimes did a ninety-day summer retreat in the Trayastrimsha Heavens and 
sometimes He did it in the quiet caves on Vulture Peak along with five hundred 
monastics. Throughout all five nations of India where the Buddha and His retinue 
traveled, when the time was ripe, without discussing where, they would do a pure 
summer retreat, which was their carrying out a ninety-day summer retreat. It is 
what Buddhas and Ancestors of the present carry out as the One Great Matter,* for 
it is the unsurpassed Way of unifying training and enlightenment. In the Scripture 
of Brahma’s Net there is mention of a winter retreat, but how it was done has not 
been passed on; only the method for performing the ninety-day summer retreat has 
been passed on. It has been accurately Transmitted to me personally in the fifty- 
first generation. 

djb 

CX) 


In the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple , it says the following, “If 
monks on pilgrimages wish to begin their summer retreat at a particular monastery, 
they should settle in half a month before the opening day. What is important is that 
they not be hurried in making their tea offerings and paying their respects.” ‘Half a 
month before’ means ‘during the last ten days of the third lunar month’. 
Accordingly, you should arrive and get settled in during the third lunar month. 
From the first day of the fourth lunar month on, monks are not to go outside the 
confines of the monastery. The doors of the reception rooms in various quarters, as 
well as those to the rooms for temporary lodging of itinerant monks are all locked. 
Accordingly, from the first day of the fourth lunar month on, itinerant monks will 
be making the retreat within the confines of the temple buildings or they will have 
settled into a monk’s hut. Some may do the retreat in the residence of a lay 
Buddhist, for which there is a precedent. All these are rules of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors, so you need to do the practice and training out of a desire to emulate the 
ancient ways. Once the Fists and Noses have all taken up residence in the halls of 
the monastery, they hang up their traveling bag in their place for the duration of the 
retreat. 

Despite this, that band of demons say, “The perspective of Mahay ana* is 
what is important. The summer retreat is a practice of Hinayanists of the Lesser 
Course,* so by all means, do not engage in the practice of it.” Such folks have 
never encountered, much less heard of, the Buddha Dharma. Supreme, fully 
perfected wisdom is synonymous with doing meditation throughout the summer at 
a ninety-day retreat. Even though the Ultimate is to be found in both the Greater 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


860 


and the Lesser Courses, Its branching, leafing out, flowering, and fruiting emerge 
from the ninety-day retreat. 

First off, after breakfast on the third day of the fourth lunar month, the 
following ceremony is performed. Prior to the first day of the fourth lunar month, 
the senior monk in charge of the trainees within a Meditation Hall has already 
prepared the notice boards announcing the ceremony of kaird. Right after 
breakfast, he hangs up these boards in front of the halls where the monks are 
residing. That is, he hangs them outside the latticed window which is to the left of 
the front entrance. He hangs them after breakfast and removes them after the bell is 
rung at the end of the day’s practice. These are hung from the third day through the 
fifth day. The times to hang them and to take them down remain the same. 

There is a set style and order for signing in on these boards. The order is not 
according to one’s general position in the hierarchy of the retreat temple as ‘temple 
officer’ or ‘senior monk’, but just according to the date when the monk first took 
the monastic preceptual vows. Those who may be senior monks or temple officers 
elsewhere should sign in as Chief Junior or Prior or whatever. 3 4 5 Those who have 
served in various offices should write their highest office. Anyone who has ever 
served as an Abbot puts down ‘So-and-so of the Western Hall’/*' Although someone 
may have served as Abbot of a small temple, this may not be known by other 
monks, so, as often as not, he may choose not to write this title. When a monk of 
the Western Hall stays in the training assembly of his Master, there are examples 
where such a one does not follow the custom of the Western Hall and simply refers 
to himself as Veteran Monk So-and-so. There are many excellent examples of such 
a monk taking a nap in the common room of the Abbot’s attendants who take care 
of their Master’s robes and monk’s bowl. Also, there is an old tradition of such a 
veteran monk serving as the attendant in charge of the Master’s robe and bowl, or 
as the attendant responsible for handling incense offerings, or what is more, in any 
other office that is assigned at the discretion of the Master. In a large temple, when 
someone else’s disciples come to the retreat, even if they served the Abbot of a 
small temple, it is a reliable precedent for them to be given a title for the ninety-day 


3. Kairo is a ceremony in which monks enter their name in a registry along with the number of 
years since their ordination, that is, since taking the preceptual vows of a monastic. 

4. That is, they should register in accordance with the specific position held in their own 
temple. 

5. ‘So-and so of the Western Hall’ refers to the retired head monk of another temple, one who 
is staying in the guest quarters on the west side of the monastery. The Western Hall is also 
the place where retired monks in their Master’s assembly are sequestered. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


861 


retreat, such as Chief Junior, Clerical Officer, Chief Supervisory Officer, or Prior, 
for instance. Those who use their title from some minor post in a small temple 
cause laughter among those in the monastery. A sensible person who has been even 
the Abbot of a small temple will sign himself without using that title. 


The board is set up in the following style: 

Such-and-such Temple on Such-and-such Mountain in Such- 
and-such District of Such-and-such Province is holding a summer 
retreat this summer. For the Sangha attending, the number of years 
that each has passed since taking the monastic Precepts is as follows: 

The Venerable Kaundinya 6 
The Venerable Abbot 

Precept recipients in 1 st year of the Kempo era : 

So-and-so Veteran So-and-so Librarian 

So-and-so Veteran So-and-so Veteran 

Precepts recipients in 2 nd year of Kempo era : 

So-and-so of Western Hall So-and-so Trainees’ Supervisor 
So-and-so Chief Junior So-and-so Guestmaster 

So-and-so Veteran So-and-so Bathhouse Monk 

Precepts recipients in 1 st year of Kenrvaku era : 

So-and-so Grounds Supervisor So-and-so Abbot’s Assistant 
So-and-so Chief Junior So-and-so Chief Junior 

So-and-so Chief Cook So-and-so Meditation Hall Head 

Precepts recipients in 2 nd year of Kenrvaku era : 

So-and-so Clerical Officer So-and-so Veteran 

So-and-so of Western Hall So-and-so Chief Junior 

So-and-so Veteran So-and-so Veteran 

The preceding is respectfully offered. If there are any errors, 
please point them out. Respectfully written. 

Respectfully submitted by So-and-so Supervisor of Trainees on 
the third day of the fourth lunar month in such-and-such an era. 


6. Ajnyata Kaundinya was Shakyamuni Buddha’s first disciple. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


862 


This is how it should be written. We write it on white paper. We write it in the 
standard, non-cursive style. We do not use the cursive grass style or the seal style. 
To hang a board, attach a cord about the width of two rice grains to the top of the 
board from which to hang it, just like we do with a rattan blind or a vertical tablet. 
It is taken down on the fifth day of the fourth lunar month after the bell is rung at 
the end of the day’s practice. 

On the eighth day of the fourth lunar month, the community celebrates the 
birth of the Buddha. 

After the midday meal on the thirteenth day of the fourth lunar month, the 
monks assemble in their own common room where a tea ceremony is performed, 
followed by a Scripture recitation. The Dormitory Heads perform these tasks. It is 
their duty to provide hot water and to bum incense. A Dormitory Head sits in the 
innermost part of the monks’ common room, seated to the left of the saintly image 
of the hall’s bodhisattva.* 7 8 Monks such as the Chief Juniors and the senior monks 
do not participate in the Scripture recitation; it is only done by the monks staying 
in that particular hall. 

Towards evening, a senior monk prepares an offering of incense and flowers 

o 

at the shrine of the Guardian of the Field, placing it before the shrine’s tablet. The 
monks then assemble before the shrine to perform the ceremonial recitation. 


The Method for Doing the Recitation 

After all the monks have assembled, the Abbot makes an incense offering, 
followed by the administrative monks and monastic managers of the monastery, all 
in the same manner in which incense is offered during the ceremony of bathing the 
Buddha’s image. Next, the Supervisor of Trainees gets up from his place and, 
going to the front, bows with hands in gassho,* first to the Abbot and then before 
the shrine of the Guardian of the Field. Then, while facing north—that is, facing 
the shrine—he conducts the mindful recitation, saying the following: 

Balmy breezes fan over the fields and the emperor of heat rules 
everywhere. This is a time when, in obedience to the Lord of the Law, 


7. Such a ‘saintly image’ (shoso) will most likely be that of the Buddha, Manjushri, Maitreya, 
or Avalokiteshvara. 

8. The Guardian of the Field Shrine is dedicated to whatever spiritual beings might have 
already inhabited the grounds upon which the temple was erected. A shrine is built for them 
and they are respectfully asked to serve as guardians of the temple. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


863 


we take not a step from the temple. These are the days for protecting 
the lives of the Buddha’s disciples. We have assembled the whole 
community in all humility and respectfully visit your sacred shrine. 

We recite the names of the great Buddhas of myriad virtues and offer 
the merit therefrom to you, the Guardian Deity of all the monastic 
halls. We pray for your divine protection that we may be able to 
accomplish this retreat; out of respect we take refuge in the Holy 
Sangha. Now let us invoke the names of the Ten Buddhas: 

The completely pure Buddha, Vairochana* Buddha, 

Dharma Itself, 9 

The complete Buddha Who has been rewarded for His 
previous training, 

Shakyamuni Buddha, one of the many Buddhas who 
have appeared in the many worlds, 

Maitreya* Buddha Who will appear in the future, 

All the Buddhas in all directions and in the Three Worlds, 

Holy Manjushri* Bodhisattva; 

The great and wise Samantabhadra* Bodhisattva, 

The great and kind Avalokiteshvara,* 

All the Bodhisattvas and Ancestors, 

The great Prajnaparamita. 10 

We offer the merits of this recitation to the Guardians of the 
Field—the dragons and the celestial hosts—and to all who protect and 
preserve the true Dharma. Bowing, we pray that your spiritual light 
will aid all of us to manifest the merits of our deeds, and that your 
pure light will flourish and confer upon us selfless joy. Once again, let 
us join together to recite: 

All the Buddhas in all directions and in the Three Worlds, 

All the Bodhisattvas and Ancestors, 

The great Prajnaparamita. 

Then the drum sounds and the whole assembly of monks immediately go to their 
sitting places in the Cloud Hall for a serving of sweetened hot water. The 
preparation of sweetened water is a responsibility of the officers who oversee the 

9. A gong is struck before each name is recited. 

10. This is a reference to the Bodhisattva who is the personification of Great Wisdom. She is 
regarded as the mother who gives birth to all the Buddhas. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


864 


Kitchen. The assembly goes to the Cloud Hall and circumambulates the hall in 
seniority order, Upon arriving at their own place, they each sit facing outwards. 
One of the senior administrative officers does the prescribed ceremony, that is, he 
or she makes an incense offering, and so forth. In the Procedures for Cleanliness in 
a Zen Temple, it says, “Originally, the Prior would perform this ceremony, but 
according to circumstances, the Supervisor of Trainees may act on the Prior’s 
behalf.” 

It is proper that, before the Mindful Recitation, a notice should be copied 
onto an announcement board and presented to the Chief Junior. The administrative 
officer, upon seeing the Chief Junior wearing a kesa* and carrying his or her 
bowing mat, performs the ceremony of twice offering to spread one’s mat and then 
doing three bows. 11 The Chief Junior responds with bows of his or her own, done 
in the same manner. A novice monk then presents the Chief Junior with a box 
containing the notice board wrapped in a cloth. The Chief Junior accepts it and 
then sees the officer off. 

The form of the notice is as follows: 

This evening, on behalf of the Chief Junior, the Kitchen Hall 
officers are offering green tea and cakes in the Cloud Hall for the 
benefit of the community. We humbly inform you of this ceremony to 
celebrate the opening of the retreat, and respectfully pray that you, the 
community, will honor us with your illustrious presence. 

Respectfully presented on this 14 th day of the 4 th lunar month in 
the 3 ld year of the Kangen era (May 11, 1244) by So-and-so of the 
Kitchen Hall. 

This is signed with the first name of the presiding officer of the kitchen. After 
presenting the board to the Chief Junior, the officer asks the novice to post it up in 
front of the Cloud Hall, to the left of the hall’s front entrance. 

On the outside wall to the south of the front entrance there is a lacquered 
board on which the notice is to be posted. There is a leather envelope to the side of 
this board. It is aligned with the right edge of the board and fastened with a 
bamboo peg. This board is made according to a set method. The writing is in small 
characters about half an inch high; they should not be too big. The message on the 
front of the envelope is as follows: 


11. This ceremony entails a monk’s beginning to spread his or her bowing mat in preparation for 
doing three bows, but each time they are signaled with a gesture by the monk who is being 
honored that such formal bowing is unnecessary, whereupon the monk ends up by simply 
doing three standing bows without spreading his or her mat. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


865 


An invitation to the Chief Junior, along with all the other monks 
of the community, enclosed with respect from the monks of the 
Kitchen Hall. 

After the ceremony of green tea and cakes, the board is taken down. 

Before breakfast on the fifteenth day, the temple officers and senior monks, 
as well as the Abbot’s disciples and fellow monks, first enter the Abbot’s quarters 
to pay their respects. But if, on the previous day, the Abbot had excused them from 
performing this courtesy, they should not visit the Abbot’s quarters at all. ‘Being 
excused from performing this courtesy’ means that the Abbot has had someone 
paste up a notice board on which he has written a verse or some words of Teaching. 
This is posted either on the east side of the entrance to his quarters or in front of 
the Cloud Hall. 

After breakfast on the fifteenth, the Supervisor of Trainees hangs on the east 
wall that is in front of the Meditation Hall a single kairo board that he had prepared 
in advance. He hangs it above the front hall, that is, between the pillars to the south 
of the front entrance. In the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple, it says 
that the senior monk in charge of the Meditation Hall puts up a kairo board and 
makes an alms offering of incense and flowers. (He puts this board up in front of 
the Meditation Hall.) After the midday meal on the fifteenth day of the fourth lunar 
month, a board announcing a Mindful Recitation ceremony is hung in front of the 
Meditation Hall. Similar boards are also hung up outside other temple buildings. 

Also on the fifteenth day, after the Abbot has given his Dharma talk, he 
comes down from the Dharma seat and stands before its steps. He then steps onto 
the north comer of the bowing seat and stands facing south. A temple officer 
approaches him and performs the ceremony of twice offering to spread one’s mat 
and then doing three bows. After the first offering, he says the following: 

On this occasion of our being sequestered during the summer 
retreat, we are able to serve you with a towel and water jug. We pray 
that, due solely to the strength of your Dharma, O Venerable Monk, 
we shall meet with no impediments. 


12. The Mindful Recitation ceremony consists primarily of the recitation of the Names of the 
Ten Buddhas. 

13. The bowing seat (haiseki) is a bowing mat that lies in front of the altar. During ceremonies, 
it is the customary place where a celebrant stands or spreads his bowing mat to do his 
prostrations. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


866 


As his next offering, he expresses the compliments of the season by wishing for the 
cold weather to warm and then does three informal bows. 14 Once he has finished 
paying the compliments of the season and has done his three bows, he picks up his 
mat and continues, saying the following: 

How fortunate we are that the early summer is finally warming 
up. Reflecting upon this period when our Dharma Lord has opened 
this summer retreat, I am humbled by the thought that our gratitude is 
not equal to the thousand blessings that you, our Venerable Monk who 
is the Head of our Hall, bestow upon us lowly trainees. 

After this, the temple officer responds by placing his mat on the ground and then 
doing three more informal bows. Saying nothing, the Abbot and all others respond 
with three informal bows. 

The Abbot then responds, as follows: 

It is likewise my great good fortune to be able to carry out a 
summer retreat here with all of you. And I earnestly desire that you, 
So-and-so the Chief Junior, and you, So-and-so the Prior, along with 
all you others, will assist me, through the strength of your Teaching, to 
go beyond all impediments. 

The Chief Junior, along with the whole community, then follows the same 
procedure of making three informal bows. At this time, the Chief Junior, along 
with the whole community, including the officers, all face north and bow. Only the 
Abbot faces south, standing in front of the stairs to his Dharma seat. The Abbot 
then spreads his bowing mat upon the bowing seat. 

Next, the Chief Junior and the rest of the assembly perform the ceremony of 
twice offering to spread their mat and then doing three bows before the Abbot. At 
this time, the Master’s disciples, his attendants, his Dharma relatives, 15 and the 
novices remain standing to one side; they should not blindly follow the rest of the 
assembly in paying their personal respects. ‘To remain standing to one side’ means 
‘to stand along the eastern wall of the Dharma Hall’. If the screened-off area for 
donors is at the east wall, then the aforesaid monks should stand near the Dharma 
drum or along the western wall. 


14. The most common style of doing informal bows is by placing one’s folded bowing mat on 
the ground and doing a prostration with one’s forehead touching one’s mat. 

15. One’s Dharma relatives—Dharma brothers and sisters—are monks who share the same 
Master as oneself. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


867 


When the assembly has finished their prostrations, they return to the temple 
kitchen led by the administrative officers, who stand at the right side. 16 Next, the 
Chief Junior leads the rest of the assembled monks to the kitchen to pay their 
respects to the Kitchen Officers, that is, they do three informal bows to them. At 
this same time in the Dharma Hall, the Abbot’s disciples, his assistants, his Dharma 
relatives, and the novices do their prostrations to him. His Dharma relatives should 
do the ceremony of twice offering to spread one’s mat and then doing three bows, 
with the Abbot returning these bows. The Abbot’s disciples and his assistants each 
do nine prostrations; the Abbot does not return these bows. The novices do either 
nine or twelve prostrations, which the Abbot receives whilst just holding his hands 
in gassho. 

Next, the Chief Junior goes in front of the Monks’ Hall and, to the right of 
the entrance, on a level with the southern end of the administrative officers’ 
meditation seats—that is, in front of the Cloud Hall and facing south—stands 
before the monks. The assembled monks face north and do three informal bows 
while turned towards the Chief Junior. The Chief Junior then leads the assembled 
monks into the Monks’ Hall. In order of monastic seniority, the monks 
circumambulate the hall and stand before their own place. The administrative 
officers enter the hall and do three bows, spreading their mats before the main 
image in the hall. Next, they do three informal bows to the assembly, to which the 
assembled monks bow in response. The six administrative officers then do one 
circumambulation of the hall and, according to rank, stand by their place, their 
hands in shashu.* 

The Abbot enters the hall, offers incense before the main image, does three 
full prostrations, and then rises. During this time, his disciples stand out of the way, 
behind the main image, whereas his Dharma relatives follow the other monks. 
Next, the Abbot does three informal bows to the Chief Junior. That is, the Abbot 
remains standing in his place and does these bows while facing west. The Chief 
Junior, along with the community, bows in response, as before. 

The Abbot then circumambulates the hall and departs. The Chief Junior, 
leaving by the south side of the front entrance, sees the Abbot off. After the Abbot 
has departed, all the monks, from the Chief Junior down, spread their bowing mats 
and perform three full bows, facing outwards from their sitting place, and then 
recite in unison, as follows: 


16. The administrative officers are the Chief Supervisory Officer, the Prior, the Treasurer, the 
Supervisor of Trainees, the Chief Cook, and the Grounds Maintenance Officer. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


868 


How fortunate we are to be doing this retreat together. I fear lest 
my acts of body, speech, and mind should not prove to be good, and I 
pray that I will show benevolence and compassion towards all. 

The prostrations following this are done thrice with one’s bowing mat spread out 
fully. Having completed this, the Chief Junior, the Clerical Officer, the Chief 
Librarian, and the other department heads each return to their quarters. Those who 
are staying in the monks’ common quarters, from the Head of the Quarters on 
down, all do three informal bows to each other, reciting the same verse that was 
recited in the Main Hall. 

After this, the Abbot makes his rounds of the various offices, beginning with 
the Kitchen Hall. The monks follow after the Abbot in sequence, accompanying 
him to his quarters and then withdrawing. That is to say, the Abbot goes first to the 
Kitchen Hall. Once he has paid his respects to the Kitchen Officers and departs, he 
continues making his rounds, with the Kitchen Officers following behind him. 
Following after the Kitchen Officers are those who are staying in or around the 
Eastern Quarters. At this time, the Abbot does not enter the Infirmary, but turns 
west from the Eastern Quarters, passing by the Temple Gate and continuing on his 
rounds of the various quarters. Those who are residing near the Temple Gate join 
the procession. From the south, the Abbot goes around to visit the quarters on the 
west side. At this time, while he is traversing the west side, he is facing north. By 
this time, the elderly retired monks, retired officers, retired assistant officers, those 
over one hundred years old, and veteran monks who live in private quarters as well 
as the monk in charge of the toilets, among others, will have joined the procession. 
The Supervisor of Trainees and the Chief Junior, among others, will follow behind 
them. Following them are the monks from the common quarters. The quarters are 
circumambulated according to the convenience of their location. This is what we 
call “the monks’ escort”. 

Thence, the Abbot goes up the western stairs to his quarters and then, 
positioning himself directly in front of his quarters, he faces south with hands in 
shashu. The whole assembly, from the administrative officers on down, face north 
and make monjin* to the Abbot. This monjin should be especially deep. The Abbot 
makes monjin in response. The assembly then withdraws. 

My late Master did not lead the assembly to his quarters; when he reached 
the Dharma Half he stood before the stairs of the hall, facing south with hands in 
shashu. The assembly made monjin and then retired. This was the traditional 
ceremony from ancient times. After this, the monks in the assembly would pay 


17. As distinct from the resident monks who stay in the Meditation Hall. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


869 


their respects to each other, as they pleased. They paid their respects by doing bows 
to each other. For instance, those from the same home district—even dozens of 
them—would exchange prostrations, some in the Hall of Illumination and others in 

1 o 

some convenient place in the corridors, and they would offer to each other the 
congratulatory verse on attending the retreat together. At the same time, there are 
some whose words resemble those spoken formally in the Main Hall, and there are 
also personal ways some have of expressing their feelings. And there are also 
Masters who have brought their disciples. In that case, the disciples will invariably 
offer their bows, doing nine full prostrations. Those who are Dharma relatives of 
the Abbot do the ceremony of two offerings and three bows or do three full 
prostrations. The prostrations of any Dharma relative of anyone in the assembly 
should be the same. And there will be prostrations to the younger and elder 
brothers of one’s Master. Those who sit and sleep next to each other in the 
Meditation Hall all do prostrations to each other, as well as to those who are 
mutually acquainted or have done a retreat together in the past. Those who are 
veteran monks living in private quarters, as well as the Chief Supervisory Officer, 
the Prior, the Supervisor of Trainees, the Chief Cook, the Grounds Maintenance 
Officer, the monks of the Western Hall, and the Teacher of the Female Trainees 
should all visit each other’s quarters or visit each other’s sitting place in the 
Meditation Hall and do their bows and greetings. When we go to visit someone and 
find the entryway to their quarters too crowded to enter, we write out a card and 
attach it beside their entrance. The card is written on white paper an inch or so high 
and about two inches wide. The style of writing is as follows: 

So’un, Esho, and others. 

Congratulations, with three bows! 
or 

So-and-so. 

Salutations and congratulations! 
or 

So-and-so of Such-and-such Hall. 

Congratulations, with three bows! 
or 

So-and-so bows. 

Congratulations! 

or 


18. The Hall of Illumination is a small room next to the Monks’ Hall, which is used by the Chief 
Junior to give Dharma talks to novice monks when the Abbot is unable to perform that duty. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


870 


So-and-so 

Humbly offering prostrations. 

The styles of writing are many, but these give the general idea. So, a large number 
of these cards can be seen beside entrances. They are not attached to the left of an 
entrance, but to the right of it. These cards are taken down after the midday meal 
by the person in charge of the quarters. On that day the rattan blinds are raised on 
the entryways of all halls and quarters. 

There is a custom that the Head of a Temple, his or her administrative 
officers, and the Chief Junior, in succession, offer tea and cakes. However, this can 
be abridged, or dispensed with, for those on a remote island or deep in the 
mountains, as they simply do what is within their means. Retired senior monks, as 
well as monks who are serving as temporary Chief Juniors for the duration of the 
retreat, offer tea and cakes in their quarters, especially for the various temple 
officers. 

Having thus opened the summer retreat, we do our utmost in practicing the 
Way. You may well have been pursuing the Way and keeping to the Precepts, but if 
you have not done a summer retreat, you are not an offspring of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors, much less a Buddha or Ancestor. By virtue of a summer retreat, 
Jetavana Park and the Divine Vulture Peak will fully manifest themselves for you. 
The training ground of a summer retreat is the realm of the Mind seal* of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors and is the dwelling place of all Buddhas. 


The Closing of the Summer Retreat 

As it says in the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple, “On the 
thirteenth day of the seventh lunar month, the serving of tea and cakes and the 
reciting of Scriptures in the Common Room is once more the responsibility of the 
one who is the head of the Common Room for that month.” 

The mindful recitation of the names of the Buddhas on the evening of the 
fourteenth, as well as the attending of a Dharma talk, the paying of one’s respects, 
the circumambulating of the quarters, and the serving of tea and cakes, are all, one 
after the other, the same as at the opening of the retreat. Only the wording of 
notices is different. The notice for the kitchen staff’s offering of tea reads as 
follows: 

The kitchen staff will offer tea and cakes in the Cloud Hall this 
evening, especially for the benefit of the Chief Junior and the 
community. We will perform a small closing ceremony. We humbly 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


871 


pray that you will be so kind as to join in. Spoken in respect, So-and- 
so, the monks of the Kitchen Hall. 

The words for the mindful recitation before the Shrine of the Guardian of the Field 
are as follows: 

Golden breezes fan over the fields and the emperor of frost 
rules everywhere. The time is as that when the Buddha, Lord of 
Enlightenment, commenced the monks’ retreat. It is the day of our 
being a whole year older in the Dharma. Three months have passed 
without disaster and the whole Community is at ease. We recite the 
names of the great Buddhas of myriad virtues as we humbly report to 
you, the Guardian Deity of all the monastery halls, out of respect for 
you. We take refuge in the Holy Sangha as we all recite Their names. 

The mindful recitation from here on is the same as at the opening of the summer 
retreat. 

After the formal talk in the Dharma Hall, the administration officers, along 
with the other officers, recite the following in unison: 

Humbly, we rejoice that the Dharma year has been fulfilled 
without difficulties. This is undoubtedly due to the protective strength 
of the Master’s Dharma. We cannot fully express our deep gratitude. 

The Abbot then responds with these words: 

Now that the Dharma year has been fulfilled, we all offer our 
thanks to So-and-so Chief Junior and to So-and-so Prior, among 
others, for sharing with us the strength of their Dharma. I cannot fully 
express my deep gratitude. 

The Chief Junior and staff of the Hall, as well as the Dormitory Heads of the 
various quarters and their staff, say the following: 

During the ninety days of the summer retreat, we have relied 
upon each other, but I fear lest my acts of body, speech, and mind 
have not proved to be good, and I humbly pray that you will show 
benevolence and compassion towards me. 

The administrative officers, along with the other officers of the temple, then make 
the following announcement: 

We ask those brothers and sisters who are planning to travel on 
to remain with us for tea before departing. This, of course, does not 
apply to those who have some pressing engagement. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


872 


djb 

CX) 

This ceremony of the ninety-day summer retreat is fundamental to us since 
time immemorial—from before to after the Age of the Lords of Awe-inspiring 
Voices. The Buddhas and Ancestors have placed great emphasis on just this 
ceremony alone. And the non-Buddhists and the demon hordes have yet to corrupt 
this one ceremony. Not a single one who is an offspring of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors within the three nations of India, China, and Japan has ever failed to 
perform it, but those outside the Way have never studied it. Because of the long- 
cherished desire of the Buddhas and Ancestors for the One Great Matter, from the 
morning of Their entering the Way until the evening of Their entering nirvana, 
what They proclaim is simply the underlying principle of the summer retreat. Even 
though there are differences among the five monastic families in India, they are 
alike in observing the ninety-day summer retreat, inexorably practicing the Way of 
enlightenment. Of the nine monastic families in China, not even one has ever 
violated the rule of the summer retreat. Those who have never done a ninety-day 
summer retreat should never be called a monk who is a disciple of the Buddha. 
This means that we should not only do this practice during the bodhisattva stages 
for awakening, but we should also continue the practice of a summer retreat after 
having awakened. The Great Awakened, World-honored One performed the 
practice of a summer retreat throughout His life, not missing a single summer. 
Keep in mind that it was what the Buddha realized as the ultimate fruition. 

At the same time, although you may laugh at one who has not done a ninety- 
day summer retreat and yet calls himself an offspring of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors, such a foolish person is not even worth a laugh. Do not listen to the 
words of that bunch who talk like that. Do not get into discussions with such 
people. Do not sit with them. Do not even walk the same path with them. For, in 
the Buddha Dharma, we handle such wicked people by using the method of 
Brahma’s rod of silence. 

You should simply understand the ninety-day summer retreat as the Buddhas 
and Ancestors have done, and rely upon it, and preserve it. It has been genuinely 
Transmitted from the Seven Buddhas* down to Makakasho. It was genuinely 
Transmitted by Dharma heir after Dharma heir through the twenty-eight Indian 
Ancestors. When the Twenty-eighth Ancestor came to China, he genuinely 
Transmitted It to our Great Ancestor, the Second Chinese Ancestor, Great Master 
Eka. From the Second Ancestor, It was genuinely Transmitted by Dharma heir after 
Dharma heir and has been genuinely Transmitted down to this very day. When I 
went to China, I directly received the genuine Transmission from within the 
assembly of an Ancestor of the Buddha, and I am doing the genuine Transmission 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


873 


in Japan. Now that you are within an assembly where the genuine Transmission 
exists and have done the ninety-day summer retreat within that assembly, you have 
already had the Way of the summer retreat genuinely Transmitted to you. Because I 
am of the genuine Transmission and you are doing the summer retreat while 
residing here together with me, it will be a true summer retreat. Because the 
summer retreat has been conferred face-to-face to Dharma heir after Dharma heir, 
starting with the summer retreats held when the Buddha was in the world, the 
countenance of both a Buddha and an Ancestor has been genuinely Transmitted to 
you right before your very eyes, and the body and mind of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors has personally awakened you to the promise of full enlightenment. This 
is why it is said that to encounter the summer retreat is to encounter Buddha, to 
experience the summer retreat is to experience Buddha, to practice the retreat is to 
practice Buddha, to hear the retreat is to hear Buddha, and to model oneself after 
the retreat is to leam Buddha. 

In sum, it is the Teaching that all the Buddhas and Ancestors never went 
counter to the summer retreat, or beyond it. Thus, lordly humans, lordly Shakras, 
lordly Brahmas, and so on, should do the summer retreat and become monastics, 
even if it is only for a single summer, for that would be their encountering Buddha. 
Ordinary people, persons in lofty positions, and erudite ‘dragons’ should do the 
summer retreat and become monastics—be they male or female—even if only for a 
single period of ninety days, for this would be their encountering Buddha. To join 
the community of an Ancestor of the Buddha and do a ninety-day summer retreat is 
to encounter Buddha forthwith. It is your good fortune that, before the dewdrop of 
your life has fallen, you have already done one summer’s retreat, be it as an 
ordinary lay person or as someone in a lofty position, so that you are now someone 
who has exchanged your skin and flesh, bones and marrow for the Skin and Flesh, 
Bones and Marrow of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Because the Buddhas and 
Ancestors come and do the retreat through us, each person’s practice of the retreat 
is the retreat’s practicing each of us. Because this is the way things are, those who 
have done the retreat are described simply as ‘a thousand Buddhas and myriad 
Ancestors’. If you were to ask why, the reason is because the retreat is the Skin and 
Flesh, Bones and Marrow, conscious mind and physical body of those who are 
Ancestors of Buddha. It is the Crown of their head and their Eye, it is their Fist and 
their Nose, it is their Buddha Nature fully perfected, it is their hossu* and traveling 
staff,* it is their lacquered, ceremonial bamboo sword and their meditation cushion. 
A summer retreat is not something brought forth as newly made. At the same time, 
it is not something that is merely making use of something old. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


874 


djb 

CX) 

The World-honored One once addressed the Bodhisattva Whose 
Enlightenment is Fully Perfected, along with the great assembly and 
all sentient beings, saying, “When the summer begins and you go into 
retreat for the three months of the rainy season, you should let the 
immaculate bodhisattvas stop and abide with you in your sanctuary. In 
your hearts, you should stay clear of those who merely come to listen 
but do not train, because the community of disciples is not a 
sometimes thing. Upon arriving for the opening day of the summer 
retreat, you should say something like the following before the 
Buddha or His image, ‘I, the monk or lay person So-and-so, being 
seated in the vehicle of bodhisattvahood, will cultivate tranquility and 
freedom from my defiling passions so that I too may enter the Truth of 
Immaculacy and abide therein. I take the great Fully Perfected 
Enlightenment to be my true monastery and sanctuary, with my body 
and mind, equally, both dwelling peacefully within the spiritual 
knowledge of Buddha Nature. Because the True Nature of nirvana is 
without ties or attachments to anything, I now pray respectfully that I 
may not rely solely on listening to the voicing of the Dharma, but may 
spend this three-month retreat with the Tathagatas of all the ten 
quarters and with the great bodhisattvas. Also, for the sake of the 
Great Cause for which we cultivate the supreme and wondrous 
awakening of a bodhisattva, I will not let myself be distracted from 
the purpose of the retreat through entanglements with my fellow 
trainees.’ O My fine disciples, I call this the dwelling at ease which a 
bodhisattva displays during a summer retreat.” 

Thus, whenever the monks and laity arrive for the three months of the retreat, they 
put into practice the Important Matter of the supreme and wondrous enlightenment 
of the bodhisattvas. Keep in mind that male and female lay trainees can also do the 
retreat. The place of this retreat is great, fully perfected enlightenment. This being 
so, Jetavana Park and the Divine Vulture Peak are both temples of the Tathagata’s 
great fully perfected enlightenment. You should carefully listen to, and take to 
heart, the World-honored One’s teaching that the Tathagatas and great bodhisattvas 
in all ten quarters did the practice and training of the three months’ summer retreat. 


Once when the World-honored One was doing the ninety-day 
summer retreat somewhere, on the final day, when the ceremony of 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


875 


public repentance was held , 19 Manjushri suddenly appeared in the 
assembly, whereupon Makakasho asked him, “Where did you do your 
retreat this summer?” Manjushri replied, “This summer I did the 
retreat in three other places.” At this, Makakasho assembled the 
community, intending to have Manjushri expelled by striking the 
wooden fish." But just as he had raised the hammer to strike the 
wooden fish, he suddenly saw innumerable Buddhist temples 
appearing. He could see that there was a Buddha with a Manjushri at 
each place and a Makakasho at each place, his hand raising a hammer 
to expel Manjushri, whereupon the World-honored One spoke to 
Makakasho, saying, “Which Manjushri do you wish to expel now?” 
Makakasho was immediately dumbfounded . 21 

Meditation Master Engo, in commenting on this account, once said the following: 

If a bell is not struck, it does not ring; if a drum is not struck, it 
does not resound. Makakasho had already grasped the essential 
function of a summer retreat; Manjushri had rid himself of all duality 
by means of his doing his meditation throughout the ten quarters. This 
very moment in the story is an excellent one, for it expounds the 
functioning of the Buddha’s Teaching. How regrettable to have 
missed such a move! As our dear Master Shakyamuni was about to 
say, ‘Which of the Manjushris do you wish to expel now?’ just 
imagine, what if Makakasho, right off, had given the fish a good 
whack! What mass annihilation would he have then created? 

Meditation Master Engo added a verse to this commentary of his: 

A great elephant does not play about in the narrow path 
that a rabbit makes, 

22 

And what coidd a little bird know of a great wild swan? 


19. This is the ceremony where the participants ask their fellow trainees to have compassion on 
them for their poor training during the retreat. 

20. The wooden fish is a wooden gong in the shape of a fish. It traditionally hangs just outside 
the Meditation Hall. Regulations for monks stipulate that a monastic must do the summer 
retreat in only one place. Breaking this regulation is considered a serious enough infraction 
to entail expulsion from the monastic Sangha. 

21. Quoted from the Great Far-reaching Scripture That is a Veritable Treasure Chest. 

22. ‘A great elephant’ is an allusion to Manjushri. ‘A great wild swan’ is a reference to 
Makakasho. 



Shobogenzo: On the Summer Retreat 


876 


It was just as if Makakasho had created a new way of 
putting the Matter whilst staying within the rules 
and regulations; 

It was just as if Manjushri had grabbed a flying arrow 
within his teeth, having already broken the target. 

The whole universe is one with Manjushri; 

The whole universe is one with Makakasho. 

Face-to-face, each is solemn in his authority. 

Makakasho raised his hammer, but in which place will he 
punish Manjushri? 

Manjushri did It with one fine prick of his needle; 

Makakasho s ascetic practices rid him of all hindrances. 

So, the World-honored One’s doing the summer retreat in one place is 
equivalent to Manjushri’s doing it in three places, and neither is not doing the 
summer retreat. If someone is not doing the retreat, then such a one is not a Buddha 
or a bodhisattva. There is no account of any offspring of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors not doing a summer retreat. You should realize that those who do a 
summer retreat are offspring of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Doing a summer 
retreat is the body and mind of the Buddhas and Ancestors. It is the Eye of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors, the very life of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Those who 
have not done a summer retreat are not the offspring of the Buddhas and Ancestors: 
they are neither a Buddha nor an Ancestor. We now have Buddhas and 
bodhisattvas, be They as humble as clay and wood, as precious as silk and gold, or 
as wondrous as the seven precious jewels.* All of Them have performed the retreat 
of sitting in meditation through the three months of the summer. This is the ancient 
custom of abiding within, and maintaining, the Treasures of Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha. In short, those who reside within the house of the Buddhas and Ancestors 
must, by all means, do the practice of sitting in retreat for the three months of a 
summer. 

Delivered to the assembly at Daibutsu-ji Temple in Echizen Province, on the thirteenth day of the 
sixth month, during the summer retreat in the third year of the Kangen era (July 8, 1245). 

Copied by me in the same province at Shinzenko-ji Temple in Nakahama on the twentieth day of 
the fifth month, during the summer retreat in the second year of the Koan era (June 30, 
1278). 


Giun 



78 

On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 

(Tashintsu) 


Translator’s Introduction: This discourse is Dogen’s reworking of his commentary on a section 
in Discourse 18: On ‘The Mind Cannot Be Grasped’ (Shin Fukatoku) concerning the encounter 
between the National Teacher Echu and a Tripitaka Master named Daini. ‘National Teacher’ is a 
Chinese imperial title often posthumously conferred upon a monk whose devotion to spiritual 
life was exemplary. Such a monk customarily served as the emperor’s personal spiritual advisor. 
‘Tripitaka Master’ is a secular title which might be comparable to the present-day academic 
‘Professor of Buddhology’; it does not imply that the person was necessarily a monk or even a 
practicing Buddhist. 


National Teacher Echu of the Temple of Luminous Residence in 
the Western Capital was a man from Chuchi in the Yueh-chou District. 
His family name was Zen. After having received the Mind seal, he 
went to reside on Mount Poyai in Tangtsu Valley in the Nang-yan 
District. For forty years he did not go out from the monastery’s gate, 
yet his reputation for practicing the Way was well-known throughout 
the country, not only in the towns and villages but also in the imperial 
court. In the second year of the Chinese Shang-yiian era (761 C.E.), 
Emperor Su-tsung of the T’ang dynasty privately dispatched his 
messenger, Sun Ch’ao-chin, to convey to the monk an invitation, 
summoning him to come to the capital. The emperor attended on the 
monk with all the courtesies due a Master, and had him take up 
residence in the Western Meditation Cloister of the Temple of a 
Thousand Blessings. When Emperor T’ai-tsung ascended to the throne 
after Su-tsung, he too sent his messenger to the monk, and now had 
him sequestered in the Temple of Luminous Residence. During his 
sixteen-year stay there, Echu gave voice to the Dharma in accordance 
with the capabilities of his audience. Then, one day, a person arrived 
at the capital from India, calling himself Tripitaka Master Daini. He 
claimed that he possessed the Eye that is keen enough to read people’s 


* See Glossary. 


877 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


878 


minds. The emperor summoned the National Teacher Echu to test this 
person. No sooner had the Tripitaka Master caught sight of the 
National Teacher than he did a full prostration and then stood to the 
left of the National Teacher. 

The National Teacher asked him, “Do you have the ability to 
read minds?” 

The Tripitaka Master answered, “I would not dare to make such 
a claim.” 

The National Teacher then said, “You, say! Where is the old 
monk right now?” 1 

The Tripitaka Master replied, “The reverend monk is indeed the 
teacher of this nation, so why does he go to the Western River and 
watch people racing about in their boats?” 2 3 

The National Teacher then asked a second time, “You, say! 
Where is the old monk right now?” 

The Tripitaka Master replied, “The reverend monk is the 
teacher of this nation, so why does he go to Tientsin Bridge and watch 
people playing with their pet monkeys?” 

The National Teacher asked a third time, “You, say! Where is 
the old monk right now?” 


1. ‘The old monk’ is an ambiguous term. On the one hand, it is a conventionally humble way 
for older senior monastics to refer to themselves, which is how the Tripitaka Master would 
have understood it. On the other hand, as ‘the Old Monk’, it can be understood as the 
National Teacher referring to his Buddha Nature, something which the Tripitaka Master 
would not have picked up on. In the latter sense, what the National Teacher asked could also 
be taken to mean, “Where is your Buddha Nature?” 

2. The Western River flows through the Western Paradise. The Tripitaka Master is saying, in 
effect, “Why do you, who are so saintly that you are already in the Western Paradise, bother 
to pay any attention to us ordinary people who are engaged in worldly, competitive 
pursuits?” 

3. ‘Tientsin Bridge’ literally means ‘the bridge that leads into the Harbor of Heaven’. The 
Tripitaka Master is saying, in effect, “Why do you, who are standing on the very Bridge of 
Heaven, concern yourself with us worldly people who are preoccupied with playing around 
with our everyday minds?” Both this and the Tripitaka Master’s previous statement are 
offering seemingly flattering but spiritually meaningless remarks in response to the National 
Teacher’s deeply spiritual question, all the while still hinting that he could, indeed, read the 
minds of others. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


879 


Although the Tripitaka Master remained there for quite a long 
time, he did not know what to say. 

The National Teacher said, “O you wild fox spirit, where is 
your ability to read minds now?” 

The Tripitaka Master still had no response. 4 


Concerning this story, there was a monk who once asked Joshu, 

“Why didn’t the Tripitaka Master see where the National Teacher was 
the third time?” Joshu replied, “He did not see where the National 
Teacher was because he was right on the tip of the Tripitaka Master’s 
nose.” 

Also, there was a monk who once asked Gensha Shibi, “Since 
the National Teacher was already right on the tip of the Tripitaka 
Master’s nose, why didn’t he see him?” Shibi replied, “Simply 
because he was just much too close.” 

A monk once asked Kyozan, “Why didn’t the Tripitaka Master 
see the whereabouts of the National Teacher the third time, since he 
was there a rather long time?” Kyozan replied, “The first two times, 
the National Teacher’s mind was in the realm of externals. He then 
entered the meditative state of delight in the Self, so the Tripitaka 
Master was unable to perceive his whereabouts.” 

Kaie Shutan once said, “If the National Teacher was right on the 
tip of the Tripitaka Master’s nose, why was he having such difficulty 
seeing it? After all, he did not recognize that the National Teacher was 
right inside the Tripitaka Master’s Eye.” 

Also, as if rebuking the Tripitaka Master, Shibi once remarked, 

“You, say! Did you even see It the first two times?” About this, 
Setcho Juken once said, “Seen through the first time! Seen through the 
second time!” 

From ancient times, there have been many senior monks who have 
commented on or tried to explain this story concerning National Teacher Echu’s 


4. Evidently, the Tripitaka Master realized that what he was being asked for required 
something beyond ‘p ar l° r Zen’ responses, but because he did not know what the True Mind 
of the National Teacher was, he was unable to reply. ‘A wild fox spirit’ here refers to a 
clever and manipulative person who gives teachings that are false and misleading. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


880 


testing of Tripitaka Master Daini, but these five venerable Fists are noteworthy. 5 
And though 1 do not deny the insight and appropriateness of the remarks of these 
five esteemed veteran Masters, there are several points where the commentators 
have not spotted the way that the National Teacher was behaving. If we ask why 
this is, it is because all concerned, in both the past and present, have been of the 
opinion that the first two times the Tripitaka Master correctly knew where the 
National Teacher was residing. This was the common error of our Ancestors and, 
as present-day trainees, you need to recognize it. 

Now there are two reasons why I have doubts about these five esteemed 
veteran Masters. First, they did not recognize the underlying intention in the 
National Teacher’s testing of the Tripitaka Master. Second, they did not appreciate 
the body and mind of the National Teacher. 

To begin with, I have said that they did not appreciate the body and mind of 
the National Teacher because the first time the National Teacher said, “You, say! 
Where is the old monk right now?” his underlying intention was to test whether the 
Tripitaka Master had the Eye to see and hear the Buddha Dharma; he wished to test 
whether the Tripitaka Master had the ability to read the minds and hearts of others, 
which is part of the Buddha Dharma. At that moment, if the Tripitaka Master had 
been equipped with the Buddha Dharma, then when asked, “You, say! Where is the 
old monk right now?” he would have been in possession of a path for going 
beyond the discriminatory, of an expedient means for putting the Matter* in his 
own personal way. The National Teacher’s saying “Where is the old monk right 
now?” is equivalent to asking, “What is the Old Monk?” His question, “Where is 
the Old Monk right now?” is his asking, “What occasion is ‘right now?’” His 
saying, “Where is...” is his asserting “This is the place where the What resides.” It 
has the underlying principle of referring to ‘the What’ as ‘an old monk’. The 
National Teacher is not the whole of what the Old Monk is, but the Old Monk is 
certainly the National Teacher’s Fist. Even though Tripitaka Master Daini had 
come from India, he did not know the heart of this, for he had not learned what the 
Buddha Dharma is and had just vainly studied the paths of non-Buddhists and 
those of the two Lower Courses.* 

The National Teacher then asked a second time, “You, say! Where is the old 
monk right now?” And here, again, the Tripitaka Master gave a pointless reply. 
Again the National Teacher asked, “You, say! Where is the old monk right now?” 
This third time, even though the Tripitaka Master took a considerable amount of 


5. When referring to a Master, the term ‘Fist’ refers to someone who has gone beyond 
conceptualizing and verbalizing in order to express the Buddha Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


881 


time, he was in a daze and gave no respectful reply. The National Teacher now 
rebuked the Tripitaka Master, saying, “O you wild fox spirit, where is your ability 
to read minds now?” Even though the Tripitaka Master was rebuked in this way, he 
was without a respectful reply and had no way out of his predicament. 

However, in regard to the National Teacher rebuking the Tripitaka Master, 
all of the five Ancestors were of the opinion that the latter knew the whereabouts of 
the National Teacher the first two times and only failed to see it the third time, and 
because he did not see it then, he was rebuked by the National Teacher. This is a 
huge mistake. The National Teacher’s rebuke of the Tripitaka Master was, from the 
first, a rebuke for not having encountered the Buddha Dharma even in his dreams. 
He does not rebuke him, as some have thought, for not having understood the third 
time even though having understood the first two times. He rebukes him for having 
styled himself as one who knew how to read minds when he did not know how to 
read minds at all. 

The National Teacher is, first off, testing the Tripitaka Master by asking him, 
in effect, whether the ability to read minds exists within the Buddha Dharma. By 
his answering, “I would not dare to make such a claim,” he implies that it does 
exist. After that, the National Teacher is apparently of a mind that thinks, “If we 
say that the ability to read minds exists in the Buddha Dharma and if we obtain the 
ability to read minds during our practice of the Buddha Dharma, then things are as 
they should be, but if what is expressed by words is not a full offering of the 
Teaching, then it cannot be the Buddha Dharma.” Even if the Tripitaka Master was 
at a point where he could have managed to express a small bit of the Teaching the 
third time, if it was anything like the first two times, it would not be a genuine 
expression through words and the National Teacher should rebuke him on 
principle. In asking his question three times, the National Teacher was trying to see 
again and again whether the Tripitaka Master could understand the question, which 
is why he asked his question three times. 

Second, none of the ancient worthies could fully appreciate the Body and 
Mind of the National Teacher. What I have called ‘the Body and Mind of the 
National Teacher’ is something that is beyond the reach of scholastic teachers of 
Scriptures like the Tripitaka Master, who could not see It, much less comprehend 
It. Among the bodhisattvas,* even the ‘thrice wise and ten times saintly’* have not 
reached It, nor is It something that those who will be reborn as Buddhas have 
clarified. Scholars who are students of Scriptures are ordinary, unenlightened 
people, so how could they possibly comprehend the National Teacher’s Whole 
Being? By all means, you need to be certain about this underlying principle. To say 
that the Body and Mind of the National Teacher can be known or seen by a scholar 
of Scriptures is to insult the Buddha Dharma. To believe that his Body and Mind 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


882 


are on a par with those of scholarly commentators on Scriptures is the utmost 
height of lunacy. Do not teach yourself that someone who may be able to read the 
worldly intentions of others must surely know where the National Teacher is 
existing. 

Now and again, as a cultural custom, there have been those in India who 
have succeeded in developing the ability to read minds. But I have never heard an 
example of anyone attaining the ability to read minds without, at the same time, 
relying on the Mind that has given rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood and 
without relying on the Right Views of the Greater Course.* A person like this, after 
attaining the ability to read minds, has genuinely mastered the Buddha Dharma. On 
the other hand, if an ordinary lay person has attained the ability to read minds, and 
then later gives rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood and therefore 
undertakes the training and practice, that person can, quite naturally, realize 
enlightenment in the Buddha’s Way. If one could comprehend the Buddha’s Way 
merely by having attained the ability to read the minds of others, then all the 
saintly ones of the past would have, first off, trained themselves to read the minds 
of others and then used that ability to realize the fruits of Buddhahood. But this has 
yet to be the case, even though thousands of Buddhas and myriad Ancestors have 
come into the world. I must ask, if someone has not already come to know the Way 
of the Buddhas and Ancestors, what is one to do, for such a person is of no use to 
the Way of the Buddhas? Someone who has attained only the ability to read minds 
and some ordinary, everyday person who cannot read minds are surely equals. 
When it comes to maintaining and relying upon one’s Buddha Nature, someone 
who can read minds and some ordinary, everyday person may well be the same. 

You who are studying what Buddha is must never think that those who 
possess the five or six spiritual abilities—be they non-Buddhists or those of the 
two Lesser Courses—are in any way superior to an ordinary, everyday person. 
There is simply the Mind that seeks the Way—the Mind of one who is truly 
studying the Buddha’s Teaching—which will surpass the five or six spiritual 
abilities, just as the song of the kalavinka bird, even in its egg, surpasses that of all 
other birds. Furthermore, what is called in India ‘the ability to read the minds of 
others’ should be called ‘the ability to know the concerns of others’. Even though 
one with such an ability may have some affinity with the thoughts and feelings that 
arise in someone else, they are so vague as to be laughable. What is more, Mind is 
not necessarily thoughts and feelings, nor are thoughts and feelings necessarily 
what Mind is. When one’s mind becomes entangled with thoughts and things, one 
cannot know how to read the minds of others, and when thoughts and things 
become entangled in the mind, that mind cannot know how to read the thoughts of 
others. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


883 


Thus, the five or six abilities of India cannot come up to mowing down 
weeds and tending the fields in this country of ours. Such abilities are ultimately of 
no use. Accordingly, all the previous virtuous ones in China and the lands east of 
India had no taste for practicing the five or six abilities, because they had no need 
for them. Even a foot-wide jewel may still have some value, but there is no value 
in the five or six abilities. Even a foot-wide jewel is not the Treasure, but every 
inch of time is precious. How could anyone who attaches any importance to 
moments of time waste them by dabbling with the five and six abilities? In short, 
you need to be decisive in affirming the principle that the ability to read the mind 
of another is outside the bounds of the wise discernment of a Buddha. Also, all five 
of the veteran Masters were greatly mistaken in having thought that the Tripitaka 
Master knew the whereabouts of the National Teacher the first two times. The 
National Teacher was an Ancestor of the Buddha, whereas the Tripitaka Master 
was an ordinary, everyday person, so how can anyone possibly take him to be the 
National Teacher’s equal in any spiritual discussion? 

First off, the National Teacher is saying, “You, say! Where is the Old Monk 
right now?” There is nothing that is hidden in this question; what he said clearly 
expresses It. The Tripitaka Master was not at fault in that he did not recognize this, 
but it was a serious mistake that the five veteran Masters did not pick up on this 
and failed to see it. The National Teacher had already said, “You, say! Where is the 
Old Monk right now?” He did not say, “You, say! Where is the old monk’s mind 
now?” nor did he say, “Where are the old monk’s thoughts now?” Rather, what he 
said is something which is vital to hear, and recognize, and inquire into. But the 
veteran monks neither recognized nor saw it. They did not hear or see what the 
National Teacher was saying. As a result, they did not know what the Body and 
Mind of the National Teacher was. One who has a way of explaining what a 
National Teacher is saying is called a National Teacher. If someone does not have a 
way of putting It, such a person cannot be a teacher of one’s nation. What is more, 
a person like this will not know that the Body and Mind of the National Teacher is 
beyond being something great or something mediocre, beyond being oneself or 
being someone else. It is as if this person had completely forgotten that he had a 
Crown upon his head or that he had a Nose on his face. Since the National Teacher 
had no break from his daily practice, how could he possibly have in mind the goal 
of becoming a Buddha! Therefore, we should not await our meeting up with him, 
waiting to meet a ‘Buddha’. 

The National Teacher already has the Body and Mind of a Buddha, but we 
cannot take measure of It by employing spiritual abilities or by realizing what It is 
through practice, nor can we be prepared to say what It is by suppressing thought 
or by being oblivious to karmic* conditions, for It is not something that can be 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


884 


successfully talked about or not talked about. The National Teacher is not one who 
possesses a Buddha Nature, and he is not one who lacks Buddha Nature, and he is 
not one whose being is vast space. The Body and Mind of such a National Teacher 
is something that is completely unknown. In our lineage from Daikan Eno of Sokei 
on down, apart from Seigen and Nangaku, only National Teacher Echu is such an 
Ancestor of the Buddha. 

I now wish to test each of the five veteran Masters and will attempt to go 
them one better. 

Joshu said that the Tripitaka Master did not see where the National Teacher 
was because he was right on the tip of the Tripitaka Master’s nose. This remark 
lacks validity. How could the National Teacher possibly be right on the tip of the 
Tripitaka Master’s nose when the latter still lacked a Nose? 6 If we grant that the 
Tripitaka Master did have a Nose, then the National Teacher would have had a 
spiritual encounter with him. Even if we grant that the National Teacher had a 
spiritual encounter with the Tripitaka Master, this would simply be one Nose facing 
one Nose but, to put it simply, the Tripitaka Master was unable to have a mutual 
encounter with the National Teacher. 

Shibi said that it was simply because he was just much too close. The phrase, 
‘being much too close’, may have some truth to it, but it still does not hit the mark. 
Just what is this ‘being much too close’? Shibi may well have still not known what 
‘being much too close’ means, for he may not have encountered being much too 
close. If you were to ask why, it is because he only knew that a mutual encounter is 
never too close. He did not know that a mutual encounter is being ever too close. 
We can say that when it comes to the Buddha Dharma, he was the farthest of the 
far. If we say that being ever too close only applies to the third time, then it must be 
that there was a being ever too close which existed before the first two times. I 
should like to ask Shibi at this time, “What are you calling ‘being too close’? Do 
you call it a Fist? Do you call it the Eye?” In the future, don’t you trainees go 
around saying that nothing you see is ever too close! 

Kyozan said that the first two times the National Teacher’s mind was in the 
realm of externals, and that he then entered the meditative state of delight in the 
Self so that the Tripitaka Master was unable to perceive his whereabouts. While 
you were living in China, Kyozan, you were honored in India as having the 
reputation of a lesser Shakyamuni, but even so, what you are saying now contains a 
great error. The mind that is in the realm of externals and the mind that enters the 
meditative state of delight in the Self are not two different minds. Therefore, you 


6. That is, he still lacked an awakened Buddha Nature. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


885 


should not say that the Tripitaka Master is unaware the third time because the mind 
in the realm of externals and the mind taking delight in the Self are different. So, 
even though you come up with a reason based upon a difference between taking 
delight in the Self and being in the realm of externals, that assertion of yours is still 
not a true assertion. Were you to say that when someone enters the meditative state 
of taking delight in the Self, others cannot ‘see’ that person, then taking delight in 
the Self could not realize taking delight in the Self, and there could be no practice 
that is synonymous with enlightenment. 

Kyozan, if you gathered that the Tripitaka Master truly saw the whereabouts 
of the National Teacher the first two times, then you are not yet one of those who 
has learned what Buddha is. In short, it was not just the third time that the Tripitaka 
Master Daini failed to see the whereabouts of the National Teacher, he also failed 
to see it the first two times as well. And if your understanding was as I have just 
stated it, then I would have to say that not only did the Tripitaka Master not know 
the whereabouts of the National Teacher, but you too, Kyozan, did not know the 
whereabouts of the National Teacher. Right now I would like to ask Kyozan, 
“Where is the National Teacher at this very moment?” And if, at this time, you 
should deign to open your mouth, I would let out such a yell! 

Shibi, as a reproach to the Tripitaka Master, questioned whether he had even 
seen the National Teacher the first two times. Now this one statement, “Had you 
even seen the National Teacher the first two times?” sounds as if he is saying what 
needs to be said. But Shibi needs to study his own words. This sentence is fine as 
fine goes, but if we just look at it, it is as if he was saying, “He saw and he didn’t 
see.” Therefore, it is not accurate. Upon hearing this, Setcho Juken said, “Seen 
through the first time! Seen through the second time!” When we see Shibi’s words 
as true, we should also say this, but when we do not see Shibi’s words as true, we 
should not say this. 

Kaie Shutan said, “If the National Teacher was right on the tip of the 
Tripitaka Master’s nose, why was the latter having such difficulty seeing it? After 
all, he did not recognize that the National Teacher was right inside the Tripitaka 
Master’s Eye.” This statement also only deals with the third time. He did not 
reprimand the Tripitaka Master, as he should have, for failing to see the first two 
times, so how could he possibly recognize that the National Teacher was on the tip 
of the Tripitaka Master’s nose or inside his Eye? If he talks like this, we can say 
that he has not yet heard what the National Teacher is saying, for the Tripitaka 
Master did not have the Nose or the Eye for it. But even should the Tripitaka 
Master have maintained and relied upon an Eye and a Nose of his own, if the 
National Teacher penetrated that Nose and Eye, both the Tripitaka Master’s Nose 
and Eye would immediately have been ripped open. Once they had been ripped 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


886 


open, they would not be the niches and baskets that a National Teacher needs to 
stay in. 7 

None of the five veteran monks really knew the National Teacher. He was 
the Old Buddha of his generation and the Tathagata for his world. He had clarified 
the Matter and had received the genuine Transmission of the Buddha’s Treasure 
House of the Eye of the True Teaching. And he was undoubtedly preserving, and 
relying upon, his Eye, which was as black as a nut from a bo-tree. 8 He genuinely 
experienced the Transmission within his own Buddha Nature and he genuinely 
Transmitted It to the Buddha Nature of others. He was as a fellow trainee with 
Shakyamuni Buddha and, at the same time, he thoroughly explored the Matter with 
the Seven Buddhas.* And he acted like a fellow trainee with all the Buddhas of the 
three temporal worlds. He awoke to the Way that came before the Lord of 
Emptiness,* and awoke to the Way that came after the Lord of Emptiness, and 
awoke to the Way as a fellow trainee at the very time of the Buddha Who is the 
Lord of Emptiness. Right from the start, the National Teacher treated our ordinary, 
everyday world of suffering as his native land, and at the same time, this world of 
suffering was not necessarily within his Dharma world or within the whole of his 
universe in all ten directions. And Shakyamuni, as Lord of this world of suffering, 
never usurped or hindered the National Teacher’s native land, which is just like 
each of the former and latter Buddhas and Ancestors who had innumerable 
awakenings to the Truth, but without interfering with or hindering each other’s 
experience. And it is like this because the awakening to the Truth by former and 
latter Buddhas and Ancestors was unique to each of Them based on how it is that 
They awoke to the Truth. 

Based on the evidence that Tripitaka Master Daini did not understand the 
National Teacher, the underlying principle should be clearly evident that folks like 
the shravakas* and pratyekabuddhas* of the Lesser Two Courses do not recognize 
even the periphery of Buddhahood. You should clarify through your training the 
National Teacher’s intention in censuring the Tripitaka Master. That is, if the 
National Teacher had reprimanded him for knowing his whereabouts the first two 
times, and then reprimanded him for not knowing it the third time, this would lack 


7. That is, if the Eye of the Tripitaka Master were to open, even though he would then be one 
who had awakened to the Truth, the National Teacher, who was already more spiritually 
advanced, would not need to depend on the Eye and Nose of the Tripitaka Master to 
accurately point out the Old Monk’s whereabouts. 

8. The black nut from the bo-tree resembles the pupil of an eye. The reference is to the Eye, 
which unlike ordinary eyes does not function as one of the thieving sensory organs. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


887 


validity. To know two thirds is to know the whole. So if it were this way, the 
National Teacher should not have reprimanded him. If he is reprimanded, it is not 
for being ignorant of the whole, but because the Tripitaka Master’s attitude was 
insulting to the National Teacher. 9 If the latter had reprimanded the Tripitaka 
Master simply for failing to know the third time, who could trust the National 
Teacher’s judgment? On the grounds of the Tripitaka Master knowing the first two 
times, the Tripitaka Master would be justified in reprimanding the National 
Teacher. 

The National Teacher’s intent in censuring the Tripitaka Master is as 
follows: He reprimands him because, right from the start, he failed all three times 
to recognize where the National Teacher was, what he was thinking, and what his 
Body and Mind were. He reprimands him for never having encountered or heard 
the Buddha Dharma, much less having studied It. Because this was the National 
Teacher’s purpose, from the first time through the third, he asked his question 
using the same words. The first time the Tripitaka Master answered, “The reverend 
monk is indeed the teacher of this nation, so why does he go to the Western River 
and watch people racing about in their boats?” Spoken to in this way, the National 
Teacher did not reply, “Yes, Tripitaka Master, you have truly grasped the Old 
Monk’s whereabouts.” He simply repeated his question two more times. For 
several centuries since the time of the National Teacher, monks of long standing in 
all quarters, failing to grasp and clarify this point, have irresponsibly brought forth 
their commentaries and expounded their theories. The comments made by these 
individuals of the past lack the original intent of the National Teacher, and none 
accords with the Buddha Dharma. How sad that these veteran monks of the past 
have tripped up over this! 

Now, if we say that, within the Buddha Dharma, there is the ability to see 
into someone’s mind, then there must surely be an ability to see into someone’s 
body, an ability to see into someone’s Fist, and an ability to see into someone’s 
Eye. If that is the way things are, then we ought to have the ability to see into our 
own mind and our own body. In that things are already like this, you certainly must 
have the ability to use your own mind right at this very moment to see into your 
own mind. To state more clearly what is being said, you undoubtedly have the 
ability to see into the minds of others, for this arises spontaneously from your own 
mind. 


9. The Tripitaka Master’s two responses were insulting because, despite his feigning humility 
and his using flowery language, he is actually accusing the National Teacher of engaging in 
behavior that is improper for a monk. 



Shobogenzo: On Reading the Minds and Hearts of Others 


888 


Let me ask you right now: which is better, to use your ability in order to see 
into the minds of others or to use it to see into your own mind? Answer! Quick! 
Quick! Putting this aside just for the moment, let me say that Bodhidharma’s 
remark, “You have gotten what my Marrow is,” is what ‘seeing into the Mind of 
another’ is all about. 

Delivered to the assembly at Daibutsu-ji Temple in Echizen Province on the fourth day of the 
seventh lunar month in the third year of the Kangen era (July 28, 1245). 



79 

On ‘The King Requests Something from Sindh’ 

(O Saku Sendaba) 


Translator’s Introduction: The term sendaba (Skt. saindava), ‘something from Sindh’, refers 
to products from the Indus River area, which were held in great esteem throughout India. Thus, 
asking for something from Sindh is equivalent to asking for the very best someone can offer that 
is appropriate to the situation. Dogen views such acts of asking by one and offering by another as 
a model for the Master-disciple relationship. 


Being possessed of words is having gone beyond words, 

As a wisteria vine is to a tree: 

The one feeds a donkey and the other feeds a horse, 

The one dives into water and the other passes through 
clouds . 1 

Because this is the way matters already are, in the Great Scripture on the Buddha’s 
Parinirvana, the World-honored One is quoted as saying the following: 

For instance, it is like the great king who would bid his 
ministers supply him with something from Sindh. The single term 
‘something from Sindh’ had four references. The first was to salt, the 
second was to a goblet, the third was to water, and the fourth was to a 
horse. These four goods were alike in having one and the same term 
of reference. Astute ministers were quite familiar with this term. At 
the king’s bath time, should he ask for something from Sindh, they 
would accordingly offer him water. At the king’s mealtime, should he 


1. This poem describes various aspects of the Master-disciple relationship. To paraphrase the 
poem on one level, just as a tree supports a wisteria vine, so the Master’s having gone 
beyond words supports his verbal teaching. Hence, there are times when the Master uses 
words and times when he does not. The use of verbal instruction nourishes those who are 
plodding along nicely, doing their training, ‘the donkeys’ who have not yet awakened, 
whereas those who have awakened are like horses who do not need words but, upon seeing 
only the shadow of the trainer’s riding crop, know which way to go. As a result, the trainee 
who is like a donkey is led to dive into the water of training and practice, whereas the one 
who is like a horse flies up, penetrating anything that obscures his view of the unbounded 
sky, which corresponds to That which he has awakened to. 


889 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The King Requests Something from Sindh ’ 


890 


ask for something from Sindh, they would accordingly offer him salt. 

When the king had finished eating and wished for something to drink, 
should he ask for something from Sindh, they would accordingly offer 
him a goblet. Should the king wish to make an excursion, he would 
ask for something from Sindh, and they would accordingly offer him a 
horse. In this way astute ministers understood well the king’s four 
hidden meanings. 

The sayings, “The king asked them for something from Sindh” and “The ministers 
offered him something from Sindh,” have come to us from the distant past. They 
have been passed down to us just as the Eye of the Dharma has. Because the 
World-honored One had inevitably taken them up as a topic for the Dharma, His 
descendants have often taken them up too. I suspect that those who have become 
accustomed to being in step with the World-honored One make ‘something from 
Sindh’ their way of treading the Path. If their practice is not in step with that of the 
World-honored One, they should buy straw sandals and go in search of a Master, 
for such trainees need but advance one step in that direction and they will get it 
right off. The ‘something from Sindh’ that was already within the house of the 
Buddhas and Ancestors has quietly leaked out, so that ‘something from Sindh’ is to 
be found within the households of great kings. 


The Old Buddha Wanshi of Mount Tendo in the Great Sung Chinese 
prefecture of Ch’ing-yuan, in addressing his assembly in the Lecture Hall, once 
said the following: 

To begin with, a monk asked Joshu, “When a king asks for 
something from Sindh, what is it?” 

Joshu bowed, his hands in shashu.* 

Setcho, picking up on this, has commented, “When the one 
asked for salt, the other offered him a horse.” 

Master Wanshi went on to say: 

A hundred years ago, Setcho was an excellent trainer of 
disciples. And Joshu was an Old Buddha who lived to be a hundred 
and twenty. If Joshu is right, then Setcho is simply otherwise; if 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The King Requests Something from Sindh ’ 


891 


Setcho is right, then Joshu is simply otherwise. 2 Now, at this very 
moment, say! What ultimately is It? I, Wanshi, cannot avoid adding a 
comment to this, for if you are a hair short of It, you have missed It by 
ten thousand miles. 

To simply comprehend my words is to beat about in the 
grass and thereby startle some snake 

And not to comprehend them is to burn funeral money 
and thereby attract some demon. 

Old Gutei showed no preferences among his uncultivated 
fields, 

He just reached out and took whichever one came to 
hand . 3 

When the Old Buddha who was my former Master was giving Teaching in the 
Lecture Hall, he would customarily refer to ‘my Old Buddha Wanshi’. At the same 
time, only the Old Buddha who was my late master personally encountered the Old 
Buddha Wanshi as an Old Buddha. In Wanshi’s time, there was a certain Soko, 
known as Meditation Master Daie of Mount Kinzan, who was supposed to have 
been a distant descendant of Nangaku. The whole realm of Great Sung China 
apparently thought Daie to be at least the equal of Wanshi, and some even thought 
him to surpass Wanshi as ‘such a person’.* This error had arisen because, in that 
their eyes for the Way were not yet clear, both monks and laity in Great Sung 
China were negligent in their learning, they lacked clarity in recognizing what 
people were, and they were weak in knowledge of themselves. 

In what Wanshi was recommending there was a genuine giving rise to the 
will to train. You need to explore through your training the principle of the Old 
Buddha Joshu’s bowing with hands in shashu. At the very moment of his doing it, 


2. Although the conventional expectation of what would follow the statement ‘if Joshu is right’ 
would be that ‘Setcho is therefore wrong’, Wanshi does not say that Setcho is wrong, but 
asserts that what he is talking about is ‘simply otherwise’. That is, each has expressed the 
whole of the Truth, hence the action by Joshu and the statement by Setcho in no way 
contradict or stand against each other. 

3. To paraphrase this poem, to content oneself with an intellectual understanding of Wanshi’s 
Teaching is to beat around in the bushes and thereby run the risk of meeting up with 
something poisonous to one’s training. On the other hand, not to have a clue as to what that 
Teaching is about is like mechanically going through the ritual of burning ‘hell money’ at a 
funeral only to attract devilish obstructions to one’s training. When the great Meditation 
Master Gutei trained his disciples, he showed no preferences among them but would work 
with whichever disciple happened to come nearest to hand. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The King Requests Something from Sindh ’ 


892 


was this the king asking for something from Sindh? Or was it the offering of 
something from Sindh? You need to explore through your training the import of 
Setcho’s saying, “When the one asked for salt, the other offered him a horse.” Both 
‘asking for salt’ and ‘offering a horse’ together are the king’s asking for something 
from Sindh and the minister’s offering something from Sindh. It is the World- 
honored One asking for something from Sindh and Makakasho’s face breaking out 
into a smile. The First Chinese Ancestor asked for something from Sindh and his 
four disciples offered him a horse, salt, water, and a goblet. You need to leam that, 
when a horse, salt, water, and a goblet from Sindh are asked for, this is the pivotal 
point for the offering of a horse and the offering of water. 


One day, Nansen saw To Impo coming towards him and, 
pointing at a jar, said to him, “The jar is a vessel and there is water 
inside the jar. Without disturbing the vessel, please fetch me the 
water.” 

Accordingly, Impo fetched the water in the jar and, turning to 
face Nansen, poured it over Nansen’s head. Nansen remained still. 

Actually, in Nansen’s asking for water, the sea dried up to its very bottom; in 
Impo’s offering a vessel, the jar leaked out its contents which sank into a pond. 
Even though this is the way things were, you need to explore through your training 
that there was Water in the vessel and a Vessel in the water. Impo had not yet done 
anything to disturb the Water, nor had he yet done anything to disturb the Vessel. 


Great Master Kyogen Chikan was once asked by a monk, 

“What in the world is this ‘king asking for something from Sindh’ all 
about?” 

Kyogen replied, “Just come over here.” 

The monk went over to him. 

Kyogen said, “Your noodle-headed act could get someone 
killed!” 

Now, let us ask, is the basis of Kyogen’s remark, “Come over here,” his asking for 
something from Sindh or is it his offering something from Sindh? Please, I beg of 
you, try to answer! Was the monk’s having gone over to him based on Kyogen’s 
asking for something or based on Kyogen’s offering something? Or was either of 
these even Kyogen’s original intention? If neither was his original intention, he 
could not have said, “Your noodle-headed act could get someone killed!” If either 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The King Requests Something from Sindh ’ 


893 


was his original intention, such a noodle-headed act could not kill anyone. Even 
though one may say that what Kyogen has expressed is the full force of a whole 
lifetime, he still did not escape the disintegration of his body and the loss of his 
life. He is, for instance, like the general of a defeated army who still talks about his 
military prowess. In sum, from the Crown of his head and from his Eye, Kyogen 
gave voice to what is yellow and spoke of what is black, which is his most 
meticulous asking for, and offering of, something from Sindh. 4 Who can say that 
they do not understand the taking up of the traveling staff* and the raising of the 
hossu?* Even so, these are not the criteria of folks that play a koto with its bridge 
glued down. 5 Because these folks don’t even know that they are playing a koto 
with its bridge glued down, they are beyond having such criteria. 


One day, the World-honored One ascended the Dharma Seat. 
Manjushri,* having then rapped upon the signal block with his mallet, 
said, “When we clearly see what the Dharma of the Lord of Dharma 
is, the Dharma of the Lord of Dharma is just like this,” whereupon, 
the World-honored One came down from His Dharma seat. 

Meditation Master Setcho Juken commented on this by saying: 

As any skilled Master among the sacred ranks of those in 
the forest grove knew, 

“The Teaching of the Lord of Dharma is not just like 
this. ” 

If in the Buddha s assembly, there had been any trainee 
from Sindh, 

Why would Manjushri possibly have needed to sound 
even one single clap? 


4. In China, yellow and black are traditionally viewed as opposites or complements: the earth 
is yellow by day, the sky is black by night. In Chinese Buddhist texts, ‘giving voice to what 
is yellow’ is associated with the positive teaching of the Precepts and Buddhist training, 
whereas ‘speaking of what is black’ is associated with the pointing out of acts that are 
contrary to the Precepts and to training. 

5. The koto is a traditional Japanese stringed musical instrument. The bridge of a koto needs to 
remain flexible and to ‘give’ according to the way it is being played; hence, to glue the 
bridge down would be analogous to holding onto rigid views. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The King Requests Something from Sindh ’ 


894 


Accordingly, Setcho is saying that if one clap is as though one’s whole being is 
flawless, then whether the block has already been struck or has not yet been struck, 
it would be one’s dropping off of ‘being flawless’. If it were like this, then one clap 
would be something from Sindh. If there were already ‘such a person’, that one 
would be a trainee from Sindh who was among the sacred ranks within the forest 
grove. Hence, the Dharma of the Lord of Dharma is just like this. To make good 
use of all the hours of a day is to ask for something from Sindh. We should ask for 
the Fist and offer the Fist: we should ask for the hossu and offer the hossu. 

Even so, of the so-called senior monks in all the various monasteries in 
Great Sung China, none have ever seen something from Sindh even in their 
dreams. Painful, oh how painful, that the Way of the Ancestors has so declined! Do 
not shirk from hard training and, beyond question, you will inherit the lifeline of 
the Buddhas and Ancestors. For instance, someone asks, “What is Buddha?” and 
the Master asserts, “Your very mind is Buddha!” What does this mean? Would this 
assertion not be ‘something from Sindh’? You need to explore in detail through 
your training with your Master who it really is that says, “Your very mind is 
Buddha!” Would any of you know that it is striking, and being struck by, 
something from Sindh? 

Given to the assembly at Daibutsu-ji Temple in Echizen Province on the twenty-second day of the 
tenth month in the third year of the Kangen era (November 12, 1245). 



80 

On Instructions for Monks in the Kitchen Hall 

(Jikuin Mon) 


Translator’s Introduction: The text of this discourse would have been placed in the kitchen for 
the Chief Cook and the other kitchen monks to read and refer to. 

When Hangyo Kozen prepared the first published version of the Shobogenzo in 1690, he 
added this chapter, along with Discourse 1: A Discourse on Doing One’s Utmost in Practicing the 
Way of the Buddhas ( Bendowa ) and Discourse 5: On Conduct Appropriate for the Auxiliary 
Cloud Hall (Juundo Shiki), to the other versions of the Shobogenzo that he found in Eihei-ji. 


On the sixth day of the eighth lunar month in the fourth year of the Kangen 
era (September 17, 1246), I expounded on the following for the assembly, “The 
method of training for monks who are responsible for preparing meals is to have 
them make reverence their underlying principle.” After the Tathagata’s entering 
parinirvana, the Dharma has been accurately Transmitted from far off India and to 
China, and during that time, celestial beings have made spiritual offerings to the 
Buddhas and Their disciples. Rulers of nations have also made alms offerings of 
royal food to the Buddhas and Their disciples. In addition, the households of 
wealthy and ordinary lay folk have respectfully made food offerings, and there 
have even been laborers and servants who have done the same. These alms 
offerings were accompanied with deep respect and cordiality. Among persons in 
lofty positions, as well as among ordinary folk, were those who made offerings of 
food and other things in a most respectful way, accompanied with highly courteous 
bows and with the most polite forms of speech, because of the depth of their 
intentions. Now, even though we are deep within remote mountains, we should 
personally receive the authentic Transmission of polite acts and respectful words 
from those who serve in the Kitchen Hall of our temple, for this is how those in 
lofty positions, as well as ordinary folk, have pursued their study of the Buddha’s 
Dharma. 

For example, when speaking of the breakfast gruel, you should take the time 
to say, ‘our revered gruel’ or ‘our morning gruel’, but not just ‘the gruel’. 1 When 


1. ‘Our revered gruel’ and similar phrases are somewhat heavy-handed English translations. In 
Japanese, the respectful form for ‘gruel’ is made simply by adding the prefix ‘o-’ to the 
Chinese-derived word shoku to form o-shoku. The word for ‘morning gruel’ is choshoku. 


895 



Shobogenzo: On Instructions for Monks in the Kitchen Hall 


896 


speaking of the midday meal, you should take the time to say ‘our revered midday 
meal’ or ‘our lunchtime’, but not just ‘lunch’. You should take the time to say, 
“Would you please prepare some white rice for me?” and not just, “Pound me 
some rice!” As to washing rice, you should take the time to say, “Would you please 
wash some rice for me?” and not spend your time saying, “Wash me some rice!” 
You should take the time to say, “Would you please select some vegetables for our 
stir-fry dish?” and not, “Get me some veggies!” You should take the time to say, 
“Would you please prepare a nice broth for our meal?” and not, “Make us some 
broth!” You should take the time to say, “Would you please prepare some nice hot 
soup for our meal?” and not, “Make us some soup!” You should take the time to 
say, “The lunchtime meal—or the morning gruel—has been prepared ever so 
nicely.” 

Be sure to treat all the utensils used to prepare the midday meal and the 
morning gruel with similar respect. Disrespect invites calamity; it is never 
accompanied by anything meritorious. 

While the midday meal and the breakfast gruel are being prepared, no one 
should breathe all over the rice and vegetables, or any other food items. Do not let 
the sleeve of your robe brush against even dry food items. If your hand has come in 
contact with your head or face, do not handle any utensils or food until you have 
washed it. From the time of sorting the rice until the cooking of it to make a broth, 
should you happen to scratch yourself, by all means you should wash your hands. 

In places where the midday meal and the morning gruel are being prepared, 
you should recite lines from Buddhist Scriptures or passages spoken by the 
Ancestral Masters. Do not engage in worldly talk or use crude speech. As a 
principle, you should take the time to use polite word forms when speaking of such 
things as rice, meals, salt, and soy sauce. You should not use your time saying, 
“There’s rice,” or “There’s veggies.” 

When senior monks and novices pass by the place where the midday meal or 
the morning gruel is being conducted, they should respectfully bow with hands in 
gassho.* 

If there are any spilt vegetables or spilt rice, they should be made use of after 
the meal. 


which again is a reading derived from the Chinese. Dogen contrasts these with the colloquial 
Japanese word for gruel: kayu. 

* See Glossary. 

2. That is, fed to animals or used for compost. 



Shobogenzo: On Instructions for Monks in the Kitchen Hall 


897 


To the extent that the morning or midday meals have not concluded, you 
should not intrude upon them. 

You should take care to preserve the utensils used for preparing meals and 
not use them for other purposes. Do not let them be handled by lay folk who have 
come from home until they have washed their hands. Such foodstuffs as vegetables 
and fruit which have come from lay folk and which have not yet been cleansed 
should be rinsed, incensed, and left to dry by the fire, and then respectfully offered 
to the Three Treasures and to the monks of the assembly. In the mountain retreats 
and the temples of Great Sung China today, if lay folk bring such things as 
dumplings, dairy cakes, and steamed cakes, they should be reheated before being 
served to the monastic community. This will purify them. Do not serve them 
without reheating them. 

These are but a few points among many. O you who are in charge of the 
Kitchen Hall, you need to understand their great import and put them into practice. 
Within all your myriad duties, do not act contrary to these standards. 

These items are the lifeblood of the Buddhas and Ancestors and the Eye of 
patch-robed monks. Non-Buddhists know them not: celestial demons cannot 
endure them. Only the disciples of Buddha have been able to Transmit them. O you 
who are senior officers of the Kitchen Hall, discern them well and do not let them 
be lost! 

Displayed here by Dogen, 
the Founding Monk of this temple. 

I, as Master of Eihei-ji Temple, now address the Chief Officer: If it is already 
past noon when a donor makes an offering of cooked rice, you should keep it in 
storage until the next day. But if it is something like cakes, fruit, or some kind of 
gruel, or the like, even though it is already evening, serve it as a medicine meal for 
the assembly of the Buddhas and Ancestors. And what is more, such a meal is an 
excellent trace left by those in Great Sung China who realized the True Way. 

The Tathagata always permitted monks living in the Himalayas to wear 
underclothing. We on this mountain also permit such medicine during the times of 
snow. 

4 

Kigen, the Founding Monk of Eihei. 


3. Traditionally, only two meals are served to the monastic community, one in the morning and 
another before noon. Because monks, particularly those who are ill or are engaged in heavy 
physical labor, may need more nourishment than these two meals provide, an evening meal 
may be offered as a form of ‘medicine’ to provide additional nourishment for the body. 

4. Kigen was one of Dogen’s names. 



81 

On Leaving Home Life Behind 

(Shukke) 


Translator’s Introduction: The term shukke, ‘leaving home life behind’, has a double meaning. 
Figuratively, it refers to letting go of worldly values; literally, it refers to someone entering a 
monastery to become a mo nk . 

Some of Dogen’s readers have taken this discourse as evidence that he had completely 
rejected the idea of lay discipleship. But if that were the case, it is difficult to explain why he 
would be giving this talk to his assembly of monastic disciples rather than to the relatively few 
lay disciples who were present at Eihei-ji. It seems more likely that some of his monks were 
having difficulties with the harshness of monastic training in such an isolated locale, and Dogen 
was trying to get some starch into their backbones by insisting that only through sticking with 
their commitment to leave home life behind, in both senses of the term, and to live in accord 
with the Precepts could they realize That which they had come there to find. 


In the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple it says the following: 

All Buddhas in the three temporal worlds—past, present, and 
future—affirm that to leave home life behind is to realize the Truth. 
The twenty-eight Indian Ancestors and the six Chinese Ancestors, all 
of whom Transmitted the Buddha’s Mind seal,* were, each and every 
one of them, monastics. Most likely, it was because they strictly 
observed the monastic regulations that they were able to become 
outstanding models for those in the three worlds of desire, form, and 
beyond form. Thus, in practicing meditation and inquiring of the Way 
with their Master, they made the Precepts and the monastic regulations 
foremost. Had they not distanced themselves from their faults and 
guarded against misdeeds, how could they have realized Buddhahood 
and become an Ancestor? 

As to the method for doing the ordination ceremony of Taking 
the Precepts, three types of kesas* and a set of mealtime bowls, along 
with fresh, clean robes, are provided for the one to be ordained. If new 


* See Glossary. 


898 



Shobogenzo: On Leaving Home Life Behind 


899 


robes are not available, be sure to launder old ones, but you must not 
use borrowed kesas or a borrowed bowl set to put on the altar when 
doing the ceremony of Taking the Precepts. Concentrate 
wholeheartedly and take care not to get distracted by side issues. 
Assuming the form of a Buddha, being provided with the Precepts and 
the monastic regulations, and acquiring what the Buddha received and 
made use of are, by no means, small matters, so how could you 
possibly treat them lightly? Were you to borrow someone’s kesas or 
bowl set, and then go up to the altar to take the Precepts, you would 
not really be obtaining the Precepts. Should you never receive the 
Precepts, you will be a person devoid of the Precepts for the whole of 
your life as you vainly cross over the threshold of empty 
scholasticism, meaninglessly accepting alms given in good faith. 

Those entering the path with a beginner’s mind may not as yet have 
memorized the rules and regulations. Should their Master offer no 
guidance, they will lapse into error. What I am saying here is stem 
advice indeed. Dare I hope that you will engrave it on your heart? If 
you have taken the monastic Precepts, by all means you should also 
take the Bodhisattva* Precepts, for They are foremost for those who 
would enter the Teaching. 1 

Clearly understand that the full perfecting of the innate enlightenment of all the 
Buddhas and all the Ancestors has been nothing other than Their leaving home life 
behind and Their accepting the Precepts. And the vital line of Transmission of all 
the Buddhas and Ancestors is nothing other than Their leaving home life behind 
and accepting the Precepts. Those who have not yet left home life behind are also 
not Buddhas or Ancestors. Meeting up with a Buddha and meeting up with an 
Ancestor is what leaving home life behind and accepting the Precepts is all about. 


Makakasho, in following the World-honored One, was intent on leaving 
home life behind, as he desired to help all beings to cross to the Other Shore. The 
Buddha said, “Welcome, good monk.” Thereupon, the hair on Makakasho’s head 
naturally came off and a kesa enveloped his body. When someone leams what a 


1. The Bodhisattva Precepts can be found in the Scripture of Brahma’s Net. One translation of 
this appears in Buddhist Writings on Meditation and Daily Practice (Shasta Abbey Press, 
1994), pp. 55-188 



Shobogenzo: On Leaving Home Life Behind 


900 


Buddha is and drops off whatever that person is holding onto, such a one is, in this 
way, an excellent example of leaving home life behind and accepting the Precepts. 


In the third fascicle of the Great Scripture on Wisdom it says the following: 

The World-honored Buddha once said, “If a bodhisattva- 
mahasattva* were to think thus: ‘Were I, at some time, to abandon my 
position in our nation, then on the very day that I realized supreme, 
fully perfected wisdom I would, also on that day, turn the Wheel of 
the Wondrous Dharma in order to help sentient beings beyond count 
to distance themselves from their defiling passions and to depart from 
their delusions, as well as help them bring to life their pure Eye for the 
Dharma. I would also help sentient beings beyond count bring their 
delusive, evil deeds to an end, and help them set free the Wisdom 
within their heart. And I would also help sentient beings beyond count 
realize the state where they neither regressed nor turned away from 
their supreme, fully perfected Wisdom.’ If this bodhisattva- 
mahasattva were to desire such things, then he or she should, by all 
means, study the Great Scripture on Wisdom .” 

Generally speaking, our supreme enlightenment is fulfilled at the time of our 
leaving home life behind and accepting the Precepts. Were there no day on which 
we left home life behind, then it would not be completely fulfilled. Thus, making 
use of the day on which we leave home life behind, we bring about the day on 
which we realize supreme enlightenment, and we pick out the day on which we 
will realize supreme enlightenment, which is the day on which we leave home life 
behind. This leaving home life behind turns us upside down. It is the turning of the 
Wheel of the Dharma. Accordingly, leaving home life behind helps innumerable 
beings keep from regressing or turning away from supreme enlightenment. Keep in 
mind that what is meant by fulfilling ‘what benefits oneself benefits others’ and by 
not regressing or turning away from fully perfected enlightenment is leaving home 
life behind and accepting the Precepts. On the other hand, the day of leaving home 
life behind is the day of realizing what Wisdom truly is. And beyond doubt, you 
need to realize that the day of leaving home life behind goes beyond sameness or 
difference. 

On the day of leaving home life behind, we experience through our training 
innumerable eons of time. And on the day of leaving home life behind, we dwell 
within an unbounded ocean of time, turning the wondrous Wheel of the Dharma. 
And the day of leaving home life behind should not be thought of as comparable to 



Shobogenzo: On Leaving Home Life Behind 


901 


‘a time to eat’, nor is it sixty seconds, but it goes beyond the three periods of past, 
present, and future, for one has dropped off temporal boundaries. The day of 
leaving home life behind transcends ‘the day of leaving home life behind’. Be this 
as it may, when we have broken open the nets and cages of our delusions, the day 
of leaving home life behind will be our day of leaving home life behind. The day 
for manifesting the Truth will be our day of manifesting the Truth. 


In the thirteenth section of Nagarjuna’s Commentary on the Great Scripture 
on Wisdom, there is the following: 

Once when the Buddha was at Jetavana Park, an intoxicated 
Brahman came to where the Buddha was and asked to become a 
monk. The Buddha requested that some of his monks shave the 
Brahman’s head and clothe him in a kesa. After the effects of the 
liquor had worn off, the Brahman was astonished and frightened upon 
seeing that his bodily form had changed into that of a Buddhist monk, 
whereupon he ran away forthwith. The monks respectfully asked the 
Buddha why He had allowed the drunken Brahman to become a monk 
only to have him run back home. The Buddha answered, “For eons 
beyond measure, this Brahman did not have the heart to leave home 
life behind, but now, while under the influence, he gave rise to a bit of 
courage. Due to this, he will, later on, leave home life behind.” 

There are all sorts of stories like this one. The breaking of the 
Precepts by one who has left home life behind is far better than the 
keeping of the Precepts by one who has remained in home life, 
because others do not rid themselves of their delusions and spiritual 
suffering due to a lay person’s keeping of the Precepts. 

The principle underlying the Buddha’s instructions concerning the Brahman is 
quite clearly recognizable. Within the Teaching being given here by the Buddha, 
what is fundamental is simply leaving home life behind. Not yet freeing oneself 
from home life is not the Buddha’s Way . 2 While the Tathagata was in the world, 


2. This sentence has been understood in different ways. Some believe that Dogen is saying 
everyone must become a monastic, whereas others assert that Dogen’s view is that everyone 
needs to free oneself from worldly values and worldly ways of thinking and behaving. 
Perhaps the deciding question is for whom did Dogen intend this talk? Was he trying to 
encourage the lay Buddhists who were working at Eihei-ji or otherwise supporting the 



Shobogenzo: On Leaving Home Life Behind 


902 


whenever non-Buddhists discarded their false views and took refuge in the 
Teaching of the Buddha, invariably they sought, first off, to leave home life behind. 
Either the World-honored One Himself would personally greet such persons, 
saying, “Welcome, good monk!” or He would have His monks shave them, and 
then have them formally leave home life behind and take the Precepts. In either 
case, the means for leaving home life behind and taking the Precepts were 
immediately supplied. 

You need to keep in mind that once the Buddha’s Teaching envelops our 
body and mind, the hair on our head naturally falls away and a kesa clothes our 
body. If the Buddhas had not yet given Their approval, our hair would not have 
been shaved off, nor would a kesa have been wrapped around our body, nor would 
we have been able to take the Buddha’s Precepts. So, our leaving home life behind 
and accepting the Precepts is our personally receiving from the Buddhas and the 
Tathagata the affirmation of our ultimate enlightenment. 


In the Lotus Scripture, Shakyamuni Buddha once said the following: 

My virtuous sons! Upon seeing sentient beings who are low in 
moral character and sunk deep in delusion taking pleasure in 
trivialities, I, the Tathagata, instruct them by saying, “While still 
young, I left home life behind and realized supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment. And the time since I truly realized Buddhahood has 
been ever so long.” I give instruction in this manner, but only as a 
skillful means for teaching sentient beings that they too may enter the 
Buddha’s Way. 

So, His realizing the Truth long ago was synonymous with His having left home 
life behind while still young, and His realizing supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment was also synonymous with His having left home life behind. 

By the Buddha’s putting forth the statement, “While still young, I left home 
life behind,” those human beings who are low in moral character and sunk deep in 
delusion, and who therefore take pleasure in trivialities, also come to realize that 
they too, though still young, may leave home life behind. At any point where we 
can encounter, or hear about, and learn through practice the Teaching contained in 
“While still young, one may leave home life behind,” we encounter the Buddha’s 


monastery to let go of such values, thinking, and behaving? Or was he upbraiding monks 
who were disinclined to give up their pursuit of worldly interests? 



Shobogenzo: On Leaving Home Life Behind 


903 


supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. When He rescued those human beings 
who were taking pleasure in trivialities, He taught them, “While still young, 1 left 
home life behind and realized supreme, fully perfected enlightenment.” Though He 
expressed the Essential Matter* like this, were someone ultimately to ask me, “Just 
how much merit is there in leaving home life behind?” I would reply, “It is worth 
your very head!” 

Delivered to the assembly at Eihei-ji Temple in Echizen Province on the fifteenth day of the ninth 
lunar month in the fourth year of the Kangen era (October 25, 1246). 



82 

On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 

(Shukke Kudoku) 


Translator’s Introduction: ‘Leaving home life behind’ has a double meaning. In one sense, it 
refers to someone who becomes a monk upon taking the monastic Precepts. In another sense, it 
refers to the renouncing of the mundane values of worldly society, and as such, would apply not 
only to monks but also to those who have accepted the lay Precepts while remaining in lay life. 
Which meaning Dogen intends seems to shift back and forth, and context does not always make 
clear whether he is referring to the literal or figurative meaning, or both simultaneously. And 
there is a third aspect to leaving home life behind which Dogen brings up later in relation to a 
quotation from Rinzai. 

While Dogen insists most emphatically throughout this discourse that leaving home life 
behind is a prerequisite for realizing full Buddhahood, there is no place where he openly rejects 
being involved with sincere, practicing lay Buddhists. Indeed, in Dogen’s Zen Buddhist tradition, 
when lay persons formally take all ten Great Precepts, there is a symbolic shaving of the head, 
and they are given a wagesa, which is a token kesa, along with a certificate containing the 
bloodline of the Buddhas and Ancestors from Shakyamuni Buddha down to the present ordinand. 


The bodhisattva* Nagarjuna once said the following: 

Someone once asked me, “If we are able to be reborn in some 
celestial world, realize the Way of bodhisattvas, and realize nirvana by 
just keeping to the lay Precepts, of what use are the Precepts that a 
monastic takes?” 1 

In reply, I said, “Both lay people and monastics can reach the 
Other Shore, but even so, each way has its difficult and its easy 
aspects. Those in lay life have all manner of duties and occupations. If 
they should wish to concentrate on pursuing wholeheartedly the Path 
to full awakening, then their family duties will fall by the wayside, 
and if they should wholeheartedly fulfill the responsibilities of family 
life, then matters that pertain to pursuit of the Way will be abandoned. 
They would need to be able to practice the Dharma without selecting 


* See Glossary. 

1. The laity in the Theravadin tradition customarily take five Precepts. In the Mahayana 
tradition, the laity take those five plus five more. Monastics in both traditions take Precepts 
that number in the hundreds. 


904 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


905 


one way and abandoning the other. And this is what I would describe 
as ‘taking on what is difficult’. In leaving lay life behind, we sever 
ourselves from pursuing worldly profits and from indulging in dislikes 
and wrangling, as we devote ourselves wholeheartedly to practicing 
the Way, which is what I would describe as ‘taking on what is easy’. 
Also, there is the noise and bustle of a home, with its many affairs and 
many duties, all of which are the roots of entanglements and the 
storehouse of wrongdoings. This is what is described as ‘taking on 
what is extremely difficult’. When we leave home, we are, for 
instance, like someone who has departed to reside somewhere where 
the lands are empty and there is no one else about. In that way, our 
heart is as one, being beyond intentions and beyond fear. Our 
expectations have already been removed. And our wayward ways 
have also departed. It is like what is being expressed in the following 
poem: 

I sit at ease within the forest grove. 

Tranquilly, my human failings are overthrown. 

Through being impartial, I attain a singleness of mind, 

The pleasure of which surpasses the pleasures of celestial 
worlds. 

Others may seek to gain wealth and honor, 

Or fineries of dress or comfortable abodes, 

But such pleasures lack true peace, 

Since for one in pursuit of gains, there is no satiety. 

Adorned in my patched robe, I go forth begging my food, 

Whether moving or standing still, I am always at one within 
my heart. 

With my very own Eye of wise discernment, 

I fathom the True Nature of all thoughts and things. 

Within the sundry gates to the Dharma, 

I enter, only to see that all are just alike, 

So this Heart that understands the Why of things is tranquil, 

For there is nothing that can surpass It within the triple 
world. 2 


2. The triple world consists of the worlds of desire, form, and beyond fonn. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


906 


“Thus, by this poem we know that leaving home life behind, 
living by the Precepts, and doing the practice as a monk is ‘taking on 
what is extremely easy’. 

“Further, leaving home life behind and practicing the Precepts 
gain for us good moral rules and regulations beyond measure, all of 
which we possess to the full. For this reason, a white-robed one like 
you should leave home life behind and accept the full Precepts. 3 

“Further, within the Buddha Dharma the Teaching of leaving 
home life behind is the most difficult to practice. The young Brahman 
Jambukadaka once asked Shariputra, ‘Within the Buddha Dharma 
what is the most difficult thing to do? ’ 

“Shariputra responded, ‘Leaving home life behind is the most 
difficult to achieve.’ 

“The Brahman then asked, ‘What are the difficulties in leaving 
home life behind? ’ 

“Shariputra replied, ‘In leaving home life behind, contentment 
is the most difficult to achieve.’ 

“The Brahman then asked, ‘When one has attained 
contentment, what then is the most difficult to attain? ’ 

“Shariputra responded, ‘Putting good ways into practice is what 
is difficult. For this reason, by all means you should leave home life 
behind. ’ 

“Further, when someone leaves home life behind, the Lord of 
Demons, taken aback, sorrowfully says, ‘This person has scarcely any 
entanglements or delusions left. Such a one will certainly realize 
nirvana and enter the ranks of the Sangha Treasure.’ 

“And also, it says the following in the story concerning the 
female monastic Utpalavama: 

“If people who have left home life behind to be within the 
Buddha Dharma break the Precepts and lapse into impure ways, once 
they have brought their impure ways to an end and obtained liberation 
from them, they will be like the female monk Utpalavama. 

“While the Buddha was in the world, this female monk attained 
the six spiritual abilities and realized arhathood.* She once entered the 
house of a member of the nobility and, continually extolling the 
Dharma of leaving home life behind, she admonished the wives and 


3. ‘A white-robed one’ is a common reference to a lay person. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


907 


daughters of the noble, saying, ‘My sisters, you should leave home 
life behind and become monastics.’ 

“The noblewomen all replied, ‘We are young and our bodies are 
comely; for us to keep to the Precepts would indeed be hard, and we 
would surely beak them on occasion. ’ 

“The monk replied, ‘If you break the Precepts, then you break 
them. Just leave lay life behind! ’ 

“They then asked her, ‘If we break the Precepts, then we shall 
certainly fall into some hellish state, so why would you have us break 
them?’ 

“She replied, ‘If you fall into some hell, then you fall into some 

hell.’ 

“All the women broke out in laughter and said, ‘In a hell we 
will receive the consequences of our defiling deeds, so why would 
you have us fall into such a state? ’ 

“The monk replied, ‘In recalling my own past lives, there was a 
time when I had become a prostitute. I dressed up in all sorts of 
clothes and told the age-old licentious stories. One day, I dressed up as 
a female monk, just as a joke. As a direct result of this, I became a 
female monk in Kasho Buddha’s time. After a while, I took to 
depending on my aristocratic demeanor and gave rise to pride and 
arrogance, thereby breaking monastic prohibitions as well as Precepts. 
Because of the defilement from breaking monastic prohibitions and 
Precepts, I fell into a hellish state where I suffered the consequences 
of my various defiling acts. After I had suffered these consequences, I 
met Shakyamuni Buddha and left home life behind, ultimately 
obtaining the six spiritual abilities and realizing arhathood. Due to 
this, I have come to know that if we leave home life behind and take 
the monastic Precepts, even though we later break Precepts, we will 
realize arhathood because of the karmic* effect of the Precepts. If I 
had merely done bad things, without having received any effects from 
the Precepts, I would not have realized the Way. In times long past, I 
had fallen into hellish states generation after generation, getting out of 
some hell only to become a wicked person. When that wicked person 
died, again a hell was entered and nothing whatever had been gained. 
Now because of this, I have come to realize that if someone leaves 
home to be a monastic and takes the Precepts, even though that person 
breaks the Precepts, because of having taken them, that person will 
obtain the fruits of the Way. ’ 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


908 


“Also, once when the Buddha was at Jetavana Park, an 
intoxicated Brahman came to where the Buddha was and asked to 
become a monk. The Buddha requested that some of his monks shave 
the Brahman’s head and clothe him in a kesa.* After the effects of the 
liquor wore off, the Brahman was astonished and frightened upon 
seeing that his bodily form had changed into that of a Buddhist monk, 
whereupon he forthwith ran away. The monks respectfully asked the 
Buddha why He had allowed the drunken Brahman to become a monk 
only to run back home. The Buddha answered, ‘For eons beyond 
measure, this Brahman did not have the heart to leave home life 
behind, but now, while under the influence, he gave rise to a bit of 
courage. Due to this, he will, later on, leave home life behind.’ 

“In various stories like these, the benefit from leaving home life 
behind is described as producing spiritual merit beyond measure. 

Even though one who is garbed in white may have the five Precepts, 
such a one does not know what leaving home life behind is like.” 

Thus the World-honored One let the intoxicated Brahman hear about leaving home 
life behind and taking the Precepts, thereby planting the first seeds for realizing the 
Way. Clearly, you need to know that, from ancient times, human beings who still 
lack the merits of having left home life behind have not been able to realize the 
fully awakened state of Buddhahood. Because the Brahman was in his cups, he 
gave rise to a bit of courage, and by having his head shaved and his taking the 
Precepts, he became a monk. Though it was not long before he sobered up, the 
principle that he will preserve the merits of this act and will increase his good roots 
for realizing the Way is to be found in the World-honored One’s golden words of 
Truth, for this was the Tathagata’s original wish, which led Him to come forth into 
the world. All sentient beings—be they of past, present, or future—should clearly 
trust in this principle and put it into practice. Truly, giving rise to the intention to 
realize the Way is something that one establishes moment by moment. The merits 
from this Brahman’s momentarily leaving home life behind are just like this. And 
what is more, how could the merits of your leaving home life behind and taking the 
Precepts during your present lifetime be inferior to those of an intoxicated 
Brahman! 

The saintly Wheel-turning Lords* emerged more than eighty-thousand years 
ago and ruled over the four continents, having been supplied with the seven royal 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


909 


treasures. 4 At that time, these four continents were all like Pure Lands. The delight 
of these Wheel-turning Lords goes beyond words to express. It is said that there 
were some of these Wheel-turning Lords who ruled over three-thousandfold 
worlds. Distinctions have been made among those whose Wheel was of gold, 
silver, copper, or iron. Those with these Wheels ruled over the first, second, third, 
and fourth continents, respectively. And their whole being was positively free from 
the ten evils. 5 Though these saintly Wheel-turning Lords enjoyed their delights in 
abundance, as soon as a single white hair appeared on their head, they would turn 
their office over to the crown prince and forthwith leave home life behind. They 
would don a kesa and go off into the mountains or forests to do their spiritual 
training, so that when they came to the end of their life, they would undoubtedly be 
reborn in Brahma’s Heaven. 6 7 They would place their white hair in a golden coffer 
to be stored in the royal palace and passed on to the next Wheel-turning Lord. 
When the hair of the next Wheel-turning Lord turned white, he would do the same 
as the previous Lord. The length of a saintly Wheel-turning Lord’s life after 
leaving home life behind far surpasses that of people today. It is said that the life of 
a Wheel-turning Lord is more than eighty thousand years and his body is endowed 

n 

with the thirty-two physical marks, which surpass those of people today. Be that 
as it may, when such Wheel-turning Lords saw their white hair, they awoke to 
impermanence and invariably left home life behind to train in the Way in order to 
fully realize the merit of practicing untainted deeds. Rulers today cannot match the 
saintly Wheel-turning Lords. If today’s rulers were to waste precious time just 
chasing after their greeds and ultimately failed to leave home life behind them, 
they might well come to regret it in future ages. And what is more, in small nations 
in remote lands, there are rulers in name only, for they lack the virtues of a Wheel- 
turning Lord and are unable to bring their greeds to a halt. But if they were to leave 
home life behind and practice the Way, many celestial beings would be glad to 
offer them their protection, dragon spirits would respectfully guard them, and the 
Eye of Buddhas would joyfully confirm their awakened state. 


4. The seven are the Golden Wheel, wise elephants, swift horses, the divine Pearl, able 
ministers, women as precious as jewels, and loyal generals. 

5. The ten evils are the ways in which one acts contrary to the ten Mahayana Precepts. 

6. The heaven ruled over by Lord Brahma, the lowest of the four meditational heavens in the 
world of fonn, one that is free of sexual desires. 

7. According to ancient Indian traditions, both Buddhas and Wheel-turning Lords were bom 
with the thirty-two marks of a great being. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


910 


During her past as a prostitute, Utpalavarna put on the robe of a female 
monastic, not with a sincere heart but for the sake of making a joke out of it. More 
than probably, she was committing a wrong deed by making light of the Dharma, 
but the power of her having put this robe upon her body brought her face-to-face 
with the Buddha Dharma in a second generation. The female monastic’s robe refers 
to a kesa. As a result of her having previously donned the kesa as a joke, she met 
Kasho Buddha in a second lifetime. She left home life behind, took the Precepts, 
and became a female monastic. As the result of her having broken the Precepts, she 
fell into a hellish state as the consequence of her misdeeds. But, due to the merits 
of the kesa not having crumbled away, she ultimately met Shakyamuni Buddha, 
and upon meeting the Buddha and hearing His Teaching, she gave rise to the 
intention to devote herself to the training, leaving the triple world far behind her 
and ultimately becoming a great arhat, one possessed of the six spiritual abilities 
and the three kinds of spiritual insights. Without doubt, she must have realized the 
supreme Truth. 

Therefore, when you straightaway and in all earnestness commit your 
innately immaculate heart of faith to realizing supreme enlightenment and accept 
the kesa in trust, the spiritual merit of this will increase faster than the spiritual 
merit of that prostitute. And what is more, when you give rise to the heart that 
seeks enlightenment, leave home life behind, and accept the Precepts, all for the 
sake of supreme enlightenment, the spiritual merit of this will be beyond measure, 
for without a human body, it is rare indeed for any being to realize this spiritual 
merit. 

In India and China, there have been many monks and lay people who have 
been bodhisattvas and Ancestral Masters, but none is the equal of our Ancestral 
Master Nagarjuna. Only our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna has offered us stories like 
those of the intoxicated Brahman and the prostitute in order to encourage us human 
beings to leave home life behind and accept the Precepts. 


This is what our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna recorded of the golden speech 
of the World-honored One: 

The World-honored One once said, “In the southern continent 
of Jambudvipa,* there are four kinds of preeminent events: first is 
encountering a Buddha, second is hearing the Dharma, third is leaving 
home life behind, and fourth is realizing the Truth.” 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


911 


You need to clearly recognize that these four kinds of preeminent events surpass 

o 

anything in the northern continent of Uttarakura or in the celestial abodes. Being 
drawn along through the power of our long-accumulated good roots, we have now 
acquired the peerless body of a human being. We are people who can joyfully, and 
with deepest gratitude, leave home life behind and accept the Precepts. Do not treat 
this preeminently good body lightly and leave our dew-like life to the mercy of the 
winds of impermanence. By piling up life after life of leaving home life behind, we 
will be amassing merit and accumulating virtue. 


The World-honored One once said, “The karmic recompense 
that results from having left home life behind in order to be within the 
Buddha Dharma is mind-boggling. Even if someone were to erect a 
seven-jeweled stupa* that was high enough to reach the thirty-third 
heavenly world, the merit gained from such a deed would not equal 
that from leaving home life behind. And why is this so? Because a 
seven-jeweled stupa can be demolished by foolish people acting from 
their greed and wickedness, but there is nothing that can destroy the 
merits of leaving home life behind. Thus, if someone instructs both 
men and women about leaving home life behind, and if they then set 
their servants free to do so, or if they let the populace at large do so, or 
if they themselves leave home life behind and enter the Way, the 
merits of that are immeasurable.” 

The World-honored One clearly knew the amount of merit involved, and so He 
evaluated it in this manner. ShrTvaddhi, whose name means ‘he whose wealth is 
ever increasing’, on hearing this Teaching of the Buddha, felt compelled to leave 
home life behind and take the Precepts, even though he had already reached the 
advanced age of a hundred and twenty years. 8 9 He sat in the rear of the assembly 
alongside the young novices, polishing his training. He ultimately became a great 
arhat. 

Keep in mind that having a human body in this lifetime is something 
temporary, comprised as it is of the four elements* and the five skandhas.* It is 


8. Uttarakura is the realm of those who are in a state of continual, blissful ignorance. 

9. When ShrTvaddhi asked if he could become a monk, Shariputra told him he was now too 
old, but the Buddha intervened and ordained him. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


912 


always subject to the eight forms of pain. 10 And what is more, its arising and 
vanishing goes on uninterruptedly moment by moment. It is said that during one 
click of our fingers, sixty-five of these moments of time arise and disappear, but we 
are in the dark about this, due to our lack of awareness. Within the period of a 
single day and night, there are over sixty-four hundred million of these moments 
during which our five skandhas arise and disappear, but we are unaware of this. 
How sad that even as we arise and vanish, we ourselves are unaware of it! This 
measure of the arising and vanishing of a moment has been known only by the 
World-honored Buddha and Shariputra. Not even the saintly have known it. In 
accord with this principle of the appearance and disappearance of each moment, 
human beings fashion their good or wicked deeds, and give rise to their intention to 
realize both Buddhahood and the Way. Ours is a body that appears and disappears 
in this manner, so even though we treasure it, it does not remain unchanging. Since 
time immemorial, there has never been a single person who, through prizing the 
body, has kept it from changing. In this sense, this human body does not belong to 
us. But if we make use of it to turn ourselves around so that we may leave home 
life behind and accept the Precepts, then we may realize the supreme, fully 
perfected enlightenment of the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds, as well as the 
fruits of Buddhahood, which are as indestructible as a diamond. What sage person 
would not be delighted to seek for them? 

According to the Lotus Scripture, the eight disciples of the Buddha Whose 
Guiding Light Is as Luminous as the Sun and Moon all renounced their previous 
lordly positions in which they held dominion over the four earthly continents and 
left home life behind. And the sixteen disciples of the Buddha Whose Universal 
Wisdom Is Unsurpassed had, all together, left home life behind as well. Then, 
when the Buddha of Universal Wisdom entered eternal meditation, they gave voice 
to the Lotus Scripture for the sake of His assembly and have now become 
Tathagatas in the ten quarters. Eighty trillion people under the governance of their 
paternal lord, who was a saintly Wheel-turning Lord, upon seeing the sixteen 
princes leave home life behind, also sought to leave home life behind, whereupon 
the Wheel-turning Lord forthwith granted it. And the two sons of His Majesty the 
Lord of Wondrous Splendor, along with their father and mother, all left home life 
behind. Keep in mind that whenever great saintly ones have appeared in the world, 
they have invariably viewed leaving home life behind to be what the True Teaching 
is. You must not go around saying that these people left home life behind because 


10. The eight are being born, aging, sickening, dying, being separated from loved ones, having 
to associate with those one dislikes, chasing after what is unobtainable, and suffering the ills 
that afflict the five skandhas. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


913 


they were confused; if you realize that they left home life behind out of wisdom, 
you should consider doing the same. During the time of Shakyamuni, our Buddha 
of the present, His son Rahula and His cousin Ananda, among others, left home life 
behind, along with a thousand of the Buddha’s Shakya clan on one occasion and 
twenty thousand on another. We should consider them to be excellent examples. 
From the time when His first five monks left home until the time when Subhadra, 
at the end of the Buddha’s life, also did so, all those who were converted to the 
Buddha’s Teaching left behind their worldly ways. You need to know that this is 
what we call ‘immeasurable merit’. 

Thus, if worldly people have compassion for their offspring, they should 
forthwith let them leave home life behind. If they have compassion for their 
parents, they should let them leave home life behind as well. For this reason, there 
is a poem which says the following: 

If there were no past ages, 

There could not have been Buddhas in the past. 

If there were no Buddhas in the past, 

There could be no leaving home to accept the full 
Precepts. 

This poem is one for all Buddhas and Tathagatas. It annihilates the non-Buddhist 
assertion that there were no past ages. Thus, you should know that leaving home to 
accept the full Precepts is the Teaching of the Buddhas of the past. Fortunately, we 
are living in a time when leaving home life behind and accepting the full Precepts 
is the wondrous Teaching of the Buddhas; were we to vainly fail to leave home and 
accept the Precepts, it would be difficult indeed to fathom what the obstacle is. By 
relying upon this most modest physical existence of ours, we may well realize the 
most exalted merit, for it can be the greatest merit within Jambudvipa and its three 
worlds of desire, form, and beyond form. While this human body in Jambudvipa 
has not yet disappeared, we should, by all means, leave home life behind and 
accept the Precepts. 

djb 

CX) 


An ancient holy one—Master Bashumitsu—once said: 

Even though someone who has left home life behind may act 
counter to the Precepts, nevertheless, that person surpasses one who 
has kept to the Precepts while remaining in lay life. Thus, it is difficult 
to repay the benevolence of one who humbly gives voice to the 
Scriptures that encourage people to leave home life behind. Further, 
the one who encourages others to leave home life behind is simply 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


914 


someone who is encouraging the practicing of the most venerable of 
deeds. The karmic recompense that results from this surpasses even 
that of Lord Yama, a Wheel-turning Lord, or the guardian deity 
Shakrendra. Thus, it is difficult to repay the benevolence of one who 
humbly gives voice to the Scriptures that encourage people to leave 
home life behind. There is no case where Scriptures encourage people 
to accept just the Precepts of a lay follower, hence that practice is not 
substantiated by the Scriptures. 

Keep in mind that once you have left home life behind, even if you then act 
counter to one of the restrictive Precepts, your practice surpasses remaining in 
home life and not acting counter to the lay Precepts. By taking refuge in the 
Buddha, leaving home life behind, and accepting the Precepts, you will invariably 
excel. The recompense from leaving home life behind surpasses that of a Lord 
Yama, a Wheel-turning Lord, and a Shakrendra. Even had you been a peasant or an 
untouchable in India, if you left home life behind, you would surpass those of the 
warrior caste, as well as surpass a Lord Yama, a Wheel-turning Lord, or a 
Shakrendra. The Precepts of those who remain in home life are not like this, 
therefore you should leave home life behind. Keep in mind that what the World- 
honored One taught cannot be fully measured, even though His teachings were 
collected from far and wide by the World-honored Master Bashumitsu, along with 
his five hundred arhats. Truly, you need to keep in mind that when it comes to the 
Buddha’s Dharma, you must be clear about Its fundamental principles. Mundane 
teachers of recent times have not been able to fathom the wisdom from the three 
spiritual insights and six spiritual abilities of a single saintly person, much less that 
of the five hundred saintly arhats! 11 These saintly ones knew what mundane 
teachers of recent times do not know, they have seen what these teachers have not 
seen, and they have realized what these others have not realized. There is nothing 
that mundane teachers know that was unknown to these saintly ones. So, do not 
compare the ignorant and foolish explanations of mundane teachers with the 
insightful words of the saintly. 

djb 

It says in the 120 th fascicle of the Vibasha Commentary, “Even one who has 
given rise to the intention to realize Buddhahood and then leaves home life behind 
is already called a saintly one. How much more so is one who has attained 


11. The three spiritual insights are the recognition of universal impermanence, universal 
suffering, and the universal absence of any permanent, unchanging self. Dogen discussed the 
six spiritual abilities in detail in Discourse 24: On the Marvelous Spiritual Abilities (Jinzu). 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


915 


awareness of the Four Noble Truths!” Keep in mind that one who has given rise to 
the intention to realize Buddhahood and then leaves home life behind is already 
called a saintly one. 

djb 

CX) 


Among Shakyamuni Buddha’s five hundred great vows, number 137 is as 
follows: 

In the future, after I have fully realized true enlightenment, if 
there are any who desire to leave home life behind to be within the 
Dharma, I vow that they will know no obstacles due to physical 
weakness, loss of memory, emotional distress, pride, lack of 
reverence, being foolish, lacking wise discernment, being entangled in 
many defiling passions, or being mentally distracted. Should it be 
otherwise, then I have not realized true enlightenment. 

His vow number 138 is as follows: 

In the future, after I have fully realized true enlightenment, if 
there are any women who desire to leave home life behind to study 
My Teaching and take the Great Precepts, I vow to help them 
accomplish the Way. Should it be otherwise, then I have not realized 
true enlightenment. 

His vow number 314 is as follows: 

In the future, after I have fully realized true enlightenment, if 
there are human beings whose good roots are few, but who give rise to 
feelings of love for their good roots and delight in them, I will help 
them leave home life behind to study the Way within the Buddha 
Dharma, and I will help them dwell peacefully within the ten 
immaculate Precepts. Should it be otherwise, then I have not realized 
true enlightenment. 

Keep in mind that the good sons and daughters who have left home life behind 
have all received assistance from the strength of His great vows made long ago in 
the past, and thus have been able, unhindered, to leave home life behind and accept 
the Precepts. Through His vows, the Tathagata has already been helping us to leave 
home life behind. Clearly, He is saying that leaving home is the most venerable, 
unsurpassed great merit. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


916 


djb 

The Buddha once said: 

Moreover, if there are any who follow My example by shaving 
their head, putting on a kesa, and accepting the Precepts, then anyone 
who makes alms offerings to them will ultimately succeed in entering 
the fortress that is free from fear of temptations. Because this is the 
way things are, I teach in this manner. 

Even if someone with a shaven head dons a kesa but does not take the Precepts, 
anyone who makes an alms offering to that person will enter the fortress that is free 
from fear of temptations. 12 The Buddha also said the following: 

And further, if there is someone who, for My sake, has 
undertaken leaving home life behind and has donned a kesa, but has 
not yet taken the Precepts, should someone who is devoid of the 
Teaching torment or harm this person, even going so far as to 
undertake to destroy the Dharma Body and the Reward Body of a 
Buddha of the three temporal worlds, 11 it will be because they are 
fully committed to the three evil worlds of existence.” 14 

If there are any human beings who, for My sake, have left home 
life behind, shaved their head, and donned a kesa, even though they 
have not kept to the Precepts, they are already stamped with the 
Nirvana seal. 15 Further, if they have left home life behind but do not 
keep to the Precepts, should anyone who is devoid of the Teaching 
then speak ill of them, humiliate them, or insult them, or should strike, 
bind, or cut them by using a hand, a sword, or a stick, or if that person 
should steal their kesa or their monk’s bowl, or steal from them their 
various monastic necessities, then such a one acts to harm the real 


12. That is, the person making the alms offering may not know whether the monk has taken the 
Precepts or not and will, therefore, still receive the merit of their offering. 

13. The Reward Body is the Sambhogakaya, the second of the three Bodies of the Buddha. The 
first is the Truth Body (Dharmakaya), which represents Absolute Truth or Buddha Mind 
Itself. The Reward Body represents the blissful reward of Buddhist training. The third is the 
Transformation Body (Nirmanakaya), which is the physical body of the Buddha as it 
appears in the world. 

14. That is, they are acting like a savage beast, a hungry ghost, or a power-mad asura. 

15. The Nirvana seal is associated with the stillness that derives from the keeping to the Noble 
Eightfold Path. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


917 


Reward Body of the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds and 
offends the eyes of all humans, both the ordinary and the lofty. 
Because this person wants to hide the seeds of the true Teaching and 
the Three Treasures which Buddhas possess, and because this person 
is interfering with the ability of both the lofty and the worldly to 
receive the benefits of these seeds, it will cause such a one to fall into 
some hellish state because this person, out of his conceit, is 
broadening the roads to the three evil worlds of existence. 

Keep in mind that when people shave their heads and dye their robes a monkish 
color, even though they may not keep to the Precepts, they are still stamped with 
the supremely great Nirvana seal. If someone worries them, that person aims at 
injuring the Reward Body of the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds, which is 
equivalent to a traitorous wrongdoing. Clearly keep in mind that the merits of 
leaving home life behind go hand-in-hand with the Buddhas of the three temporal 
worlds. 

djb 

CX) 

The Buddha also once said: 

Now then, those who leave home life behind ought not give rise 
to evil acts. Should they give rise to evil acts, then they have not left 
behind worldly ways. The body and speech of those who have left 
home life behind are in accord. When they are not in accord, then 
there is no leaving home life behind. When I left home life behind in 
order to explore the Way, I gave up parents, brothers, wife and child, 
relatives, and acquaintances. It was a time when I was accumulating 
meritorious insights; it was not a time for accumulating non- 
meritorious insights. ‘Meritorious insights’ means having compassion 
for all living beings as if they were one’s own offspring. ‘Non- 
meritorious insights’ are altogether different from these. 

Based on this, what is inherent in leaving home life behind is having compassion 
for all living beings as if they were one’s own offspring. This means not giving rise 
to evil acts, and our body and speech being in mutual accord. Since this is what 
one’s leaving home life behind is like, its merit will be like what the Buddha also 
said: 

Furthermore, Shariputra, if bodhisattvas and mahasattvas* wish 
to realize supreme, fully perfected enlightenment, then on that very 
day when they leave home life behind, they should wish to turn the 
Wheel of the Dharma, because immeasurably great numbers of 
sentient beings have not been able to accept the whole of the Dharma. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


918 


When they turn the Wheel of the Dharma, if they desire to free their 
own minds from the taint of delusions and enable immeasurably 
numerous sentient beings to realize supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment without regressing or turning away from it, then they 
should leam the prajhaparamita, which is the wisdom needed to help 
ferry all sentient beings to the Other Shore.” 

The bodhisattvas who have learned the prajhaparamita are our Ancestors, one after 
the other. At the same time, supreme, fully perfected enlightenment is invariably 
brought to maturity on the very day when one leaves home life behind. Even so, as 
students of the Way, you need to know that when bodhisattvas do the practice that 
is identical with enlightenment for three eons of indefinite length or for 
immeasurable eons of indefinite length, they do not taint that practice with notions 
of its being limited or unlimited. 

djb 


If a bodhisattva-mahasattva were to think, “At some point in 
time, I will undoubtedly relinquish my position in our country and 
leave home life behind. On that day I will realize supreme enlightened 
wisdom. And on that day I will turn the wondrous Wheel of the 
Dharma, whereupon I will help immeasurable, countless living beings 
depart from the spiritual dust and dirt of life, and produce the 
immaculate Eye of the Dharma. Also, I will help immeasurable, 
countless living beings completely bring to an end all the taint from 
their delusions and set free the Wisdom in their heart. Also, I will be 
able to help immeasurable, countless living beings keep from 
regressing or turning aside from their supreme enlightenment.” Then, 
this bodhisattva-mahasattva should, by all means, study the Wisdom 
Scriptures. 

This describes the merit of the Buddha’s coming into existence in a royal palace as 
a bodhisattva embodied for the final time, and of His relinquishing His position in 
His country in order to realize genuine enlightenment and turn the Wheel of the 
Dharma to help all sentient being reach the Other Shore. 


There is a biography of the Buddha that has the following account: 

Prince Siddhartha took from His charioteer Chandaka’s side a 
sword whose hilt was encrusted with the seven precious jewels* and 
other gems. Grasping the sword with His right hand, He drew it from 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


919 


its scabbard. With His left hand, He then took hold of His shell-shaped 
topknot, which was the deep blue color of a water lily, and with His 
right hand He cut it off. Then with His left hand, He dedicated it 
before discarding it by throwing it into the sky. At that moment, there 
arose in the Celestial Lord Indra a great joy, something that he was not 
accustomed to feeling. He caught hold of the Prince’s topknot and, not 
allowing it to touch the ground, he wrapped it in a wondrous celestial 
robe for safe keeping. Then all manner of celestial beings made their 
most excellent offerings to it out of respect. 

This is how the Tathagata Shakyamuni, whilst still a prince, came to climb over the 
walls of the palace in the middle of the night and, with the coming of the morning, 
went into the mountains and cut off the hair from His own head. At that time, the 
celestial beings from the Heaven of Pure Abiding came down to shave His head 
and offer Him the kesa. 16 This is undoubtedly an auspicious sign of a Tathagata 
emerging in the world and is the usual way with World-honored Buddhas. 

Not even one Buddha, at any place or at any time, has ever realized 
Buddhahood whilst remaining in home life. Because there have been Buddhas in 
the past, the merit of leaving home life behind and taking the Precepts exists. A 
sentient being’s realizing the Way invariably depends on leaving home life behind 
and accepting the Precepts. In short, because the merits of leaving home life behind 
and accepting the Precepts are the customary way of Buddhas, the merits of these 
acts are beyond measure. Some people are of the opinion that one may realize 
Buddhahood whilst holding onto lay life, and likewise, some think that one may 
realize Buddhahood whilst holding onto distinctions based on gender, but these 
views are not accurate. 17 

During the time of our Fourth Indian Ancestor, the Venerable 
Ubakikuta, there was a certain rich man’s son by the name of Daitaka. 

He came to the Venerable One and, bowing low, sincerely sought to 
leave home life behind. The Venerable One said, “Are you leaving 
home life in body, or are you leaving home life in mind?” 

Daitaka responded, “I have come to leave home life behind, but 
it is not for the sake of my body or my mind.” 


16. The Heaven of Pure Abiding is the highest of the celestial abodes that comprise the world of 
form. 

17. Dogen’s views on gender-based distinctions are clearly enunciated in the second half of 
Discourse 10: On ‘Respectful Bowing Will Secure for You the Very Marrow of the Way’ 
(Raihai Tokuzui). 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


920 


The Venerable One then asked him, “If it is not for the sake of 
your body or your mind, well then, who is it that is leaving home life 
behind?” 

Daitaka responded, “Well, those who leave home life behind do 
so because there is no ‘I, me, my, or mine’. Because they have no ‘I, 
me, my, or mine’, their Mind is not subject to arising and passing 
away. The Mind’s not arising and passing away is the normal 
procedure. And it is normal for Buddhas, as well; Their mind has no 
characteristic form, and it is the same with Their body.” 

The Venerable One then said, “You will undoubtedly have a 
great awakening, and your mind will quite naturally fully comprehend 
the Matter.* Well and good. Through your devotion to Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha, you will inherit Their saintly seeds and help 
Them flourish.” He then had Daitaka leave home life behind and 
receive ordination. 

Well, now, to meet the Dharma of the Buddhas and leave home life behind is the 
foremost form of excellent karmic recompense for good deeds done in the past. 
That process is not done for the sake of ‘me’, nor for the sake of ‘mine’, nor for the 
sake of ‘my body and mind’, for it was not Daitaka’s body and mind that left home 
life behind. It is no different from the underlying principle that what leaves home 
life behind is not an ‘I’ or a ‘mine’. When it is not a matter of ‘me’ and ‘mine’, it 
will be the process of Buddhas, for it is simply a Buddha’s customary way. 
Because it is a Buddha’s customary way, it is not only beyond ‘I’ or ‘mine’, it is 
also beyond ‘my body and mind’. It is beyond comparison with those in the three 
worlds of desire, form, and beyond form. Because this is the way things are, 
leaving home life behind is the supreme method. It is beyond sudden and gradual, 
beyond certainty and uncertainty, beyond something that comes and something that 
goes, beyond what has been ever-abiding and what is newly fashioned, beyond 
what is broad and what is narrow, beyond the large and the small, and beyond what 
is dependent on circumstances and what is independent of circumstances. There 
has never been a case of an Ancestral Master of the genuine Transmission of the 
Buddha Dharma failing to leave home life behind and accept the Precepts. The 
underlying principle of Daitaka’s present encountering of the Venerable Ubakikuta 
for the first time and seeking to leave home life behind was no different. He left 
home life behind, received ordination, trained under the Venerable Ubakikuta, and 
ultimately became our Fifth Ancestral Master. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


921 


djb 

CX) 

Our Seventeenth Indian Ancestor, the Venerable Sogyanandai, 
was the son of Ratnavyuha, the King of Koshala, who dwelt in the 
capital city of Shravasti. No sooner had he been born than he could 
speak, constantly praising Buddhist matters. By the age of seven he 
had lost interest in worldly pleasures and, speaking in verse, he 
announced the following to his parents: 

Prostrating myself before you, my most wise father, 

And bowing to you, mother of my bones and blood, 

I now desire to leave home life behind, 

Praying for your happiness for the compassion you have 
shown me. 

His parents firmly forbade this, whereupon he stopped eating that very 
day. Because of this, they permitted him to leave home life behind 
while continuing to stay in their home. They give him the name of 
Sogyanandai and appointed a monk named Zenrita to be his teacher. 18 
By his nineteenth year, he had still not regressed or lost interest in his 
training. This Venerable One kept saying to himself, “My body resides 
in a royal palace, so how can that be ‘leaving home?’” One night, a 
bright light poured down from the heavens and Sogyanandai saw that 
it illumined a broad, level pathway. Without thinking, he slowly 
walked down it for some ten miles until he arrived before a huge 
grotto. There was a stone cavern, which he entered, settling down in 
its quietude. His father had, by that time, discovered the loss of his 
son. Thereupon, he sent Zenrita from the palace out into the 
countryside to search for his son, but he did not find the young man’s 
whereabouts. After ten years had passed, the Venerable One realized 
the Dharma and received the confirmation. He then traveled to the 
kingdom of Madai, teaching as he went. 

The terms ‘remaining in home life’ and ‘leaving home life behind’ were first heard 
of at this time. An excellent example of this is Sogyanandai’s finding the broad 
road within the celestial light. As a result of the help received from his good deeds 
in past lives, he was finally able to leave the royal palace and arrive at the stone 
cavern. 


18. Zenrita is the Japanese reading of the Chinese characters used to spell out the monk’s name 
in Sanskrit, but it is not certain what the actual Sanskrit equivalent is. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


922 


Those who have no interest in worldly amusements and who deplore the 
dust and dirt of defiling passions are saintly ones. Those who crave the stimulation 
of their five senses and give no thought to freeing themselves from the tyranny of 
the senses are truly foolish and confused. The T’ang dynasty emperors T’ai-tsung 
and Su-tsung often associated with monastics, but they still coveted their royal 
position and never cast it aside. Daikan Eno, while still a layman, had already left 
his mother, becoming our Sixth Ancestor due to the merits of his having left home 
life behind. Layman Ho’on cast aside his worldly treasures, but he did not cast 
aside his defiling passions, which can be called the height of folly. 19 Daikan Eno’s 
strength in the Way and Ho’on’s method of practice are not to be compared. Those 
who are clear about the Matter invariably leave home life behind, whereas those 
who are in the dark end up at home, which creates the causes and conditions that 
produce misfortunate karmic recompense. 


One day, Meditation Master Nangaku Ejo spontaneously came out with this 
laudatory remark: 

Well now, leaving home life behind is done for the sake of the 
Dharma, which goes beyond anything that arises. There is nothing that 
surpasses It in the heavens above or among humankind. 

His phrase, ‘the Dharma, which goes beyond anything that arises’ refers to the 
Tathagata’s true Teaching, which is why nothing surpasses It in the heavens above 
or among humankind. ‘In the heavens above’ refers to the six heavens in the world 
of desire, the eighteen heavens in the world of form, and the four heavens in the 
world beyond form, yet none of them can compare with the way of leaving home 
life behind. 

djb 


Meditation Master Banzan Hoshaku once said: 

O my virtuous meditative monks, the practice of the Way that 
hits the bull’s-eye resembles the earth holding aloft a mountain 
without realizing that it is a solitary peak, or it is like a stone in which 
a jewel is embedded without the stone realizing how flawless the 
jewel is. Whoever is like this is called one who has left home life 
behind. 


19. A lay person who originally studied under Sekito Kisen, but who went on to become a lay 
disciple of Baso Doitsu. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


923 


The true Teaching of the Buddhas and Ancestors is not necessarily concerned with 
realizing or not realizing something. Because leaving home life behind is the true 
Teaching of the Buddhas and Ancestors, its spiritual merit is evident. 


Meditation Master Rinzai Gigen in Chienchou Province once said: 

Well now, those who have left home life behind should be able 
to correctly discern what a normal, reliable view is. They should be 
able to distinguish between a Buddha and a demon, between the true 
and the false, between the worldly and the saintly. If someone is able 
to discern things in this way, we call that one someone who has left 
home life behind. If someone cannot distinguish a demon from a 
Buddha, we invariably call such a person someone who leaves one 
home only to enter another home and who thereby creates karma. We 
cannot consider such a person to be one who has genuinely left home 
life behind. 

What he calls ‘a normal, reliable view’ means having such things as a deep 
conviction in cause and effect, and a deep faith in the Three Treasures. What he 
calls ‘distinguishing a Buddha’ means being clear in realizing what the merits of a 
Buddha are, both as to their cause and as to their result. It is being able to clearly 
distinguish between the genuine and the fake, the mundane and the saintly. When it 
comes to demons and Buddhas, if you are not clear about the difference, you will 
sacrifice your practice of the Way, regressing or turning away from it. If you detect 
the doings of demons and do not pursue those activities, then you will not be 
regressing from your ability to discern the Way. We consider this to be the method 
of someone who has truly left home life behind. There are many who vainly 
consider the doings of demons to be the Buddha Dharma. It is the mistake of 
modem times. You who are learning should quickly recognize demons, be clear 
about Buddhas, and practice the Way, which is enlightenment itself. 


At the time of the Tathagata’s entering His parinirvana, the 
bodhisattva Makakasho said to the Buddha, “O World-honored One, 
since a Tathagata is equipped with the ability to know what someone’s 
spiritual conditions are, You surely must have known that Sunakshatra 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


924 


would sever his good spiritual roots. What conditions caused You to 

90 

allow him to leave home life behind?” 

The Buddha responded, “O My good disciple, in the past when 
I first left home life behind, my younger half-brother Nanda, along 
with my cousins Ananda and Devadatta, as well as my son Rahula, 
among others in My clan, all followed Me in leaving home life behind 
in order to train in the Way. Had I not allowed Sunakshatra to leave 
home life behind, he would ultimately have inherited the royal 
position of king. Had he been free to exert that power, he might have 
destroyed the Buddha Dharma. Because of this condition, I allowed 
him to leave home life behind and practice the Way. O My good 
disciple, had Sunakshatra not left home life behind to become a monk, 
he would still have severed his good roots and, for untold generations, 
he would have had no spiritual benefits at all. Now, after someone has 
left home life behind, were that person to cut off his good spiritual 
roots, he would still be able to keep to the Precepts by donating his 
services, as well as showing his respect, to those who were long-time 
monks, greatly experienced monks, and virtuous persons, and by 
practicing the four stages of meditation. These are called good causes 
that can give rise to good ways. If people have already given rise to 
good ways, they will be practicing and learning the Way. If they are 
already practicing and learning the Way, they can realize supreme, 
fully perfected enlightenment. This is why I let Sunakshatra leave 
home life behind. O My good disciple, if I had not let Sunakshatra 
leave home life and take the Precepts as a monk, then I could not be 
called a Tathagata possessing the ten abilities. 21 O My good disciple, a 
Buddha recognizes whether a human being is possessed of virtuous or 


20. Sunakshatra is said to have been one of Prince Siddhartha’s close relatives who, as a monk, 
served as a personal attendant to the Buddha. Though he was well informed in all the 
Buddha’s Teachings, he later returned to lay life where he reviled the Three Treasures. As a 
result, he is said to have fallen into a state of hellish suffering during his lifetime. 

21. The ten abilities of a Tathagata are (1) recognizing what is right or wrong under any 
circumstances; (2) recognizing what everyone’s karma is in past, present, and future; (3) 
comprehending the various forms of meditation; (4) recognizing the superior or inferior 
qualities of others; (5) recognizing the desires of others; (6) recognizing the spiritual lineage 
of others; (7) recognizing which of the six worlds of existence someone is headed for; (8) 
knowing the past lives of others; (9) recognizing everyone’s patterns of birth and death; and 
(10) knowing how to destroy all delusions within oneself and others. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


925 


non-virtuous ways. Even though this man Sunakshatra possessed both 
these ways, in time he succeeded in severing all his good roots until 
he possessed only non-virtuous roots. And why? Because such human 
beings have no close friends who are spiritually good, they do not pay 
attention to the True Teaching, they do not think of what is spiritually 
good, and they do not act in accord with the Dharma. This is why they 
sever all their good roots until they possess only non-virtuous roots. 

Keep in mind that the World-honored Tathagata was quite aware that there were 
human beings who might cut off their good roots; still, out of His great 
benevolence and great compassion, He let them leave home life behind in order to 
give them a cause to be virtuous. The causes of cutting off one’s good roots are due 
to failing to associate with virtuous friends, failing to listen to the true Teaching, 
failing to think about what is good, and failing to act in accord with the Dharma. 
You who are now learning the Way must keep close to morally good friends and be 
on intimate terms with them. What we call ‘a good friend’ is someone who asserts 
that Buddhas do exist and teaches us that there is wrongdoing, as well as 
happiness. One who does not deny cause and effect is considered a good friend and 
a good counselor. What such a one gives expression to is the true Teaching. To 
think about this principle is to think about what is good. To act in this way will be 
to act in accord with the Dharma. Thus, regardless of whether people choose to be 
our intimates or not, you should simply recommend that they leave home life 
behind and take the Precepts. Do not pay attention to whether or not they later 
regress, and do not worry about whether they do the practice or not, for this is 
doubtless the true Teaching of our Venerable Shakyamuni. 


The Buddha, in instructing His monks, once said, “By all 
means, you need to keep in mind that Lord Yama gave the following 
teaching , 22 ‘Some day I shall be free of this suffering of mine. I shall 
be reborn among those in the world of humans. Obtaining a human 
body, I will be able to leave home life behind, have my head shaved, 
receive the kesa of the Three Treasures, and leam the Way as one who 
has left home life behind. ’ Even a Lord Yama had these thoughts. And 
what is even more, you now have received the body of a human being 
and have had the opportunity to become monks! Because of this, my 
monks, you should consciously work on the actions of your body, 


22. Lord Yama is the Lord of the Dead. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


926 


speech, and mind, and do not allow faults to exist in them. By all 
means, you need to eliminate the five fetters and put into practice the 
five good roots . 23 Monks like you should certainly do just such 
training.” 

At this time the monks, having heard what the Buddha 
expressed through words, were filled with joy and devotedly 
undertook to act upon them. 

It is clear that the desire to be reborn within the human world is something longed 
for even by a Lord Yama. Once someone has been reborn as a human being, he or 
she should forthwith have their head shaved, don the kesa of the Three Treasures, 
and take up the study of the Way of the Buddha. These are the merits of being 
within the world of humans, which surpasses the other five worlds of existence. 
But to be bom in the human world and then to wantonly seek out the path to 
political power or some other worldly career, vainly spending one’s life as a toady 
to ministers and kings, wrapping oneself up in fantasies and dreams, only to 
proceed in later times towards pitch darkness without anything to rely upon, that is 
folly indeed! Not only have you received the body of a human being, which is hard 
to come by, but you have also encountered the Buddha Dharma, which is hard to 
encounter. You should forthwith cast aside all your involvements and quickly leave 
home life behind in order to study the Way. Rulers and ministers, along with their 
wives and children, their relatives and households, are encountered everywhere, 
but the Buddha Dharma, like the rare udumbara blossom, is hard to meet up with. 
In short, when impermanence suddenly arrives, there is no mler or minister, friend 
or relative, spouse or child, or any precious treasure that will save us, for each of us 
simply returns to death’s Yellow Spring alone. What follows along with us is 
simply our good and bad karma. When we are about to lose our human body, our 
feelings of regret for our human body may well be deep indeed! So, while we still 
have our human body, we should quickly leave home life behind. Just this alone 
will be the true Teaching of the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds. 


23. The five fetters are covetousness, hate, arrogant pride, envy, and mean-spiritedness. The five 
good roots are faith, diligent effort, mindfulness, meditative contemplation, and wise 
discernment. 

24. The Yellow Spring is the Chinese equivalent of the River Styx, the river in Greek mythology 
that one crosses at death. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


927 


djb 

CX) 

For those who have left home life behind in order to put the Dharma into 
practice, there are four things called ‘the four necessities ’. 25 

The first is to go so far in one’s fleshly life as to sit 
beneath a tree. 

The second is to go so far in one s fleshly life as to wear 
robes made of discarded cloth. 

The third is to go so far in one s fleshly life as to beg for 
one s food. 

The fourth is to go so far in one s fleshly life as to take 
the long-abandoned, old-fashioned remedies, when 
physically ill . 26 

If you practice all these methods, you may indeed be called one 
who has left home life behind and, in being given that name, you have 
become a member of the Sangha. If you do not practice these, you 
have not become what we call a member of the Sangha. For that 
reason, these four are called the practice of the Dharma by those who 
have left home life behind. 

Now, what the Buddhas and Ancestors in India and China have authentically 
Transmitted is leaving home life behind in order to put the Dharma into practice. 
Those who spend their life without leaving the monastery even once are supplied 
with these four necessities so that they may put the Dharma into practice. This is 
what I call ‘practicing the four necessities’. Should someone alter this by trying to 
establish a fifth necessity, you need to know that this is a false teaching . 27 Who 
could accept it in good faith? Who could bear to hear such a thing? What the 
Buddhas and Ancestors have correctly Transmitted, that is the true Teaching. 
Accordingly, those human beings who have left home life behind are supremely 


25. That is, the four necessities for sustaining life: shelter, clothing, food, and medicine. 

26. The passage that Dogen is citing comes from a seventh century text describing the ideal for 
a Mahayana monk. The four examples given represent the extremes to which a monk should 
be willing to go in order to continue on as someone who has left home life behind. All four 
represent practices that, in the Buddha’s time, could sustain a monk’s existence without 
requiring him or her to return to lay life. The long-abandoned, old-fashioned remedies 
alluded to include the ancient Indian medical practice of using the urine and dung of cattle 
for sterilization as well as for a variety of internal and external ailments. 

27. The so-called ‘fifth necessity’ is sex. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


928 


fortunate and most worthy of our veneration. For this reason, Nanda, Ananda, 
Devadatta, Aniruddha, Mahanama, and Bhadrika, all of whom were grandsons of 
King Simhahanu and were of the most noble in the warrior caste in India, quickly 
left home life behind, which should be an excellent example for succeeding 
generations. Those who are not warriors today should not regret who they are. 
For those who may well not be princes, what can there possibly be to regret? The 
noblest of families in Jambudvipa ended up as the noblest in the human realms, 
that is, they left home life behind. Rulers of lesser nations, like those of the 
Licchavi multitudes, were wont to prize that which is not worth prizing, to flaunt 
what is not worth flaunting, to confine themselves to what is not worth abiding 
with, and not to leave home life behind . 29 Who could fail to see that they were 
bunglers? Who could fail to see that they were foolish people? 

The Venerable Rahula was the son of the Bodhisattva . 30 And he was the 
great-grandson of King Simhahanu, who would have bequeathed the throne to him 
were it not for the World-honored One’s influencing him to leave home life behind. 
You need to know that the Dharma of leaving home life behind is the most 
venerated. As the disciple foremost in keeping to the Precepts, Rahula has yet to 
enter nirvana. Even to this day, as an arhat he helps human beings to abide in this 
world as in a cultivated field of happiness. 

Among our Indian Ancestral Masters to whom the Buddha’s Treasure House 
of the Eye of the True Teaching was Transmitted, there has been an abundance of 
princes who left home life behind. Our first Ancestor in China, Bodhidharma, was 
the third son of the King of the Indian state of Koshi. Not taking his royal position 
as something of importance, he received the Transmission of the true Teaching and 
held to It. It should be clear to you that he held leaving home life behind in greatest 
veneration. While he may not have held a station that was the equal of those other 
princes, he was in a position where he was able to leave home life behind. So why 
would he not hasten to do so? What kind of tomorrow should he have waited for? 
Were he to leave home life behind right off, not waiting to inhale and exhale a 
single breath, that would be wise indeed. Also, keep in mind that our Master, one 
who has left home life behind and accepted the Precepts, is due the same gratitude 
and appreciation which we owe to our parents. 


28. Simhahanu was Siddhartha’s grandfather on his father’s side. 

29. The Licchavis were thought to be among the earliest supporters of the Buddha, but not to the 
extent that they left home life behind. 

30. The Bodhisattva here is Prince Siddhartha prior to his enlightenment. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of Leaving Home Life Behind 


929 


djb 

CX) 

It says in the first fascicle of the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple: 

All Buddhas in the three temporal worlds—past, present, and 
future—affirm that to leave home life behind is to realize the Truth. 

The twenty-eight Indian Ancestors and the six Chinese Ancestors, all 
of whom Transmitted the Buddha’s Mind seal,* were, each and every 
one of them, monastics. Most likely, it was because they strictly 
observed the monastic regulations that they were able to become 
outstanding models for those in the three worlds of desire, form, and 
beyond form. Thus, in practicing meditation and inquiring of the Way 
with their Master, they made the Precepts and the monastic regulations 
foremost. Had they not distanced themselves from their faults and 
guarded against misdeeds, how could they have realized Buddhahood 
and become an Ancestor? 

Even if one’s monastery has become subject to the winds of decay, it may still be a 
grove of fragrant trees in full bloom, a grove that has not fallen to the level of 
ordinary trees or commonplace sproutings. Then again, it may be like milk diluted 
with water. When we want to make use of milk, we should use this milk that has 
been diluted with water, but we should not use any other substance . 31 

Thus, what is most revered is the genuine Transmission of what all Buddhas 
in the three temporal worlds teach as the Dharma of leaving home life behind. 
Furthermore, there has never been a single Buddha of the three temporal worlds 
who failed to leave home life behind, for this is the Treasure House of the Eye of 
the True Teaching, which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana and supreme 
enlightenment, as accurately Transmitted from Buddha to Buddha and from 
Ancestor to Ancestor. 

A day during the summer retreat in the seventh year of the Kencho era (1255). 

Copied here on the sixth day of the eighth lunar month in the third year of the Enkyo era (August 
30 , 1310 ). 


31. That is, even though milk may be diluted with water, it is still milk. This is a metaphor for 
the Dharma. Undiluted milk refers to the Dharma in its purest form. Diluted milk refers to 
the Dharma that has been simplified to make it more accessible to people, but it is still the 
Buddha Dharma. 



83 

On Receiving the Precepts 

(Jukai) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen presents the ceremony of taking the 
Mahayana Precepts. In the Soto Zen tradition, the form of these Mahayana Precepts derives from 
the Scripture of Brahma s Net. They are traditionally given to the laity when they decide that 
they wish to live their lives as Buddhists, to those who are being ordained as novice monks, and 
to a novice monk as part of the ceremonial associated with Transmission. These Bodhisattva 
Precepts are distinct from the 250 preceptual regulations for male monastics and the 348 
preceptual regulations for female monastics, which address everyday problems that may arise for 
those living in a monastic or hermetic setting. 


In the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple it says the following: 

All Buddhas in the three temporal worlds—past, present, and 
future—affirm that to leave home life behind is to realize the Truth. 
The twenty-eight Indian Ancestors and the six Chinese Ancestors, all 
of whom Transmitted the Buddha’s Mind seal,* were, each and every 
one of them, monastics. Most likely, it was because they strictly 
observed the monastic regulations that they were able to become 
outstanding models for those in the three worlds of desire, form, and 
beyond form. Thus, in practicing meditation and inquiring of the Way 
with their Master, they made the Precepts and the monastic regulations 
foremost. Had they not distanced themselves from their faults and 
guarded against misdeeds, how could they have realized Buddhahood 
and become Ancestors? 

As to the method for doing the ordination ceremony of Taking 
the Precepts, three types of kesas* and a set of mealtime bowls, along 
with fresh, clean robes, are provided for the one to be ordained. If new 
robes are not available, be sure to launder old ones, but you must not 
use borrowed kesas or a borrowed bowl set to put on the altar when 
doing the ceremony of Taking the Precepts. Concentrate 
wholeheartedly and take care not to get distracted by side issues. 


* See Glossary. 


930 



Shobogenzo: On Receiving the Precepts 


931 


Assuming the form of a Buddha, being provided with the Precepts and 
the monastic regulations, and acquiring what the Buddha received and 
made use of are, by no means, small matters, so how could you 
possibly treat them lightly? Were you to borrow someone’s kesas or 
bowl set, and then go up to the altar to take the Precepts, you would 
not really be obtaining the Precepts. Should you never receive the 
Precepts, you will be a person devoid of the Precepts for the whole of 
your life as you vainly cross over the threshold of empty 
scholasticism, meaninglessly accepting alms given in good faith. 

Those entering the path with a beginner’s mind may not as yet have 
memorized the rules and regulations. Should their Master offer no 
guidance, they will lapse into error. What I am saying here is stem 
advice indeed. Dare I hope that you will engrave it on your heart? If 
you have taken the monastic Precepts, by all means you should also 
take the Bodhisattva* Precepts, for They are foremost for those who 
would enter the Teaching. 

In India and China, whenever an Ancestor of the Buddha passed on the 
Transmission, without fail, the Precepts were accepted as the first act of entering 
the Dharma. Unless we accept the Precepts, we are not yet a disciple of the 
Buddhas, nor are we an offspring of our Ancestral Masters, because They have 
considered one’s departing from error and resisting wrong to be synonymous with 
practicing meditation and inquiring of the Way. The words, “They have made the 
Precepts foremost,” are already precisely what the Treasure House of the Eye of 
the Tme Teaching is. Realizing Buddhahood and becoming an Ancestor have 
invariably been based on receiving and preserving the Transmission of the Treasure 
House of the Eye of the Tme Teaching. Ancestral Masters who have authentically 
Transmitted the Treasure House of the Eye of the Tme Teaching have invariably 
received and preserved the Buddha’s Precepts. There cannot be an Ancestor of the 
Buddha who has not received and preserved the Precepts. There are Those who 
received and preserved them in compliance with the Tathagata, and there are Those 
who received and preserved them in compliance with a disciple of the Buddha, all 
of whom received the bloodline thereby. 

The Buddhist Precepts, which have now been authentically Transmitted from 
Buddha to Buddha and from Ancestor to Ancestor, were Transmitted only by our 
Ancestral Founder Bodhidharma, the Abbot of Mount Suzan, until They came 
down through five Transmissions in China to our Founding Ancestor of Mount 
Sokei, Daikan Eno. Although the genuine Transmission of Seigen Gyoshi and 
Nangaku Ejo and beyond has been conveyed to us of the present day, there are 



Shobogenzo: On Receiving the Precepts 


932 


those senior monks who have never recognized the Precepts and could care less. 
Oh, how extremely pitiful they are! 

As has been said, we should receive and accept the Bodhisattva Precepts, for 
this is how we reach the entryway into the Dharma. This is something that we need 
to know in our exploration through our practice with our Master. This procedure of 
receiving and accepting the Bodhisattva Precepts has invariably been correctly 
Transmitted to those of us who have explored the Matter* through our long¬ 
standing training within the private quarters of an Ancestor of the Buddha. It is not 
something that those who are lazy or indifferent achieve. This procedure invariably 
involves lighting incense and doing prostrations before our Ancestral Master 
Bodhidharma, and then asking if we may receive the Bodhisattva Precepts. Once 
we have been given permission, we bathe that we may purify ourselves. We then 
put on clean, new robes. Or, we may wash our previous robes, strew flowers, bum 
incense, and perform prostrations to show our reverence, after which we put those 
robes on. We respectfully bow to the altar images, to the Three Treasures, and to 
our venerable Ancestors, ridding ourselves of any obstmctions. Thereby we can 
purify our body and mind. This procedure has been accurately Transmitted for ever 
so long from within the private quarters of Ancestors of the Buddha. After this, the 
presiding teacher of the Monks’ Training Hall invites the ordinand to make a 
prostration and then recite the following refuges, while kneeling upright with 
hands in gassho:* 

I humbly take refuge in the Buddha, 

I humbly take refuge in the Dharma, 

I humbly take refuge in the Sangha. 

I humbly take refuge in the Buddha, the most venerated 
among humans, 

I humbly take refuge in the Dharma, the most venerated 
among those who have forsaken their passions, 

I humbly take refuge in the Sangha, the most venerated 
among those in our assemblies. 

I have taken refuge in the Buddha, 

I have taken refuge in the Dharma, 

I have taken refuge in the Sangha. 

(Repeat the above refuges three times.) 

Ordinand: “The Tmth of the supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment which was realized by the Tathagata is my great 
Teacher, in which I will take refuge from now on. From now on, I 



Shobogenzo: On Receiving the Precepts 


933 


shall not seek refuge in the demons of heresy or in those outside the 
Way, because I shall have His compassion and benevolence.” 

(Repeat the above words three times. After the third time, repeat three more times 

the line “I shall have His compassion and benevolence.”) 

Preceptor: “Good disciple, you have discarded past evils and 
been converted to the Truth. The Precepts have already embraced you. 

Now you are about to receive the Three Pure Precepts. 

“The first is the Precept of Ceasing from Evil. From this present 
state of yours to that of becoming Buddha, will you keep this Precept 
or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The second is the Precept of Doing Only Good. 

From this present state of yours to that of becoming Buddha, will you 
keep this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The third is the Precept of Doing What Is Good for 
the Sake of All Sentient Beings. From this present state of yours to 
that of becoming Buddha, will you keep this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “You must not violate the preceding Three Pure 
Precepts. From this present state of yours to that of becoming Buddha, 
will you keep these Precepts or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “This is how you must keep Them.” 

The ordinand then does three prostrations, ending by kneeling straight up with 

hand in gassho. 

Preceptor: “Good disciple, you have already received the Three 
Pure Precepts. Now you are about to receive the Ten Great Precepts. 

These are the Great Immaculate Precepts of all Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas. 



Shobogenzo: On Receiving the Precepts 


934 


“The first is ‘Do not kill.’ From this present state of yours to 
that of becoming Buddha, will you keep this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The second is ‘Do not steal.’ From this present state 
of yours to that of becoming Buddha, will you keep this Precept or 
not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The third is ‘Do not covet.’ From this present state 
of yours to that of becoming Buddha, will you keep this Precept or 
not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The fourth is ‘Do not say that which is untrue.’ 
From this present state of yours to that of becoming Buddha, will you 
keep this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The fifth is ‘Do not sell the wine of delusion.’ From 
this present state of yours to that of becoming Buddha, will you keep 
this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The sixth is ‘Do not speak against others, be they 
laity or monastics.’ From this present state of yours to that of Buddha, 
will you keep this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The seventh is ‘Do not be proud of yourself and 
devalue others.’ From this present state of yours to that of becoming 
Buddha, will you keep this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 



Shobogenzo: On Receiving the Precepts 


935 


Preceptor: “The eighth is ‘Do not be mean in giving either 
Dharma or material possessions.’ From this present state of yours to 
that of becoming Buddha, will you keep this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The ninth is ‘Do not be angry.’ From this present 
state of yours to that of Buddha, will you keep this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times) 

Preceptor: “The tenth is ‘Do not defame the Three Treasures.’ 

From this present state of yours to that of becoming Buddha, will you 
keep this Precept or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will keep It.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “The preceding Three Refuges, Three Pure Precepts, 
and Ten Great Precepts are what all Buddhas receive and keep to. 

From this present state of yours to that of becoming Buddha, will you 
keep these Precepts or not?” 

Ordinand: “I will.” 

(Asked three times, answered three times.) 

Preceptor: “These are what you should keep to.” 

The ordinand does three prostrations, coming back to kneeling straight up with 

hands in gassho. The Preceptor and the ordinand together then chant the following 

verse in Sanskrit: 

We live in the world as if in the sky, 

Just as the lotus blossom is not wetted by the water that 
surrounds it. 

The mind is immaculate and beyond the dust. 

Let us bow to the highest Lord. 

When this is finished, they recite the following: 

Homage to the Buddha, 

Homage to the Dharma, 

Homage to the Sangha. 

The ordinand then leaves the Training Hall. 



Shobogenzo: On Receiving the Precepts 


936 


djb 

CX) 

This ceremony of receiving the Precepts is what the Buddhas and Ancestors 
have, beyond question, correctly Transmitted to us. Such trainees as Yakusan 
Igen’s disciple Tanka Tennen, as well as his novice Ko, both received and kept to 
Them. Even though there have been Ancestral Masters who did not take the two 
hundred and fifty monastic precepts, there has never been an Ancestral Master who 
failed to take these Bodhisattva Precepts, which the Buddhas and Ancestors 
authentically Transmitted. And it is These that we invariably receive and preserve. 



84 

On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 

(Kesa Kudoku) 


Translator’s Introduction: One element that is markedly different between this discourse and 
Discourse 12: On the Transmission of the Kesa (Den ’e) is that the present discourse has several 
extensive quotes from Chinese translations of Scriptural writings which Dogen uses to clarify 
and support his points. 


The robe and the Teaching which Buddhas have directly passed on to 
Buddhas, and Ancestors to Ancestors, were, beyond doubt, correctly Transmitted to 
China by Bodhidharma, our noble Ancestor of Mount Suzan, and by him alone. 
This noble Ancestor was of the twenty-eighth generation from Shakyamuni 
Buddha. In India, he was the twenty-eighth in line to have legitimately received the 
Transmission, and, as the Twenty-eighth Ancestor, he came to China where he 
became known as the First Chinese Ancestor. Those of Chinese nationality made 
five Transmissions until coming to Daikan Eno, who became the thirty-third 
generation Ancestor, and was called the Sixth Chinese Ancestor. Known as the 
Thirty-third Ancestor Meditation Master Daikan Eno, he received the genuine 
Transmission of the robe and the Teaching in the middle of the night whilst on 
Mount Obai. He watched over and protected the robe for the rest of his life, and it 
is still enshrined in Horin-ji Temple on Mount Sokei. 

Successive generations of Chinese emperors have respectfully requested that 
this robe be brought to their court so that they might make offerings and reverently 
bow to it. They are persons who, as spiritual guardians, have protected it. During 
the T’ang dynasty, the emperors Chung-tsung, Su-tsung, and T’ai-tsung repeatedly 
had it brought back to court so that they might make offerings to it. Whenever they 
requested it or had it sent back, they would have an emissary accompany it and 
would issue an edict to that effect. On one occasion, Emperor T’ai-tsung, in 
returning the Buddha’s robe to Mount Sokei, issued the following edict, “I am now 
pleased to entrust to Commander General Liu Chung-ching, Pacifier of Our 
Nation, the returning of this robe with all courtesies. We declare this robe to be a 
national treasure. Venerable Abbot, I pray that you will safely enshrine it in your 
temple, placing it under the rigorous care and protection of those monks of your 


937 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


938 


community who have personally received from you the tenets of our religion, 
never letting the robe fall into neglect.” 

Truly, it would be better than having sway over the three-thousand great¬ 
thousandfold worlds—which are as countless as the sands of the Ganges—just to 
have the opportunity, as ruler of some small, present-day country, to actually see 
the Buddha’s robe and make venerative offerings to it, for such would truly be a 
good life within one’s cycle of birth and death; it would, indeed, be the ultimate in 
one’s life. 

Surely, nowhere within the three thousand worlds in which the influence of 
Buddhism has extended has the kesa* been absent. Be that as it may, the only one 
to receive the Buddha’s kesa that had been passed on from person to person, from 
successor to successor, was our Ancestor of Mount Suzan in times long gone. The 
Buddha’s kesa was not accorded to any other, subsidiary disciple. Even though the 
Transmission through the Bodhisattva* Bhadrapala, a subsidiary descendant of the 
Twenty-seventh Ancestor, was, beyond doubt, extended to Dharma Teacher Jo in 
the fifth century, the genuine passing on of the Buddha’s kesa was not involved. 
Likewise, the Fourth Chinese Ancestor, Great Master Daii Doshin, ferried 
Meditation Master Hoyu of Mount Gozu to the Other Shore, but he did not pass the 
Buddha’s kesa on to him. Well, even though someone may not have received 
Transmission from a direct heir, nevertheless, the Tathagata’s genuine Dharma is 
never devoid of spiritual merit, so for thousands, nay, myriads of eons, Its benefits 
will be great and far reaching. And, obviously, anyone who has not been 
Transmitted is not to be considered comparable to someone who has been 
Transmitted by a direct heir. 

Thus, if commoners or those of more lofty status were to accept and keep to 
a kesa, they would need to have passed on to them the genuine Transmission which 
the Buddhas and Ancestors have passed on. In India and China, during those 
periods of the genuine and the superficial teaching of the Dharma, householders 
still kept to the kesa that they had accepted. But now, in these weak and degenerate 
times in a remote land like ours, those who shave their heads and beards and call 
themselves disciples of the Buddha do not keep to the kesa that they have received. 
Alas, they still do not believe, or know, or clearly understand that they should keep 
to what they have accepted, to say nothing of their lack of knowledge about its 
materials, colors, or measurements, much less of the ways to wear one. 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


939 


djb 

The kesa, from ancient times, has been called ‘the garment of liberation’, for 
it can free us from all our obstructions, be they from the karmic* effects of our past 
deeds, from our defiling passions, or from the effects of our rebirth in one of the 
six worlds* of existence. Should a dragon be able to obtain a single thread from a 
kesa, it will be delivered from its three forms of burning pain . 1 Should an ox be 
able to touch a kesa with even one hom, its past defilements will spontaneously 
disappear. Upon realizing Buddhahood, every Buddha, without exception, was 
wearing a kesa, which is obviously why wearing one is described as the most 
venerable and highest of spiritual merits. 

True, we have been born in a remote country and have been exposed to the 
Dharma in Its final days, sad to say, but even so, in that we have encountered the 
robe and the Teaching as received by Buddha after Buddha for generation after 
generation, what greater joy could there be? Which other tradition has correctly 
Transmitted both the robe and the Dharma of the Venerable Shakyamuni as we 
have straightforwardly Transmitted them? Even if, in the space of a single day, we 
were to renounce our physical life for times as countless as the sands of the 
Ganges, we should still humbly make offerings to both the robe and the Dharma. 
Indeed, we should vow that, upon encountering them in life after life, for 
generation after generation, we will humbly raise them above our head, make 
offerings to them, and venerate them. 

Even though we are separated from the Buddha’s native land by more than a 
hundred thousand leagues of mountains and seas too difficult to traverse, 
nevertheless, spurred on by our good deeds in some past life, these mountains and 
seas do not stand as obstacles blocking our way, nor have we ever been dismissed 
or shunned as muddle-headed, ignorant provincials. Having respectfully 
encountered this genuine Teaching, we put It into practice day and night to the best 
of our ability; keeping to this kesa which we have respectfully accepted, we guard 
and protect it, constantly taking joy in it. How could this possibly be due to the 
cultivation of spiritual merits under the tutelage of just one or two Buddhas? It 
must be due wholly to the cultivation of all kinds of spiritual merits under the 
tutelage of Buddhas as numerous as the sands of the Ganges. Even if it were due to 
our own efforts, we should feel respect for the robe and the Dharma and should 
enjoy heartfelt gratitude. We should cordially show our gratitude to the ancestral 
Masters for their profound kindness in Transmitting the Dharma to us. Since even 


1. Namely, sulfering from fiery heat, from fierce desert winds, and from being devoured by a 
garuda bird. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


940 


animals repay kindliness, how could humans fail to understand kindness? If people 
do not recognize kindness, they must be even denser than animals. 

When it comes to the spiritual merits of this Buddha robe and this Buddha 
Dharma, if there had not been Ancestral Masters who Transmitted the Buddha’s 
True Dharma, then the rest of us would not yet be able to clarify, much less 
comprehend, what these merits are. If you are able to take delight in seeking out 
the trail left by the Buddhas, you will enjoy this Dharma all the more. 

Even after a hundred thousand myriad generations, people will be able to 
recognize this genuine Transmission as the genuine Transmission. This will be the 
Buddha Dharma; the proof of Its authenticity will undoubtedly be evident. 


Do not liken the Transmission to adding water to milk, since It more closely 
resembles a crown prince ascending to the throne. When we do make use of milk, 
even though it is that which has been diluted with water, we should still go ahead 
and use it if there should happen to be no other milk than that. Even if we have not 
added water to it, we should not use oil in its place, or lacquer, or wine. 2 The 
genuine Transmission may also be likened to this analogy. Even though someone is 
a run-of-the-mill disciple of a mediocre teacher, if there is a genuine Transmission, 
it will be a suitable time to ‘make use of milk’. But the genuine Transmission of 
Buddha to Buddha and Ancestor to Ancestor is more like the enthronement of a 
crown prince. Even the secular Confucian teachings admonish us not to wear 
clothing which differs from that officially worn during the time of the previous 
ruler, so why would a disciple of the Buddha wear any type of robe other than that 
which the Buddha wore? 

djb 


Starting in the tenth year of the Eihei era (67 C.E.), during the reign of the 
Later Han dynasty emperor Hsiao-ming, monks and lay disciples went back and 
forth between India in the west and their homelands in the east, ceaselessly 
following on the heels of their predecessors, as they say. Even so, none of them 
reported encountering in India an Ancestral Master of the genuine Transmission 
from Buddha to Buddha and from Ancestor to Ancestor; none of these travelers 
had a record of the lineage of the Face-to-Face Transmission direct from the 
Tathagata. They just attended on teachers of Scriptures and Scriptural 
commentaries, and brought back copies of Scriptures and scholarly texts written in 
Sanskrit. Among them, none spoke of having met an Ancestral Master who was a 


2. Because milk is still milk even in a diluted form. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


941 


genuine heir of the Buddha Dharma, nor did anyone report the existence of an 
Ancestral Master who had passed on to them the Buddha’s kesa. It is quite clear 
that they had not crossed the threshold into the deeper significance of the term 
‘Buddha Dharma’. People like these have not clearly grasped the import of the 
phrase ‘the genuine Transmission of the Buddhas and Ancestors’. 


When the Tathagata Shakyamuni conferred on Makakasho the Dharma of 
Supreme Wisdom—which is the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching— 
He passed on to him at the same time the kesa that Kasho Buddha had directly 
Transmitted to Him. It is the kesa that generation after generation of genuine heirs 
received down to Meditation Master Daikan of Mount Sokei, who was the thirty- 
third heir. The material, color, and dimensions of that kesa have been passed on 
first-hand. Since then, the Dharma descendants of Seigen and Nangaku have 
directly Transmitted the Dharma in person, employing the ways taught by the 
Ancestors for wearing a kesa, and following the methods taught by the Ancestors 
for constructing them. If someone has not learned the deeper meaning behind the 
method for washing and cleansing a kesa, as well as the procedure for accepting 
and keeping to one—both of which have been conferred face-to-face through the 
generations of successors—there is no way for that person to know of them. 


The kesa is said to be of three types: the five-paneled robe, the seven- 
paneled robe, and the large robe of nine or more panels. Even those whose practice 
is the very finest accept just these three robes; they do not hoard additional robes. 
They use just these three robes, which are sufficient for their bodily needs. 

When conducting daily business or attending to daily duties within the 
monastery, or when going outside to see to large or small matters, we wear a five- 
paneled robe. Upon our entering among the Sangha to engage in all manner of 
good spiritual acts, 3 4 we wear a seven-paneled robe. To help inculcate respect and 
trust whilst giving Teaching to both commoners and those in lofty positions, we 
should, by all means, wear a large robe of nine or more panels. Also, when alone in 
our quarters, we wear the five-paneled robe; when coming together with the 


3. Seigen and Nangaku were both direct Dharma heirs of Daikan Eno, thereby forming two 
branches within the Zen tradition. 

4. A reference to one’s joining with fellow members of the Sangha for fonnal meditation 
periods and religious ceremonies. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


942 


Sangha, we wear the seven-paneled robe; when we enter a ruler’s residence or go 
into a populous area, we should, by all means, wear the large robe. Further, in 
accord with times of warm weather, we wear the five-paneled robe; when the 
weather turns cold, we add the seven-paneled robe; and when the cold becomes 
intense, we also add on the large robe. 

Once, in days long gone, as a mid-winter night came on, the weather turned 
so cold that it cracked open the bamboo. At eventide, the Tathagata was wearing a 
five-paneled robe. As the night grew more and more chill, He added a seven- 
paneled robe. In the final hours of the night, the cold weather had grown ever more 
intense, so He added on His large robe. The Buddha immediately had the thought, 
“In the generations yet to come, all good disciples who find the cold unbearable 
will be able to wrap themselves up sufficiently with these three robes.” 


The Methods for Wearing the Kesa 

The usual method is to keep the right shoulder bare. There is a method of 
wearing the kesa over both shoulders, which was a custom of the Tathagata and of 
the more elderly and senior monks. 5 Although it is described simply as ‘covering 
both shoulders’, there are times when the chest is exposed, and times when the 
chest is covered. The covering of both shoulders is a time for wearing a large kesa 
of at least sixty pieces. 6 

When wearing an ordinary kesa, we bring both upper comers together at the 
left arm and shoulder, placing one atop the other. We bring the left edge to the 
front, letting it ride atop the right vertical edge which has been tucked in between 
the left arm and the torso; the left edge is draped over the left arm. 7 With a large 
kesa, we put the front comer over the left shoulder and drape it so that it hangs 
down in back. In addition to these methods, there are various other methods for 
wearing a kesa, which you should look into as part of your training and practice. 

During the centuries of the Chinese Liang, Ch’en, Sui, T’ang, and Sung 
dynasties, many of the scholars of both the Greater* and the Lesser Courses* 
abandoned their preoccupation with lecturing on Scriptures, realizing that this was 
not the ultimate goal. Faring on, they strove to explore the Teaching of the genuine 
Transmission of the Buddhas and Ancestors, at which time they invariably 

5. The word Dogen uses for ‘elderly’ implies age fifty and over. 

6. The sixty-piece robe refers to a fifteen-paneled kesa. 

7. Dogen gives a somewhat more detailed description of this method in the preceding 
Discourse 12: On the Transmission of the Kesa (Den ’e), p. 128. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


943 


discarded their previous worldly clothing and took on the kesa that the Buddhas 
and Ancestors had correctly passed on. This was truly their abandonment of what 
was false and their return to what was upright. 


The True Teaching of the Tathagata originated in India, as we all know. 
Many past and present teachers have held to the shallow views of common folk, 
which are colored by emotionalism and narrow-mindedness. Because the Realm of 
Buddha and the realms of sentient beings are beyond such notions as ‘having 
limits’ or ‘being without limits’, the Teachings, practices, and reasoning of both the 
Greater and Lesser Courses will not fit within the narrow-minded thinking of 
common folk today. And, at the same time, there are those in China who absurdly 
argue that India was not the source, but that China was, and they put forth this 
parochial view as their own bright new idea, taking it to be Buddha Dharma. As a 
consequence, if those today who have awakened to their Buddha Nature are 
determined to accept and keep to the kesa, they should accept and keep to the 
genuinely Transmitted kesa; they should not accept or keep to some kesa fashioned 
according to someone’s ‘bright new idea’. 

The ‘genuinely Transmitted kesa’ refers to the one genuinely Transmitted 
from Shorin-ji Monastery through Mount Sokei, and it is the one that has been 
received by generation after generation of the Tathagata’s successors without 

o 

missing even a single generation. What those disciples of the Dharma and their 
Dharma disciples wore is, precisely, the genuinely Transmitted kesa. What has 
been newly fashioned in China is not of the genuine Transmission. Now, the 
members of the monastic assembly who came from India all wore the same style of 
kesa as that which was genuinely Transmitted by the Buddhas and Ancestors; not 
even one of those monks ever wore a kesa like those new-fangled Chinese ones 
which were fashioned by that bunch who devote themselves to a scholarly study of 
the monastic regulations. Ill-informed folk may trust the kesa of scholastics; those 
who are clear-minded toss it aside. 


Broadly speaking, the spiritual merits of the kesa—which was passed on 
from Buddha to Buddha and Ancestor to Ancestor—are clear, and these merits are 
easy to accept and trust in. The kesa’s genuine Transmission has been duly 
inherited; its original form has been personally handed down, and it actually exists 


8. Shorin-ji Monastery is associated with Bodhidharma and Mount Sokei with Daikan Eno. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


944 


here and now. The practice of accepting and keeping to it has come down to the 
present, along with the inherited Dharma. The Ancestral Masters who have 
received and kept to it, as both Masters and disciples, are all ones who have 
realized the same Truth and Transmitted Its Dharma. As a consequence, we should 
construct our kesas according to the methods correctly passed on by the Buddhas 
and Ancestors, because Their method alone is of the genuine Transmission. This is 
what everyone has long come to know and understand, be they everyday folk or 
saintly ones, commoners or lofty ones, dragons or deities. 

The kesa came into being to accord with the dissemination of the Dharma. 
Once it has been wrapped around a body and accepted, and is being kept to for a 
second—or even a flash of a moment—it will become a veritable amulet, 
safeguarding us in our resolve to realize Supreme Wisdom. 9 Should we imbue our 
trusting heart with a single line of Scripture or with the whole of the kesa verse, It 
will be a seed for our bright-mindedness for lengthy eons to come, and will 
ultimately take us to Supreme Wisdom. Moreover, if we infuse our body and mind 
with a single Teaching or a single good practice, the result will be the same. The 
thoughts in our mind arise and disappear moment after moment, yet nary a one 
permanently abides; our body is being born and is ceasing moment after moment, 
yet nowhere is there a place where it permanently abides. Nevertheless, the 
spiritual merits of our practice will undoubtedly have their time of fruition, which 
will liberate us. So the kesa is not simply a manufactured thing, nor is it something 
that spontaneously arises in nature, nor is it something that has always existed 
somewhere, nor is it something that exists nowhere: it is That which Buddhas, and 
Buddhas alone, all ultimately realize. Be that as it may, the spiritual merits from 
what is realized by practitioners who accept and keep to the kesa will undoubtedly 
come to full fruition, and will undoubtedly take them to the Ultimate. As to those 
who have sown no good seeds previously, even if they were to undergo one or two 
lifetimes more, up through immeasurable lifetimes, they would not be able to see a 
kesa, or wear a kesa, or accept a kesa with a trusting heart, or clearly understand 
what a kesa really is. If we look at China and Japan today, we will see that there are 
people unable to do so, but not because they are rich or poor, nor because they are 
dim-witted or sharp. Clearly, the wearing of a kesa is due to the sowing of good 
seeds in the past. 


9. Dogen is not asserting that the kesa has some inherent magical property which wards off 
evil; rather, it protects the wearer by serving as a constant reminder of the purpose for which 
he or she donned the robe in the first place, as well as serving as an outer sign to others of 
the wearer’s spiritual commitment. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


945 


As a consequence, those who accept and keep to the kesa should rejoice in 
their having sown good seeds in the past, and should not doubt that they have piled 
up merits and accumulated virtues. Those who have not yet acquired a kesa should 
aspire to one and, right away in this life, busy themselves with planting good seeds. 
Those who are unable to accept and keep to it due to some spiritual impediment, 
should, out of shame and remorse, admit their failings to all the Buddhas and 
Tathagatas, as well as to the Triple Treasure of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. How 
sentient beings in other countries must wish that the Tathagata’s robe and Dharma 
had been directly Transmitted to them in the same way as They were Transmitted 
in China, and that They were now present in their country too! What a deep sense 
of embarrassment they must feel; what sorrow and regret they must have that there 
has been no genuine Transmission in their country. Through what good fortune 
have we encountered the Teaching whereby the World-honored Tathagata directly 
Transmitted the robe and the Dharma? Surely, it is due to the agency of great 
spiritual merits accumulated from past lives that were spent in training to realize 
True Wisdom. 

djb 


In this present-day, degenerate world when the Dharma is in Its last phase, 
some feel no shame for themselves that they lack the genuine Transmission, while 
others envy or resent those who have received the genuine Transmission. I suspect 
that these people may well be a gang of hellions. The way things are for them now 
and the state in which they now dwell have sprung from their previous deeds and 
are not what is truly real. Were they to turn themselves around and simply respect 
the genuine Transmission of the Buddha Dharma, then this would be to really take 
refuge in learning what Buddha is. 

djb 

<X> 


Broadly speaking, we must realize that the kesa is what all Buddhas revere 
and devote themselves to. It is the Body of Buddha; it is the Mind of Buddha. It is 
called ‘the garment of liberation’; it is called ‘the robe that is a fertile field of 
blessings’; it is called ‘the formless robe’; it is called ‘the unsurpassed robe’; it is 
called ‘the robe of patient forbearance’; it is called ‘the robe of a Tathagata’; it is 
called ‘the robe of great benevolence and great compassion’; it is called ‘the robe 
that is the banner of victory’; it is called ‘the robe of supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment’. Truly, in these ways we should accept it, keep to it, and humbly 
raise it above our heads. Because it is as it is spoken of, it is not something to be 
altered to make it conform to some personal fancy. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


946 


djb 

As to the material for a robe, we use silk or cotton cloth, as it suits us. 
Cotton is not necessarily ‘pure’, any more than silk is ‘impure’. And to choose silk 
because you look down on cotton is unwarranted, laughable even. The usual 
approach of the Buddhas has been, beyond doubt, to consider a robe made from 
waste cloth as the best. 

There are ten types of waste cloth, four of which are charred cloth, cloth that 
has been chewed by an ox, cloth that rats have gnawed on, and cloth that was 
previously used for a shroud. People in all five regions of India discard such types 
of cloth in back alleys and barren fields. Since they are considered the same as 
bodily waste, they are called ‘waste cloth’. Trainees collect them, wash and dye 
them, then sew them together and use the robe for furbishing their body. Among 
these are various scraps of silk and cotton. Trainees should abandon any 
discriminatory notions about silk and cotton, and concentrate on the meaning of 
‘discarded waste material’. Long ago, when the Buddha was in one of His past 
lives, He was washing a robe of just such waste cloth in Lake Anavatapta. The 
dragon who was the lord of the lake praised Him, rained flowers down upon Him, 
and respectfully bowed to Him. In addition, there are some among the Scriptural 
teachers of the Lesser Course who hold to the theory of transformed thread, 10 a 
view which has no foundation and at which persons of the Greater Course must 
smile, for what thread is not the product of some form of transformation? O you 
ancient scholarly teachers, even though you may believe your ears when you hear 
the word ‘transformation’, you doubt your eyes when you actually see a 
transformation. 

Obviously, when you are picking up waste material, it may include cotton 
that resembles silk and silk that resembles cotton. Regional customs differ in 
myriad ways, so that there is no telling how something was manufactured, for it is 
not something that the naked eye can readily determine. Once we have obtained 
such material, we should not argue over whether it is silk or cotton, but should 
refer to it as discarded waste. Even though ordinary humans or lofty beings may 
‘continue to exist’ as waste matter after death, they will not be sentient beings, they 
will simply be waste matter. Even though a dead pine tree or chrysanthemum 
should ‘continue to exist’ as waste matter, they will not be non-sentient beings, 
they will just be waste matter. O you ancient scholarly ones, when you accept and 
trust in the principle that waste material does not mean silk or cotton, or gold or 


10. An ancient Indian view that silk is thread which is created by a living creature; it is not 
naturally occurring of itself. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


947 


silver, or jade or jewels, waste material will be what manifests before your very 
eyes. Since you had not yet let go of your opinions about silk and cotton, waste 
material was something you had not even dreamt of. 


A certain monk once asked the ancient Buddha Daikan Eno, “Is 
the robe passed on to you on Huang-mei Mountain in the middle of 
the night one made of cotton or one made of silk? Pray, tell me, what 
on earth is it made of?” 

The ancient Buddha replied, “It is not cotton, nor is it silk.” 

Understand that a kesa is neither silk nor cotton. This instruction on the 
Buddha’s Way is profound and difficult to grasp. 

The Venerable Shonawashu (‘He of Hempen Clothing’) was the Third Indian 
Ancestor connected with the Treasure House of the Dharma. From the time he was 
bom, he spent his whole life inseparable from his robe. This robe was, to be sure, a 
conventional garment whilst he was still at home, but when he left home to become 
a monk, it became a kesa. 

Also, once the female monk Shukra (‘She Who is Spotless’) had taken her 
Bodhisattva vows and put on the cotton robe, then, life after life, even during the 
periods between lives, she was inseparable from the robe. On that very day when 
she met Shakyamuni Buddha and left home to become a monk, the ordinary robe 
that she had acquired at birth was immediately transformed into a kesa, the same as 
with the Venerable Shonawashu. 

Be very clear about this: a kesa is beyond being silk or cotton or any other 
type of cloth. Moreover, the spiritual merits of the Buddha Dharma transform all 
thoughts and things, physical and mental, just as in these examples. The principle 
is unambiguous: when you leave home to take the Precepts and become a monk, 
whatever your body and mind experience as objective or subjective is transformed. 
It is only because you are confused or ignorant that you do not realize this. None of 
the Buddhas ever taught that this principle applied only to Shonawashu and 
Shukra, and therefore does not apply to you. So, have no doubts about the many 
spiritual benefits that you receive. Obviously, you should assiduously explore such 
a principle as the one just described. 

djb 


The kesa that someone dons when taking the Precepts is not necessarily of 
cotton or of silk, for indeed the Buddha’s edifying influence is difficult to 
comprehend. The precious Jewel within is beyond anything that those who 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


948 


calculate grains of sand are capable of finding. 11 So, we should probe deeply to 
clarify what has dimensions and what is beyond measurement, as well as what has 
a form and what is beyond form. This is what our Ancestral Masters who traveled 
to and from India and China investigated and correctly Transmitted. Should a 
person encounter and listen to someone who is doubtlessly making clear the 
genuine Transmission of the Ancestors, and then vainly refuse to accept the 
genuine Transmission from this Ancestral Master, such a person’s attitude would 
be hard to condone. It must be due to a lack of trust as a result of befuddled and 
foolish thinking. Such a person is one who discards what is true in order to pursue 
some fabrication, one who forsakes the Source in a desire for trifles. This may well 
take the form of a belittling contempt for the Tathagata. 

Folks who would give rise to Supreme Wisdom should always accept the 
Transmission passed on to them by an Ancestral Master. Not only have we 
encountered the Buddha Dharma, which is so hard to come by, but also, as the 
Dharma descendants of the genuine Transmission of the Buddha kesa, we have the 
opportunity to experience It directly, to explore and leam from It, to accept It, and 
to keep to It. This, accordingly, is our encountering the Tathagata; it is our hearing 
the Buddha give voice to the Dharma; it is our letting the Buddha’s radiance shine 
forth; it is our experiencing what the Buddha experienced; it is our directly 
Transmitting Buddha Mind; it is our reaching the very Marrow of Buddha; it is our 
putting on the kesa of Shakyamuni Buddha, which is before our very eyes, and it is 
Shakyamuni Buddha right before our very eyes, entrusting the kesa to us. Through 
our devoutly following the Buddha, we have humbly accepted the kesa. 


The Methods for Washing the Kesa 

Put the unfolded kesa into a clean washtub and leave it to soak for about four 
hours in boiling hot water that has been incensed. Another method is to immerse it 
in clean boiling water and wait until the water has cooled down. Nowadays, we 
customarily use hot ash-water. Here in Japan, ash-water refers to hot water 
containing lye. When the ash-water has cooled down, rinse the kesa in clean, fresh, 
hot water several times, but do not scrub it with your hands or tread on it with your 
feet. Continue in this manner until the dirt and grease have been removed. Then, 
rinse it in cold water in which some incense, such as aloes or sandalwood, has been 
mixed. After that, hang it on a clean clothes pole to dry. After it has completely 


11. A reference to scholars who are unrelenting in their involvement with making distinctions 
over terms and their meanings. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


949 


dried, fold it, put it on a high place, burn incense and strew flowers, 12 
circumambulate it to the right several times, and respectfully bow to it. Make three, 
six, or nine full bows, hands in gassho,* then kneel with hands in gassho and, 
holding the kesa in both hands, recite the kesa verse. After this, stand up and 
respectfully put the kesa on in the usual manner. 


The World-honored One, in advising His great assembly, said: 

In the ancient past when I was in the presence of Ratnagarbha 
Buddha—the Buddha Who is the Storehouse of the Treasure—I was 
the Bodhisattva of Great Compassion. At that time, as the 
B o dhi s attva- Maha s attv a* of Great Compassion, I made the following 
vow before Ratnagarbha Buddha, saying, “World-honored One, when 
I have finally become a Buddha, there may be sentient beings who 
have entered into My Teaching and, leaving home to become monks, 
have donned a kesa. They may include monks or laity, male or female, 
who show a lack of faith by breaching grave Precepts, putting false 
views into practice, or acting contemptuously towards the Triple 
Treasure, thereby accumulating for themselves all sorts of heavy 
defilement. But if they give rise to a feeling of respect for even the 
span of a single thought, so that they regard the large patchwork robe 
with esteem, or if they give birth to a feeling of respect so that they 
regard the World-honored One, or the Dharma, or the Sangha with 
esteem, then, O World-honored One, 1 declare that, if even one among 
such sentient beings in any of the Three Courses* is incapable of 
receiving confirmation of ultimate Buddhahood, and, as a result, that 
person regresses or completely turns away, then I have deceived and 
misled all present-day Buddhas within all worlds everywhere for 
countless, limitless, immeasurable eons, and I will surely fail to 
realize supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. 


12. Whether Dogen intended the conventional phrase referring to incense and flowers to be 
taken literally is uncertain. ‘Strewing flowers’ is sometimes understood to mean ‘reading 
Scriptures’. Burning incense and strewing flowers is also associated with the offering of 
one’s training. For more about the metaphoric meaning of these phrases, see 
“Bodhidhanna’s Discourse on Pure Meditation” in Buddhist Writings on Meditation and 
Daily Practice, (Shasta Abbey Press, 1994), pp. 369-71. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


950 


“World-honored One, after I have become a Buddha, should 
any being—be it a dragon or a demon, human or non-human—be able 
to don this kesa, revere and make offerings to it, reverence and praise 
it, then should that being be able to catch sight of the smallest bit of 
this kesa, he or she will be able to keep from regressing from within 
the Three Courses . 13 

“If there are sentient beings pressed by hunger and thirst—be 
they spirits who are violent because of their dire poverty, or persons 
of humblest birth, or beings who act like hungry ghosts*—should they 
acquire a bit of a kesa, even four inches square, then they will be able 
to have their fill of what they thirst and hunger for and will be able to 
realize fully what they have prayed ever so long for. 

“When there are sentient beings who are acting with each other 
in offensive ways, stirring up malicious and hostile thoughts and 
intentions, and keeping things roiling until a fight breaks out— 
whether any of those engaged in such fighting be dragons, fierce 
spirits, gandharvas, asuras, garudas, kinnaras, mahoragas, 
kumbandhas, or pishachas, human or non-human 14 —should any of 
them call this kesa to mind, then, due to the influence of the kesa, they 
will give rise to a heart that is compassionate, a heart that is soft and 
flexible, a heart that is free of malice and hostility, a heart that is 
tranquil and devoid of defiling passions, a virtuous heart that is well- 
tamed and subdued, and thereby be able to return to a state of 
immaculacy. 

“Should there be someone who is in the midst of an armed 
conflict, a civil litigation, or a criminal prosecution, and should this 
person, whilst holding onto a fragment of this kesa, go among those 
involved and, for self-protection, make offerings to it, show reverence 
for it, and venerate it, this person and others like him will lose the 
inclination to injure others through aggression, to coerce them, or to 


13. That is, after having reverently accepted a kesa and put it on, some may become so 
accustomed to wearing it that they forget that they have it on, but should they then catch 
sight of even a bit of it, this will remind them of why they donned the kesa in the first place, 
which will enable them to keep from regressing in their training and practice. 

14. ‘Dragons...pishachas’ comprise a list of quasi-mythical beings who were originally given to 
violent or seductive acts but who, upon conversion to Buddhism, became spiritual 
guardians, each type having governance over some protective function. Hence, they may 
manifest as some human or non-human being fulfilling that function. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


951 


treat them with ridicule and scorn. Constantly being able to surpass 
others in this regard, such a person will come through all such 
difficulties as these. 

“World-honored One, if my kesa were unable to fulfill the 
saintly merits of such acts as these aforementioned five, then I have 
deceived and misled all present-day Buddhas within all worlds 
everywhere for countless, limitless, immeasurable eons, and will 
surely fail to realize supreme, fully perfected enlightenment in the 
future and to do the work of a Buddha. Moreover, having strayed from 
the virtuous Dharma, I would certainly be incapable of exposing and 
destroying whatever leads others off the Path.” 

O my good disciples, the Tathagata Ratnagarbha then extended 
His golden-hued right arm and, rubbing the crown of the head of this 
Bodhisattva of Great Compassion, said warmly, “Well put, well put, 
my splendid disciple! What you have said is a great, precious treasure 
that is both wise and virtuous. You will ultimately realize supreme, 
fully perfected enlightenment. This kesa garment will be able to fulfill 
these five saintly merits and create great benefits.” 

O my virtuous disciples, as the Bodhisattva-Mahasattva of 
Great Compassion, having heard the Buddha’s praise, I felt a joy 
arising in My heart that made it dance beyond measure. It then 
happened that the Buddha extended His golden-hued arm, its hand 
with its long, webbed fingers as soft and supple as a heavenly robe. 

Once He had rubbed My Bodhisattva head, My Bodhisattva body was 
immediately transformed, resembling the figure of a young man of 
twenty. 

O my good disciples, the great crowd in that assembly, all the 
various creatures, such as the dragons, the celestial beings, the 
gandharvas, both the human and the non-human, put their hands in 
gassho as an offering, bestowing many kinds of blossoms on Me as 
the Bodhisattva of Great Compassion, and they danced and made 
music, offering this as well. After they had praised Me in these 
various ways, they dwelt in silence. 

From the time that the Tathagata was in the world up to this very day, 
whenever bodhisattvas and monks search through the Scriptures and monastic 
regulations for the merits of the kesa, without fail, they take these five merits to be 
the principal ones. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


952 


Truly, the kesa is the Buddha robe for all Buddhas in the three temporal 
worlds of past, present, and future. Though we say that its spiritual merits are 
beyond measure, to attain the kesa amidst the Teaching of Shakyamuni Buddha 
must surpass the attaining of a kesa amidst the Teaching of any other Buddha. 
Should you ask why, well, long ago when Shakyamuni Buddha, as the 
Bodhisattva-Mahasattva of Great Compassion, was in a state conducive to His 
realizing Buddhahood, He made five hundred great vows in the presence of 
Ratnagarbha Buddha, in particular taking solemn vows like the five just mentioned 
on the spiritual merits of the kesa. These merits, moreover, must surely be limitless 
and beyond the mind’s ability to grasp. Consequently, what we call ‘the genuine 
Transmission down to today of the Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow of the 
World-honored One’ is the kesa robe. The Ancestral Masters who genuinely 
Transmitted the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching have invariably 
made a proper Transmission of the kesa. Sentient beings who have kept to this robe 
when it was passed on to them and who have humbly placed it atop the crown of 
their head as an act of respect have invariably realized the Way within two or three 
lifetimes. Even if someone were to put one on as a joke or for some personal profit, 
this act will be a cause for his or her realizing the Way. 


Our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna once said: 

If people who have left home to be within the Buddha Dharma 
break the Precepts and lapse into impure ways, once they have 
brought their impure ways to an end and obtained liberation from 
them, they will be like the female monk Utpalavarna (‘She Who Has 
the Hue of a Lotus Blossom’) in the Jataka Scripture on past lives. 
While the Buddha was in the world, this female monk attained the Six 
Transcendent Abilities 15 and realized arhathood.* She once entered 
the house of a member of the nobility, and, continually extolling the 
Dharma of leaving home to become a monk, she admonished the 
wives and daughters of the noble, saying, “My sisters, you should 
leave home and become monks.” 

The noblewomen all replied, “We are young and our bodies are 
comely. For us to keep to the Precepts would indeed be hard, and we 
would surely break them on occasion.” 


15. Dogen will explain what these are later in this discourse. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


953 


The monk replied, “If you break the Precepts, then you break 
them. Just leave lay life behind!” 

They then asked her, “If we break the Precepts, then we shall 
certainly fall into some hellish state, so why would you have us break 
them?” 

She replied, “If you fall into some hell, then you fall into some 

hell.” 

All the women broke out in laughter and said, “In a hell we will 
receive the consequences of our defiling deeds, so why would you 
have us fall into such a state?” 

The monk replied, “In recalling my own past lives, there was a 
time when I had become a prostitute. I dressed up in all sorts of 
clothes and told the age-old licentious stories. One day, I dressed up 
as a female monk, just as a joke. As a direct result of this I became a 
female monk in Kasho Buddha’s time. After a while, I took to 
depending on my aristocratic demeanor and gave rise to pride and 
arrogance, thereby breaking monastic prohibitions as well as Precepts. 
Because of the defilement from breaking monastic prohibitions and 
Precepts, I fell into a hellish state where I suffered the consequences 
of my various defiling acts. After I had suffered these consequences, I 
met Shakyamuni Buddha and left home to become a monk, ultimately 
obtaining the Six Transcendent Abilities and realizing arhathood. Due 
to this, I have come to know that if we leave home and take the 
Precepts, even though we may later break Them, we will realize 
arhathood because of the karmic effect of the Precepts. If I had merely 
done bad things without having any effects from the Precepts, I would 
not have realized the Way.” 

Nagarjuna then continued with Utpalavarna’s narrative: 

“In times long past, I had fallen into hellish states for generation 
after generation, getting out of some hell only to become a wicked 
person once again. When that wicked person died, again a hell was 
entered, and nothing whatsoever had been gained. Now, because of 
this, I have come to realize that if someone leaves home to be a monk 
and takes the Precepts, even though that person later breaks the 
Precepts, because of once having taken Them, that person will obtain 
the fruits of the Way.” 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


954 


The first cause for this female monk, who had the hue of a lotus blossom, to 
realize the arhaf s way was not something meritorious on her part, but just her 
having donned a kesa as a joke, and, due to the merits of that, she had now realized 
the Way. In a second lifetime, she met Kasho Buddha and became a female monk. 
In a third lifetime, she met Shakyamuni Buddha and became a great arhat, 
equipped with the Three Insights and the Six Transcendent Abilities. The Three 
Insights are the awareness of what is really transpiring within us, the awareness of 
what has brought about the karmic effects from our past lives, and the awareness of 
whether or not our defiling passions have truly come to an end. The Six 
Transcendent Abilities are the ability to freely deal with external situations or 
circumstances as needed, the ability to know what is really on the minds of others, 
the ability to see what is really transpiring with others, the ability to hear what 
others are really saying, the ability to grasp what is really causing people to behave 
the way they do, and the ability to determine whether or not someone has truly 
brought his or her defiling passions to an end. Truly, when she was just a person 
who was doing wicked deeds, she would die only to enter a hellish state. Emerging 
from that hellish state, she would again become someone doing wicked deeds. But 
when she felt the impact of the Precepts, even though she would fall into some 
hellish state due to her breaking of the Precepts, nevertheless, They were ultimately 
the cause of her realizing the Way. Now, anyone who may put on a kesa as a joke 
will still be able to realize the Way by his or her third go-round. How, then, could 
anyone who put on a kesa with a pure and trusting heart for the sake of Supreme 
Wisdom fail to fully realize its spiritual merits, to say nothing of the spiritual 
merits realized by one who respectfully accepts and keeps to it during his lifetime 
and humbly raises it atop the crown of his head, for such merits are indeed so vast 
as to be immeasurable. 

djb 

CX) 


Whoever gives rise to the Mind that seeks the Way will undoubtedly accept 
and keep to the kesa, humbly raising it atop the crown of his or her head. To have 
encountered such a fortunate existence and yet fail to sow the seeds of one’s 
Buddhahood, how pitiful that would be! To have received the body of a human 
being in the Southern Continent of Jambudvipa,* to have met with the Dharma of 
Shakyamuni Buddha by being born in proximity to an Ancestral Master who is in 
the direct line of inheritors of the Buddha Dharma, and then, to no profit, to pass 
up accepting a kesa that has been directly Transmitted from person to person, a 
kesa that points directly to one’s Buddha Nature—could there be anything more 
pathetic? 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


955 


djb 

Now, as to the genuine Transmission of the kesa, a genuine Transmission 
from an Ancestral Master is, in and of itself, the genuine inheritance. It is not 
something that any other teacher can equal. And even the spiritual merits from 
accepting and keeping to the kesa whilst following a teacher who has not been 
Transmitted will be exceedingly profound. How much more, then, will merit 
accrue to us from our accepting and keeping to a kesa that we received from a 
genuine teacher, one who had legitimately been given a kesa personally by 
someone in the Transmission line! Certainly, we will then be a child or grandchild 
of the Tathagata, for we will have had correctly Transmitted to us the Skin and 
Flesh, Bones and Marrow of the Tathagata. In sum, the kesa has come to be 
legitimately Transmitted by all Buddhas everywhere, at all times, without 
interruption. It is what all Buddhas, bodhisattvas, shravakas,* and 
pratyekabuddhas* alike, everywhere and at all times, have come to safeguard and 
protect. 

djb 


In constructing a kesa, take coarse cotton cloth as your base. When you do 
not have coarse cotton cloth, use a fine cotton cloth. If you have neither coarse nor 
fine cotton, use raw silk cloth. If you have neither silk nor cotton cloth, then use, 
say, a wool twill or a thin silk gauze, all of which the Tathagata endorsed. In a 
country that does not have any variety of silk, cotton, or twill, the Tathagata also 
permitted leather kesas. 

Speaking in general terms, when dyeing a kesa, we should use blue-green, 
yellow, red, black, or purple. Whichever color we choose, it should be a loaded 
color . 16 The Tathagata always wore a flesh-colored kesa, for this is the color of the 
Kesa. The Buddha’s kesa that the First Ancestor passed on to succeeding Ancestors 
was blue-black in color, and its cloth was of Indian cotton. It is now on Mount 
Sokei. In India, it was passed on twenty-eight times, and in China, five times. Now, 
the descendants of the ancient Buddha Daikan Eno have all had Transmitted to 
them the ancient custom of the Buddha’s robe and have kept to it, which is 
something that is beyond other monks. 

Generally speaking, there are three types of kesa. The first is a waste cloth 
robe, the second a fur robe, and the third a refurbished robe. ‘Waste cloth’ refers to 
what was discussed earlier. A fur robe is made from the fur and down of beasts and 


16. That is, not a pure, intense, primary color, but one whose brightness has been toned down by 
mixing some other color in with it. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


956 


birds. Should trainees be unable to obtain waste cloth, they may gather this down 
and make it into a robe. A refurbished robe refers to one whose worn spots and 
tears have been patched and which is then presented to a trainee. We do not wear 
worldly finery. 

djb 

<X> 


The venerable monk Upali asked the World-honored One, “O 
World-honored One of Great Virtue, how many panels does a sanghati 
robe have ?” 17 

The Buddha responded, “There are nine types. And what are 
these nine? They are referred to as nine-paneled, eleven-paneled, 
thirteen-paneled, fifteen-paneled, seventeen-paneled, nineteen- 
paneled, twenty-one-paneled, twenty-three-paneled, and twenty-five- 
paneled robes. The first three of these large monastic robes have two 
long segments and one short segment in each panel, and we should 
keep to this style. The panels of the next three types have three long 
segments and one short segment, whereas the final three have four 
long segments and one short segment. Any panel that has more 
segments than these would be one whose tears have been repaired.” 

Upali once again addressed the World-honored One, saying, “O 
World-honored One of Great Virtue, how many sizes of sanghati 
robes are there?” 

The Buddha replied, “There are three, namely, large, medium, 
and small. A large one is three hasta long and five hasta wide . 18 A 
small one is two and a half hasta long by four and a half hasta wide. 
Anything between these two is called ‘medium.’” 

Upali then addressed the World-honored One, saying, “O 
World-honored One of Great Virtue, how many panels does an 
uttarasangha robe have?” 

The Buddha replied, “It has just seven panels, with each having 
two long segments and one short segment.” 


17. These are the large robes Dogen spoke of earlier. The meaning of the Sanskrit term sanghati, 
as well as other similar technical names for robes, is explained later in the text. 

18. A hasta is an Indian measure of variable length. One hasta is the distance from the intended 
wearer’s elbow to the tip of his or her fist or index finger, generally ranging between sixteen 
and twenty inches. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


957 


Upali then addressed the World-honored One, saying, “O 
World-honored One of Great Virtue, how many sizes does this seven- 
paneled robe have?” 

The Buddha replied, “It has three, namely, large, medium, and 
small. A large one is three by five hasta, and a small one is a half hasta 
shorter on each side. ‘Medium’ refers to anything between these two.” 

Upali then addressed the World-honored One, saying, “O 
World-honored One of Great Virtue, how many panels does an 
antarvasa robe have?” 

The Buddha replied, “It has five panels, each composed of one 
long and one short segment.” 

Upali again addressed the World-honored One, saying, “How 
many sizes does an antarvasa robe have?” 

The Buddha replied, “There are three, namely, large, medium, 
and small. A large one is three by five hasta, with a medium and a 
small being the same as before, that is, reduced up to a half hasta on 
each side.” 

The Buddha added, “The antarvasa robe has two additional 
types. And what are these two? The first is two hasta long and five 
hasta wide. The second is two hasta long and four hasta wide.” 

The term ‘sanghati’ translates as ‘double-layered robe’. The term 
‘uttarasangha’ translates as ‘uppermost robe’. The term ‘antarvasa’ translates as 
‘innermost robe’, and is also called ‘the lower robe’. It is also said that the sanghati 
robe is called ‘the large robe’, or ‘the robe for entering royal palaces’, or ‘the robe 
for giving Teaching’. The uttarasangha robe is referred to as ‘the seven-paneled 
robe’, or ‘the middle robe’, as well as ‘the robe for entering amongst the 
assembly’. The antarvasa robe is called ‘the five-paneled robe’, or ‘the small robe’, 
as well as ‘the robe for going about on one’s daily paths’, and ‘the robe for 
carrying out one’s temple duties’. 

We should safeguard and protect these three robes. Further, among the 
sanghati robes there is a sixty-paneled kesa that we also must not fail to accept and 
hold to. 

djb 


It is generally held that the measurements of a body depend on the span of a 
lifetime, ranging from eighty thousand years down to a hundred years. Some say 
that ‘eighty thousand years’ and ‘one hundred years’ are different; others say that 
they are equal. Between these two views, the one which says that they must be 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


958 


equal corresponds to the genuine Transmission. The dimensions of a Buddha’s 
Body and that of a human are far distant: a human body can be measured, but 
ultimately a Buddha’s Body is beyond measure. This is why, the moment a 
Shakyamuni Buddha of the present dons the kesa of Kasho Buddha, it will be 
something that is neither long nor wide. The moment the Tathagata Mai trey a 515 dons 
the kesa of a present Shakyamuni Buddha, it will be something that is neither short 
nor narrow. We must clearly perceive, unequivocally resolve, fully comprehend, 
and infer in detail the principle of a Buddha’s Body being something that is neither 
tall nor short. Lord Brahma resides high in the world of form, yet he does not see 
the crown of the Buddha’s head. Moggallana may have reached all the way to the 
distant World Whose Banner Signpost Is the Bright Light, yet he has not 
thoroughly investigated what the Buddha has voiced. It is truly beyond our minds 
to imagine or grasp that the form and voice of Buddha are one and the same, 
whether seen or heard from near or far. All the spiritual merits of the Tathagata are 
like this, so we should humbly keep these merits in mind. 


When it comes to cutting out and sewing a kesa, there is the separate piece 
robe, the pleated robe, the gathered robe, and the plain robe . 19 All of these are 
proper methods of construction. We should accept and keep to those robes that we 
have. 

djb 


The Buddha once said, “The kesa of Buddhas in any of the three temporal 
worlds is invariably backstitched .” 20 


In obtaining material for these robes, again, we consider what is immaculate 
to be best. We consider the robe of waste material to be the most immaculate. All 
the Buddhas in all the three temporal worlds, without exception, consider this 


19. The separate piece robe consists of trimmed pieces of cloth (segments) sewn into vertical 
panels, which are then joined together and bounded by strips of the base cloth. The pleated 
robe is made from an uncut piece of base cloth folded in vertical pleats and then sewed to 
form the appearance of panels. The gathered robe is made from an uncut piece of base cloth 
folded in vertical pleats, between which panels made of separate segments of cloth are then 
sewed together. The plain robe is a hemmed piece of uncut cloth. 

20. A fonn of hand sewing in which one first sews one stitch backward on the front side of the 
fabric, and then sews one stitch forward of double length on the reverse side to fonn a solid 
line of stitching on both sides. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


959 


material to be immaculate. In addition, a robe given as an alms offering by one 
with a trusting heart is also immaculate. And one purchased in the marketplace 
with untainted money is also immaculate. Even though the time within which a 
robe is to be made has been set by tradition, we are now in the decadent final days 
of the Teaching, living in a region remote from the original source, so in our 
accepting and keeping to the kesa, it would probably be best for us to do our 
cutting and sewing when we have aroused our trusting heart. 


The best key to understanding the Greater Course is that the laity—whether 
commoners or those in lofty positions—also accept and keep to the kesa. Both 
Lord Brahma and Lord Shakra have now accepted and keep to the kesa, and they 
are excellent models in the worlds of sensual desire and form. And among humans, 
the number of excellent examples cannot be calculated. Lay bodhisattvas have all 
accepted and keep to it. 

In China, both Emperor Wu of the Liang dynasty and Emperor Yang of the 
Sui dynasty accepted and kept to the kesa. Both Emperor T’ai-tsung and Emperor 
Su-tsung of the T’ang dynasty wore the kesa, trained and studied amidst the 
monastic family, and accepted and kept to the Bodhisattva Precepts . 21 Other 
folks—such as lay disciples and their wives—who have accepted the kesa and 
taken the Precepts have been excellent models in both the past and the present. 

In Japan, Crown Prince Shotoku accepted and kept to the kesa, and, whilst 
giving Dharma talks on various Scriptures, such as the Lotus Scripture and the 
Scripture on the Lion s Roar of Queen Shrimala , he experienced the auspicious 
sign of jeweled flowers raining down from the heavens. After that, the Buddha 
Dharma spread throughout our country. Although the prince is regarded as the 
nation’s imperial regent, he was, in fact, a spiritual guide and teacher for 
commoners as well as for those in lofty positions. As an emissary of the Buddha, 
he was a father and a mother to sentient beings. In our country today, even though 
the materials, colors, and measurements of kesas have been misunderstood and 
have become corrupted, that we have even heard the word ‘kesa’ is due simply to 
the influence of Crown Prince Shotoku. How sad it would be today if he had not 
shattered what was false and set up what is genuine during his time. Later, Emperor 


21. At that time in China, it was usual for the laity to take only the first five of the Ten Great 
Precepts. To take the Bodhisattva Precepts is to take all ten of these Great Precepts, as well 
as the forty-eight Less Grave Precepts. These Precepts can be found in the Scripture of 
Brahma’s Net. One translation of this appears in Buddhist Writings on Meditation and Daily 
Practice (Shasta Abbey Press, 1994), pp. 55-188 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


960 


Shomu likewise accepted and kept to the kesa, and he also took the Bodhisattva 
Precepts as well. Therefore, whether we are of imperial rank, or whether we are 
ministers or subjects, we should not delay in accepting and keeping to the kesa, as 
well as in taking the Bodhisattva Precepts. There can be no greater joy and good 
fortune for any being in human form. 


Someone once said, “The kesa that a lay person accepts and keeps to is 
called either ‘a single-stitched robe’ or ‘a secular garment ’. 22 That is, the 
backstitch was not yet used in sewing one.” It has also been said, “When laity pay 
a visit to a training hall, they need to bring with them the three Dharma robes, a 
willow twig toothpick, water for rinsing the mouth, food utensils, and a meditation 
mat. They should train and practice in precisely the same pure manner as monks 
do.” 

Such is the legacy of some ancient worthy. However, what is now passed on 
directly by the Buddhas and Ancestors is that kesas are all backstitched, whether 
conferred on rulers, ministers of state, lay disciples, or ordinary folk. A good 
example of this is the Sixth Chinese Ancestor Eno who had already received the 
genuine Transmission of the Buddha’s kesa while he was still the temple servant 
known as Lu. 

djb 


Speaking in general, the kesa is the badge and banner of a Buddhist disciple. 
If we have completely accepted and are keeping to the kesa, then every day we 
should humbly raise it above our heads. Then, with it placed upon the crown of our 
head and with our hands in gassho, we should recite the following verse: 

How great and wondrous is the robe of enlightenment, 

Formless and embracing every treasure! 

I wish to unfold the Buddha s Teaching 
That I may help all sentient beings reach the Other 
Shore. 

After this recitation, we then put on the kesa. While robed in the kesa, we should 
think of it as our teacher and look upon it as a stupa.* We also recite this verse 
when we place it on our head after having laundered it. 


22. Single stitching consists of alternating stitches of the same length, one on the front of the 
fabric and one on the back. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


961 


djb 

The Buddha said, “When you shave your head and don the kesa, you receive 
the protection of all the Buddhas. When any of you leave home behind, both the 
lofty and the humble will make venerative offerings to sustain you.” Be clear in 
your thinking: once you have shaved your head and put on a kesa, you will be 
aided and protected by each and every single Buddha. By relying on the help and 
protection of all these Buddhas, you will be able to experience the spiritual merits 
of Supreme Wisdom. Both the assemblies of lofty beings and the masses of 
commoners will make offerings to sustain such a one as you. 


The World-honored One, in advising the monk Jnanaprabha (‘He Whose 
Wise Discernment is Radiant’), spoke thus: 

The Dharma robe, based on its material, color, and dimensions, 
acquires ten superb benefits. 

First, because it blankets your body well, it keeps feelings of 
shame or embarrassment at bay and shields you with a sense of 
modesty, so that you may train with the good Dharma and put It into 
practice. 

Second, because it keeps off heat and cold, as well as 
mosquitoes, vicious creatures, and poisonous insects, you can train in 
the Way with a feeling of peace and tranquility. 

Third, it makes manifest the look of one who has left home to 
be a monk, so that those who see you will feel delight and stay far 
away from evil thoughts and feelings. 

Fourth, the kesa has the appearance of a veritable jeweled 
banner to persons of both ordinary and lofty positions, and those who 
honor and esteem it will be able to be reborn in Brahma’s heavenly 
world. 

Fifth, when we wear a kesa, it gives rise to thoughts of a 
precious banner which can extinguish whatever is bedeviling sentient 
beings and can produce all manner of happiness and virtue. 

Sixth, right from the beginning, when we construct a kesa we 
should dye it with a loaded color, thereby avoiding thoughts of greed 
engendered by the five senses, and without arousing feelings of 
covetousness or lust. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


962 


Seventh, the kesa is the immaculate robe of the Buddha, which 
permanently cuts off defiling passions because it transforms them into 
fertile fields for good. 

Eighth, when you put a kesa on your body, it wears away the 
karma from your defiling acts and, moment by moment, promotes 
your treading the path of good deeds by keeping to the Ten Precepts. 

Ninth, the kesa also resembles a fertile field because it promotes 
the good and virtuous Bodhisattva Way. 

Tenth, the kesa also resembles armor because it is able to 
protect you from being harmed by the poisonous arrows of defiling 
passions. 

O Jnanaprabha, you surely realize that whenever Buddhas, as 
well as pratyekabuddhas, shravakas, and immaculate monks, put the 
kesa upon their body, as a result of the causal effects of these ten 
benefits, these three holy types alike will sit upon the precious 
platform of liberation . 23 Wielding the Sword of Wisdom, they will 
defeat the demons of defiling passion, and these holy types, together 
as equals, will enter the various realms of nirvana. 

The World-honored One, then wishing to express this in verse, said: 

O My monk Jnanaprabha, listen well to what I say, 

The robe that is so vast a field of blessings has profits 
ten. 

Worldly clothing increases the taint of desire, 

But not so the Tathagata s Dharma attire. 

The clothes of Dharma hinder well the shame and blush 
of those with worldly minds, 

Filling all with modest thoughts that bring to fruit the 
fertile fields of happiness. 

Cold, and heat, and insect’s poisonous sting it keeps at 
bay, 

And firms the heart that seeks the Way, till to the Ultimate 
you come. 

Making clear your leaving home, it parts you from your 
greeds and lusts, 


23. The three holy types are Buddhas, lay trainees, and mo nk s. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


963 


And severs you from the false views five, that you may 
train and practice in the proper way . 24 

The kesa is as a precious flag whose sight inspires 
respect; 

Whoever humbly bows to it will gain Lord Brahma’s 
joyful gifts. 

When, as the Buddha s child, you spread your kesa wide, 
bow as before a stupa you would bow, 

For then will such joy arise that all defiling thoughts will 
disappear, making the hearts of the lofty and the 
common to be moved. 

When you refrain from putting on proud airs and come to 
deep respect, you are a monk in truth, 

And all you do will become free of worldly dust and 
cares. 

All Buddhas praise the kesa as a good and fertile field, 

As unsurpassed in profit and delight for sentient beings 
all. 

Wondrous beyond belief are the kesa s powers and 
strengths; 

It helps you to train so that your actions plant the Bodhi 
seeds. 

Their sproutings of the Truth will be as seedlings in the 
spring, 

Their wondrous fulfilling of enlightenment like autumn s 
fruits. 

Truly is the kesa a suit of armor, diamond hard, 

Impregnable against the harm from passion’s poisoned 
darts. 

So brief have I now praised these profits ten; 

Had I all eons to expound them, never could I exhaust 
what they enfold. 

Were a dragon to wrap about his body but a single kesa 
thread, 


24. The five false views are: 1) attachment to self or other, 2) belief in the existence of a self, 
whether eternal or not, 3) denial of cause and effect, 4) to hold that the preceding three 
views constitute the Truth, 5) belief that only strict adherence to the Precepts leads to 
enlightenment. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


964 


Then from a lordly garuda s feasting could he escape. 

Should some human whilst crossing the open sea but hold 
this robe, 

He need have no fear of woe from monstrous fish or any 
hungering thing. 

Though thunder roar and through an angry sky the 
lightning flash, 

The one who wears a kesa need have no fear. 

Should a layman, clothed in white, hold this robe aloft, 

All wicked, hungering beings will never dare draw nigh. 

Should such a one arouse the will to train and seek to 
leave domestic life behind 

So that, now wearied of all worldly things, he may pursue 
the Buddha s Way, 

All devilish mansions everywhere will tremble and quake, 

As this person, arrow swift, comes to truly know the Body 
of the Dharma Lord. 

These ten superb benefits have broadly encompassed all the spiritual merits 
of the Buddha’s Way. It would be good for you to explicitly explore and apply all 
the merits and virtues described in these sentences and verses. Do not scan them 
and then hastily put them aside, but look at each and every line and consider its 
import at length. These superb benefits are simply what the spiritual merits of the 
kesa are; they are not strengths arising from some trainee’s lengthy and fierce 
pursuit of spiritual benefits. 

The Buddha said, “The spiritual strengths of the kesa are beyond all 
imaginings and conceptions.” So, any attempt by ordinary persons, as well as by 
the wise or saintly, to understand these benefits by conjecture will be in vain. In 
more general terms, immediately upon our realizing the Body of the Dharma Lord, 
we will indeed be wearing the Kesa. There has never been anyone from ancient 
times onwards who realized the Body of the Dharma Lord and was not wrapped in 
the Kesa. 

djb 


The most immaculate material for a robe is waste cloth. Its spiritual merits 
are evident throughout the three divisions of the canon—the Scriptural Discourses, 
the monastic regulations, and the commentaries—of both the Greater and the 
Lesser Courses, so we would do well to make inquiries of those who have explored 
them extensively. We also need to clarify in detail what other materials may be 
used for making a robe. This is something that Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


965 


after Ancestor have made abundantly clear and have correctly Transmitted to us, 
and They are persons unsurpassed by any others. 

In the Middle Agama Scripture , the Buddha said: 

O all you discerning ones, let us suppose that there is someone 
whose physical behavior is unstained, but whose manner of speaking 
and intentions are tainted. If an astute person should see this, and then 
feel any hostility arising, this feeling must, by all means, be dispelled. 

O all you discerning ones, let us further suppose that there is someone 
whose bodily actions are tainted, but whose speech and intentions are 
unstained. If an astute person should see this and then feel any 
hostility arising, this feeling too must, by all means, be dispelled. And 
just how should such a one dispel this feeling? 

O you discerning ones, such a person should be like the hermit 
monk living in a forest who gathers up pieces of waste cloth. He 
discards from this waste material whatever part he sees is shabby, or 
soiled with excrement, or stained with urine, nasal mucus, or any 
other unclean substance. After he has spotted such a cloth, he picks it 
up with his left hand and stretches it out with his right. If there are any 
parts free from stain of excrement, urine, mucus, or any other unclean 
substance, or any part not riddled with holes, he then tears that part off 
and takes it. 

In like manner, O you discerning ones, if there is someone 
whose bodily actions are stained while his speech is untainted, do not 
think about that person’s tainted bodily behavior. Simply keep in 
mind the purity of his speech. If astute people feel hostility arising at 
what they see, by all means they should dispel it in this manner. 

This is the method by which hermit monks of the forest handled waste cloth. 


There are four kinds and ten types of waste cloth. When gathering waste 
cloth, first, take those parts that have no holes. Next, reject those parts too deeply 
or too long stained by feces or urine so that they cannot be washed clean. You may 
take those parts that are washable. 

The Ten Types of Waste Cloth 

First, cloth chewed by an ox. 

Second, cloth gnawed by rats. 

Third, cloth singed by fire. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


966 


Fourth, menstrual cloth. 

Fifth, cloth discarded from childbirthing. 

Sixth, cloth abandoned at a wayside shrine for birds to 
peck apart. 

Seventh, cloth from a dead person’s clothing abandoned 
at a grave site. 

Eighth, cloth from abandoned prayer flags. 

Ninth, cloth from robes discarded by officials upon their 
advancement to higher rank. 

Tenth, burial shrouds discarded by those returning from a 
funeral. 

These ten types of cloth are what people discard; they are not something that 
people in general make further use of. We pick these up and make them into the 
immaculate material of a kesa. They are what all Buddhas at all times have sung 
the praises of and have come to make use of. This waste cloth robe is therefore 
what the ordinary and the lofty, as well as dragons and other such beings, hold in 
great esteem, protect, and defend. Gather these pieces of cloth and make them into 
a kesa, for they are indeed the foremost of pure materials: they are the foremost in 
immaculacy. 

In Japan today, such waste cloth robes do not exist. Though you may try to 
seek them out, you will be unable to come across them. How sad that our country 
is so small and remote! Instead, we need to use the clean materials that donors have 
given us as alms-cloth. Or, we may make into kesas some cloth bought in the 
marketplace by persons whose money comes from an untainted livelihood. Such 
waste material as this, as well as what has been earned through an untainted 
livelihood, is, indeed, neither silk nor cotton, neither gold nor silver cloth studded 
with pearls or jade, nor patterned cloth or silk gauze that is brocaded or 
embroidered: it is simply waste cloth. This waste material is not for the sake of 
humble dress, nor for the sake of beautiful raiment: it is simply for the sake of the 
Buddha Dharma. Using it for clothing is precisely the genuine Transmission of the 
Skin and Flesh, Bones and Marrow of all Buddhas at all times. It is the genuine 
Transmission of the Treasure House of the Eye of the True Teaching. Moreover, we 
should not ask commoners or lofty ones about the virtues of this, but should learn 
of them through training with the Buddhas and Ancestors. 

djb 


Whilst I was in Sung China doing my training on the long bench in the 
Meditation Hall, I noticed that every morning following the striking of the wake-up 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


967 


block, the monks who sat on either side of me would raise their folded kesa in a 
gesture of offering, place it atop their head, respectfully make gassho, and recite a 
verse to themselves. What they were saying in that verse was: 

How great and wondrous is the robe of enlightenment, 

Formless and embracing every treasure! 

I wish to unfold the Buddha s Teaching 
That I may help all sentient beings reach the Other 
Shore. 

On the occasion when I learned of this, a feeling I had never experienced 
before welled up in me. A joy filled my body to overflowing; tears of gratitude, 
stealing from my eyes, rolled down my cheeks and wet the collar of my robe. The 
reason for this was that I had been reading the Agama Scriptures shortly before, 
and though I had seen the passage on humbly offering up the kesa above one’s 
head, I was not clear about the ceremonial procedure. Now I was personally 
witnessing it and was filled with such joy and worshipful admiration at being able 
to see manifest before me its deeper intent. When I was in my native land, there 
had been no teacher to instruct me in this, nor any good spiritual companion. How 
could I not regret the days and years I had so vainly spent or not grieve their 
passing? But upon seeing and hearing what was now before me, I was able to 
rejoice because of some good deed done in a past life. If I had vacantly remained in 
my homeland, how could I possibly have sat shoulder-to-shoulder with these 
Treasures of the Sangha who had received and actually donned the kesa of a 
Buddha! My joy and sorrow were not unmixed, as my myriad tears issued forth. 

Then, in silence, I took a vow: no matter how, be I ever so incompetent, I 
will become an inheritor of the Buddha Dharma, I will correctly Transmit the True 
Teaching, and, out of pity for the sentient beings in my homeland, I will help them 
see and hear the Teaching concerning the robe that the Buddhas and Ancestors 
have genuinely Transmitted. The vow that I took then has now proved not to be in 
vain. The lay and monastic bodhisattvas who have accepted and keep to the kesa 
are many, for which I rejoice. These companions who have accepted and keep to 
the kesa, without fail, humbly raise their kesa above their head each morning and 
evening, since the spiritual merits of this will be unsurpassed. The practice of 
reading or listening to a single line from Scripture or the whole of this kesa verse 
was prevalent everywhere throughout all the highways and byways of China, and 
was as common as trees and stones. And even if the spiritual merits from the 
genuine Transmission of the kesa were encountered for only a scant day and night, 
they would still be pre-eminent and unsurpassed. 



Shobogenzo: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa 


968 


djb 

In Great Sung China during the tenth lunar month of the seventeenth year of 
the Chia-ting era (November 1223), two Korean monks came to Ch’ing-yiien 
Prefecture. One was called in Chinese Chi-hsuen, and the other was called Ching- 
yiin. These two incessantly talked about the meaning of Buddhist Scriptures, for 
they were scholarly men of letters, and, though they were also monks, they had 
neither kesa nor alms bowl and resembled those who wander through life in 
ignorance. Sad to say, they had the superficial form of monks but lacked the 
Dharma of monks. This may have been due simply to their being from a small, 
remote nation. When those from Japan who have the superficial form of monks 
travel to other countries, they too resemble those like Chi-hsuen. 


Shakyamuni Buddha, before His enlightenment, humbly raised the kesa 
above His head, never ignoring it for some twelve years. You are already His 
distant descendants, so train well with this practice. Turn away from bowing to 
celestial beings, spirits, rulers or their ministers, since all such acts are done in the 
vain pursuit of fame and gain. Instead, offer them the spiritual merit from your 
humbly raising the Buddha’s kesa above your head, for that will be joy indeed! 

Given to the assembly at Kannonddri in Koshohorin-ji Temple on the first day of winter in the 
first year of theNinji era (October 17, 1240). 



85 

On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 

(Hotsu Bodai Shin) 


Translator’s Introduction: This discourse was given on the same day as was Discourse 67: On 
Giving Rise to the Unsurpassed Mind (Hotsu Mujo Shin). Because of the nature of its content, it 
may have been intended primarily for monastics. 


Generally speaking, there are three types of mind. “The first is the mind of 
chitta, which we call the discriminative mind. The second is the mind of hridaya, 
which we call the mind of grass and trees. The third is the mind of vriddha, which 
we call the True Mind.” Among these, we invariably employ the discriminative 
mind to arouse bodhichitta, the enlightened Mind. Bodhi is an Indian word which 
we call the Way, or what is True. Chitta is an Indian word which we call the 
discriminative mind. Without this discriminative mind we could not give rise to the 
enlightened Mind. I am not saying that this discriminative mind is the enlightened 
Mind; rather, we give rise to the enlightened Mind by means of the discriminative 
mind. 

Giving rise to the enlightened Mind not only means vowing to take all 
sentient beings across to the Other Shore before one has taken oneself across, but it 
also means actively engaging in the task. Though somebody may be considered 
lowly, when such a one gives rise to this Mind, that person is already a spiritual 
guide and teacher for all sentient beings. 

This Mind is neither something innate nor something that suddenly rises up 
as new at this moment, nor is It something singular or something plural, nor is It 
something spontaneous or something planned, nor is It something within our 
physical body, nor is our body something within that Mind. This Mind is not 
something that has permeated the entire universe of thoughts and things, nor is It 
something of the past or something of the future, nor is It something that is present 
or something that is absent, nor is It something intrinsic or something produced by 
an external cause, nor is It something of a combined nature or something of a 
causeless nature. Even so, at that point when we have established a spiritual 
connection with a Master, we give rise to the Mind that aspires for enlightenment. 


969 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


970 


It is not something that the Buddhas and bodhisattvas* confer upon us, nor is It 
something that we can do for ourselves. This Mind arises due to Its being 
established through a spiritual connection with our Master and, consequently, It is 
not something spontaneous. 

Giving rise to the enlightened Mind occurs, by and large, in human beings in 
the southern continent of Jambudvipa.* Only on rare occasions does this event 
occur among those in the eight states where it is difficult to hear of Buddhism. 1 
After giving rise to the enlightenment-seeking Mind, one does the training and 
practice for three asamkhyeya eons or for a hundred great eons. 2 In some cases, 
people train for immeasurable eons and then become a Buddha. In other cases, 
people train for immeasurable eons to help sentient beings reach the Other Shore, 
ultimately not becoming a Buddha but just continuing to help ferry sentient beings 
across, doing this solely for the benefit of sentient beings. They are pursuing the 
course that is the delight of bodhisattvas. 

To speak more broadly, the Mind of enlightenment operates via the three 
modes of behavior—body, speech, and mind—without a moment’s idleness, 
always helping sentient beings give rise to the Mind of enlightenment and leading 
them along the Buddha’s Way. To waste one’s time bestowing worldly pleasures on 
people does not benefit sentient beings. Giving rise to this Mind and giving rise to 
this training for the enlightenment of others go far beyond the outer bounds of 
delusion versus enlightenment. Having transcended the three worlds of desire, 
form, and beyond form, such persons have become preeminent among all beings, 
and have gone quite beyond shravakas* and pratyekabuddhas.* 


The bodhisattva Makakasho, wishing to pay homage to Shakyamuni 
Buddha, composed the following eulogy: 


* See Glossary. 

1. The eight states where it is difficult to encounter a Buddha or hear His Teaching are: 1) 
being bom in one of the hells; 2) being born as a hungry ghost; 3) being bom as an animal; 
4) being born in the Northern Continent of Uttarakuru where all is pleasant; 5) being born in 
one of the heavens where life is long and easy; 6) being deaf, dumb, and blind; 7) being an 
emdite scholar; 8) being bom in the intermediate period between a Buddha and His 
successor. 

2. These time measurements may seem to be of inordinately long duration, but they are simply 
of indeterminate length: it takes just as long as it takes. 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


971 


Awakening one’s intention and arriving at the Ultimate, 
though two, are not separate. 

Of these two states of mind, the former is the more 
difficult to arrive at, 

So when those who have not yet arrived at the Ultimate 
first lead others to arrive, 

I, for that reason, bow to their first giving rise to their 
intention. 

With Your first arising, You were already a Teacher for 
humans and gods, 

Surpassing those who merely listen and those who seek 
the Goal only for themselves. 

The arising of such an intention as Yours has surpassed 
the triple world, 

And therefore we call it the supreme state above all. 

The arising of the intention means giving rise, right off, to the intention to help 
others reach the Other Shore, even though you yourself have not yet reached that 
Place. We call this giving rise to the enlightened Mind for the first time. Once you 
have given rise to this Mind, you will then encounter Buddhas to whom you should 
make alms offerings, and you should hearken to Their Teaching. Further, should 
you then strive to give rise to the enlightened Mind, it would be like adding frost 
atop snow. 3 

The term ‘the Ultimate’ refers to the Wisdom that is the result of 
Buddhahood. Were we to compare the state of supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment with the state of giving rise to the enlightened Mind for the first 
time, it is like comparing the universal, all-consuming conflagration of the final 
age with the light of a firefly. Even so, when you give rise to the heart that helps 
others reach the Other Shore, even though you yourself have not yet reached that 
Place, there is no difference between the two. As the Tathagata said in the Lotus 
Scripture , 

I constantly make this My intention: 

How may I help living beings 
Enter the Unsurpassed Way 
And quickly realize Buddhahood? 


3. That is, having once given rise to the enlightened Mind there is no need to strive after It as if 
it had not yet arisen. 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


972 


This is what is meant by the immeasurable life of the Tathagata. Giving rise to the 
intention, doing the training and practice, and awakening to the fruits of 
Buddhahood are the same for all Buddhas. 

‘To benefit all sentient beings’ means helping sentient beings give rise to the 
heart that helps others reach the Other Shore even though they themselves have not 
yet reached that Place. Even though you yourself have not yet reached that Place, 
you should not reckon that you will become a Buddha simply on the basis of your 
ability to help others reach the Other Shore. Even if the ripening of your 
meritorious activities, which could turn you into a Buddha, were at its full, still you 
should offer this merit to sentient beings in order to help them realize Buddhahood 
and recognize the Truth. 

This Mind is not ours, or someone else’s, or something that comes to us, yet 
after this intention arises, whenever we raise aloft the Great Earth, everything turns 
into gold, and whenever we sprinkle the waters of the Great Ocean, they 
immediately turn into the sweet dew. After that, whenever we lay hold of soil or 
rocks, sand or pebbles, we make use of this enlightened Mind, and whenever we 
explore the gushing forth of water and the blazing up of fire, we are personally 
shouldering the enlightened Mind. Hence, to offer as alms one’s nation and city, 
one’s spouse and children, the seven treasures,* men and women, one’s head and 
eyes, one’s marrow and brains, one’s body and flesh, or one’s hands and feet, all 
are the hustle and bustle of an enlightened Mind; all are an enlightened Mind’s 
playfulness, which is like a fish frolicking in a pool of water. 

Chitta, our mind that is engaged in discriminating at this very moment, is 
neither close to us nor distant from us; it is neither ourselves nor someone else. 
Even so, if we use this mind to turn ourselves towards the principle of helping 
others awaken before we ourselves are fully awakened, without retreating or 
turning away from it, this is our giving rise to enlightened Mind. Thus, if we 
employ enlightened Mind in making an alms offering of grass and trees, tiles and 
stones, gold and silver, and rare treasures, which all sentient beings hold onto as if 
these things were their own possessions, how could this not be our giving rise to 
enlightened Mind? 

Because Mind, as well as all thoughts and things, is beyond self and other, 
beyond both together, or beyond being without a cause, if we should give rise to 
this enlightened Mind, even for a split second, all the myriad thoughts and things 
will become Its additional effects. 

Generally speaking, the arising of Mind and the realizing of Truth rely upon 
the instantaneous arising and vanishing of all things. If things did not arise and 
vanish instantaneously, previous moments of evil actions would not yet have 
passed. And if previous moments of evil action had not yet passed, later moments 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


973 


of good actions could not arise now. Only a Tathagata alone clearly knows the 
measure of this moment. The Teaching that our mind in any single moment can 
give rise to a single utterance and that an utterance in any single moment can 
express a single word is also true, but it is true only of a Tathagata alone; this is not 
something that those of the other two Courses are capable of. As a rule, there are 
sixty-five moments within the time it takes for someone to snap his fingers, during 
which the five skandhas*—that is, the five components of existence—arise and 
vanish, but ordinary, unawakened people have not noticed or recognized this 
though they may have sensed it. Based on the length of a tatkshana, which is 
comprised of a hundred twenty moments, in the passing of a single day and night 
there are sixty-four hundred million, ninety-nine thousand, nine hundred and 
eighty moments during each of which the five skandhas arise and vanish. Even so, 
ordinary, unawakened people have not taken notice of this, and because they have 
not taken notice of it, they have not given rise to the enlightened Mind. Those who 
do not know the Buddha Dharma or who do not trust the Buddha Dharma do not 
believe in the principle of the arising and vanishing of moments. 

Anyone who has clarified what the Tathagata’s Treasure House of the Eye of 
the True Teaching, which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana, is certainly believes in 
this principle of the arising and vanishing of moments. Now that we have 
encountered the Tathagata’s giving expression to it in the Scriptures, we may seem 
to be experiencing it as if it had fully dawned on us, but if we are barely aware of it 
during the span of a tatkshana, we can only take on faith that this principle must be 
so. If we fail to clarify and understand through direct experience all of the Dharma 
that was expressed by the World-honored One, it will be as if we do not know what 
the length of a moment is. As trainees, do not be reckless and act proud or arrogant. 
Not only are we ignorant of the smallest of things but we are also ignorant of the 
largest. Should ordinary sentient beings rely on the power of the Tathagata’s Truth, 
they too will see the whole of the three-thousandfold worlds that comprise the 
universe. In sum, as we pass from fully existing to intermediately existing, and 
from intermediately existing to fully existing again, everything moves on, moment 
by moment. 4 Thus, whatever our intentions, we are led by our deliberate actions, so 
that the cycle of birth and death rolls on without stopping even for a single 
moment. With our body and mind rolling on like this through the cycle of birth and 
death, we should immediately give rise to the enlightened intention of helping 
others reach the Other Shore, even though we ourselves have not yet reached that 


4. ‘Intermediately existing’ describes the period between one moment of existing and the next 
moment of existing. 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


974 


Place. As we simply give rise to enlightened Mind, even if we regret having a body 
and mind, they are what arises, ages, sickens, and dies, and ultimately they are not 
our possession. 

Oh, how unceasingly and swiftly sentient beings go through life from arising 
to vanishing! 

djb 


While the World-honored One was in the world, there was a 
monk who came to call on Him. The monk bowed, his head 
respectfully touching the Buddha’s feet. He then arose and, out of 
deference, stood to the side and, addressing the World-honored One, 
said, “At what speed does the course of a living being’s life—from its 
arising to its departing—go?” 

The Buddha replied, “Although I could tell you, you would not 
understand.” 

The monk then asked, “Is there some example that could 
illustrate it?” 

The Buddha said, “There is. And I shall tell it to you now, for 
your benefit. Consider, for example, four fine archers. Each takes up 
his bow and arrow, then the four, standing together back to back, 
prepare to shoot in the direction each is facing. Now, there is a nimble 
man who comes along and says to them, ‘Now, if you will all shoot 
off your arrows at the same time, I will be able to catch them all 
before any of them touch the ground.’ What do you think? Would 
such a one be nimble or not?” 

The monk said to the Buddha, “He would be exceedingly swift, 
O World-honored One.” 

The Buddha then said, “The swiftness of that man is not as fast 
as that of an earth-dwelling yaksha. 5 And the swiftness of an earth¬ 
dwelling yaksha is not as fast as that of a sky-dwelling yaksha. And 
the swiftness of a sky-dwelling yaksha is not as fast as the swiftness 
of the Four Celestial Lords. And the swiftness of those Celestial Lords 
is not as fast as the swiftness of the two orbs of sun and moon. And 
the swiftness of the two orbs of sun and moon is not as fast as the 
swiftness of the resolute celestial children. It is they who pull the 


5. A yaksha is a belligerent demon that enjoys stirring things up. After its conversion, it 
becomes a guardian of Buddhism. 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


975 


chariot whose wheels are the orbs of sun and moon. These celestial 
beings are swift at rolling things. The course of a living being’s life— 
from its arising to its departing—passes swifter still. It rolls on in 
every moment, without the slightest pause.” 

The swiftness with which the cycle of arising and vanishing rolls on in every 
moment during the course of our life is like this. You who are doing the practice 
instant by instant, pray, do not forget this principle. While you are experiencing 
this swiftness with which the cycle of arising and vanishing rolls on in every 
moment during the course of your life, if you give rise to a single thought of 
helping others arrive before you yourself have done so, the Life that is eternal will 
manifest before your very eyes. All the Buddhas in the ten quarters during the three 
periods of time, along with the Seven Buddhas,* the twenty-eight Ancestors in 
India and the first six Ancestors in China, as well as all the other Ancestral Masters 
who have Transmitted the Buddha’s Treasure House of the Eye of the True 
Teaching have maintained and relied on this enlightened Mind. Those who have 
not yet given rise to this enlightened Mind are not our Ancestral Masters. 


Question 120 in the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple states, 
“Have you awakened to enlightened Mind?” You clearly need to realize that what 
this is saying is that, in learning the Truth of the Buddhas and Ancestors, 
awakening to enlightened Mind is unquestionably foremost. This is the continual 
Teaching of the Buddhas and Ancestors. ‘To awaken’ means to have something 
fully dawn on you. This does not refer to the great, ultimate awakening of a 
Buddha. Even if someone has entirely experienced all ten stages of 
bodhisattvahood, that person is still a bodhisattva. The twenty-eight Ancestors in 
India and the first six Ancestors in China, as well as the other great Ancestral 
Masters, were bodhisattvas; they were not the Buddha, nor were they shravakas or 
pratyekabuddhas, or anything else. Among those who are exploring the Matter* in 
the world today, there is not even one who has clearly understood that the 
Ancestors are bodhisattvas, not shravakas. Such folks today carelessly describe 
themselves as patch-robed monks or patch-robed disciples. Since they do not yet 
understand this, they have recklessly created confusion. How sad that, in these 
degenerate days of ours, the words and ways of the Ancestors have died out. 

Thus it is that even though there are those who remain in home life and those 
who have left home life behind, and even though there are those who are in lofty 
positions and those who are just ordinary folk, and even though there are those 
who say that they are suffering and those who say that they are happy, all should 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


976 


quickly give rise to the intention of helping others awaken before they themselves 
have fully awakened. Even though the world of sentient beings has its limits and is 
also beyond limits, we give rise, first off, to the intention of helping all sentient 
beings awaken, for this is what the enlightened Mind is. 

When bodhisattvas who are but one stage away from realizing Buddhahood 
are about to descend to Jambudvipa, they offer the following as their final Teaching 
for the sake of those celestial beings in the Tushita Heaven: “The enlightened Mind 
is the bright gateway to Truth, for It does not separate Itself from the Three 
Treasures.” You need to clearly understand what they are saying, namely, that not 
separating oneself from the Three Treasures is what comes after the arising of the 
enlightened Mind. After we have given rise to the enlightened Mind, we must not 
regress or wander off from It, but must steadfastly protect and defend It. 


The Buddha once said, “How do bodhisattvas protect the One 
Great Matter, which is enlightened Mind? The bodhisattvas and 
mahasattvas* are always diligent in protecting enlightened Mind, 
which is like ordinary, conventional parents in the world protecting 
their child, or like a one-eyed person protecting his one remaining eye, 
or like someone protecting his guide when going through a 
wilderness. A bodhisattva’s protecting enlightened Mind is just like 
this. Because bodhisattvas rely on safeguarding enlightened Mind in 
this way, they realize supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. Because 
they rely on realizing supreme, fully perfected enlightenment, they 
come equipped with certainty, bright-mindedness, self-worth, and 
freedom from defilement, which describes the unsurpassed great 
nirvana. For this reason, bodhisattvas protect this one Teaching.” 

Such are the Buddha’s words concerning the safeguarding of enlightened Mind. 
The reason why we protect It and do not let ourselves regress or wander off from It 
is, as popular custom would put it, because It is like the three things that are bom 
but do not reach maturity, namely, fish eggs, mangos, and bodhisattvas who have 
given rise to the intention. 6 Because, generally speaking, there are many who have 
regressed and thereby have forgotten enlightened Mind, I too once feared that I 
would regress and forget It. This is why I have protected enlightened Mind. 


6. Many fish eggs are produced but few succeed in hatching. Mango trees produce many 
flowers, but few become mature fruit. Dogen will explain the third. 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


977 


When bodhisattvas are beginners, many regress or wander off because they 
do not have a genuine Master. If they do not have a genuine Master, they do not 
hear the true Teaching, and if they do not hear the true Teaching, they are apt to 
deny causality, along with denying the end of suffering, the Three Treasures, and 
all thoughts and things in the three temporal worlds. Vainly craving the five 
fleeting desires of property, sexual involvement, food and drink, fame, and sleep in 
the present, they forget the merits of enlightenment in the future. Sometimes, in 
order to obstruct a trainee, bedevilers and tempters will take on the form of a 
Buddha or appear in the figure of one’s parents or of one’s Master, as well as of 
one’s relatives or even of heavenly beings. Then, drawing near, they make up ever- 
worsening stories, saying, “The Buddha’s Way is far, far off. You will soon enough 
experience many sufferings and deep sorrows. Better to free yourself from birth- 
and-death first and then help others awaken.” The trainee, hearing these tales, 
regresses from enlightened Mind and backs away from the conduct of bodhisattvas. 
Further, you need to know that preachings like these are nothing but the mouthings 
of demons. O my bodhisattvas, know this and do not follow such teaching. Even 
more, you should not regress or wander away from your vow to practice helping 
others to awaken before awakening yourself. 

Should you consider going against your vow to help others to awaken before 
you do, you must realize that this is the preaching of demons, the preaching of non- 
Buddhists, the preaching of wicked companions. So do not follow it. 


There are four kinds of demons: first, the demons of disturbing 
passions; second, the demons of the five components of existence; 
third, the demons of death; and fourth, the celestial demons of desire. 7 8 
‘The demons of disturbing passions’ refers to the hundred and 

o 

eight disturbing passions. When these are analyzed in detail, they 
actually comprise eighty-four thousand hindering passions. 

‘The demons of the five components of existence’ are the 
various ways in which whatever arises unites with some hindering 


7. ‘Demons’ are not necessarily something in human form, but whatever bedevils the trainee 
by creating a feeling of being hindered in one’s practice. 

The first sentence of this quotation by Dogen is from the Great Scripture on the Buddha s 
Parinirvana. The remainder is from a commentary on this sentence by our Indian Ancestor 
Nagarjuna. 

8. These are the mental functions that disturb and pollute our mind and body. 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


978 


passion. For instance, we have a body. The four basic elements of this 
body—earth, wind, water, and fire—along with whatever else is 
fashioned from these four elements,* such as what we see with our 
eyes, comprise what we call ‘the component of physical form’. 
Whatever we perceive through our senses that unites with the hundred 
and eight disturbing passions, we call ‘the component of perception’. 
Whatever distinctions our mind makes up—be they measurable or 
immeasurable—which unite with judgments, we give the name of ‘the 
component of mentation, or of thought’. When, by giving rise to 
thoughts of pleasure or disgust, we then give rise to a disposition to be 
greedy or angry, we call this activity—be it proper or improper—‘the 
component of conduct’. By uniting the six sense organs—eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue, body, and mind—with the six objects of the senses— 
color and shape, sound, odor, taste, touch, and thoughts—we give rise 
to the six kinds of mental functioning—seeing, hearing, smelling, 
tasting, feeling, and discerning; we call the immeasurable, boundless 
mind which unites with the judgments formed by these six kinds of 
mental functioning ‘the component of consciousness’. 

Because causes and conditions are impermanent, what we call 
‘the demon of death’ interrupts the flow of the five components of 
existence, and because this completely removes the three elements of 
consciousness, heat, and life, we call it ‘the demon of death’. 

‘The celestial demons’ are the lords of the world of desire. 
Because they are deeply attached to worldly pleasures and engage in 
ulterior motives to gain them, they give rise to fallacious views. They 
despise and envy the words and ways taught by all the sage and 
saintly ones for realizing nirvana, which is why we call them ‘the 
celestial demons’. In India, Mara is their name; in China, they are 
called those who can steal someone’s very life. Although such demons 
of death can truly rob you of your life, other celestial demons can also 
produce the causes and conditions for your life being stolen, and they 
can also rob one of a life of wise discernment. Because of this, they 
are called ‘killers’. 

Someone once asked me, “The one category of the demons of 
the five components of existence embraces the other three types, so 
why do you separate them into four?” I replied, “Truly, there is but 
one demon, but in order to clarify what that one means, there are the 
four.” 



Shobogenzo: On Giving Rise to the Enlightened Mind 


979 


The preceding is what our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna taught. You trainees should 
remember it and diligently study it. Do not regress or turn away from enlightened 
Mind, vainly concealing demons of fascination. 

Delivered to the assembly at Kippo-ji Temple in Echizen Province on the fourteenth day of the 
second lunar month in the second year of the Kangen era (March 24, 1244). 

Copied in the Master s hermitage on the ninth day of the fourth month in the seventh year of the 
Kencho era (May 16, 1249). 

Ejo 



86 

On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 

(Kuyd Shobutsu) 


Translator’s Introduction: The key term in this discourse is kuyd, translated in the title as 
‘making venerative offerings’, and shortened in the text itself to ‘making offerings’ or some 
variation thereof. It refers not only to selflessly giving alms and expressing gratitude to the 
Buddhas but also to showing respect for the sacred objects associated with Them, such as the 
memorial monuments called stupas, which also serve as reliquaries for sacred relics. What is 
important is the attitude of mind behind the offering, and, when it is free of any tinge of self, the 
merit that returns to the giver thereby is, as Dogen says, beyond measure. 

The original text, which is still in draft stage, is one of twelve that Dogen had not been able 
to complete before his death. It contains many excerpts, particularly from writings attributed to 
Nagarjuna. 


The Buddha once said the following in verse: 

If there were no past ages, 

There could not have been Buddhas in the past. 

If there were no Buddhas in the past, 

There could be no leaving home to accept the full 
Precepts. 

Clearly you need to keep in mind that Buddhas invariably exist in the three 
temporal worlds. When it comes to the Buddhas of the past, do not assert that They 
had a beginning, and do not assert that They had no beginning. If you erroneously 
impose upon Them Their having or not having a beginning and an end, this is not 
something that you have learned from the Buddha’s Teaching. Those who make 
offerings to Buddhas invariably become Buddhas, just as do those who leave home 
life behind and faithfully follow their Master. They become Buddhas due to the 
merit of their making offerings to Buddha. How could people who have never 
made alms offerings to even one Buddha ever become Buddhas themselves, since 
they lack a cause for becoming a Buddha? 

In the Scriptural Collection of the Past Deeds of the Buddha, it says the 
following: 

The Buddha once told Moggallana, “I recall from My past 
having planted good roots in places where there were immeasurable, 


980 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


981 


unbounded World-honored Ones and having ultimately sought 
supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. 

“O Moggallana, I recall from My past having taken on the body 
of a saintly Wheel-turning Lord* and having encountered thirty 
billion Buddhas, all sharing the same name of Shakya. I, the 
Tathagata, along with My assembly of disciples, out of our esteem for 
Them, sustained Them by respectfully making offerings to Them of 
the four necessities: namely, shelter, clothing, food, and medicine. At 
that time, those Buddhas did not foretell My future by saying, ‘You 
will realize supreme, fully perfected enlightenment and become one 
who understands the ways of the world, who is a teacher for ordinary 
people as well as those in lofty positions, and who is the World- 
honored One, for at some future time You will indeed be able to 
realize True Wisdom.’ 

“O Moggallana, I recall from My past having taken on the body 
of a saintly Wheel-turning Lord and having encountered eight billion 
Buddhas, all sharing the same name of Dipankara, the One Who Sets 
the Lamplight Ablaze. I, the Tathagata, along with My assembly of 
disciples, out of our esteem for Them, sustained Them by respectfully 
making offerings to Them of the four necessities: namely, shelter, 
clothing, food, and medicine, along with banners and canopies, 
flowers and incense. At that time those Buddhas did not foretell My 
future, saying, ‘You will realize supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment and become one who understands the ways of the 
world, who is a teacher for ordinary people as well as those in lofty 
positions, and who is the World-honored One.’ 

“O Moggallana, I recall from My past having taken on the body 
of a saintly Wheel-turning Lord and having encountered three billion 
Buddhas, all sharing the same name of the One Who Nourishes. I, the 
Tathagata, along with My assembly of disciples, made offerings to 
Them, completely supplying Them with the four necessities. At that 
time, those Buddhas did not foretell My future, saying, ‘You will 
certainly become a Buddha.’” 

In addition, He made offerings to countless other Buddhas. While in the body of a 

saintly Wheel-turning Lord, He surely would have ruled over the four continents 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


982 


and his supplies for making offerings to Buddhas must truly have been abundant. 1 
If He was a great, saintly Wheel-turning Lord, He would have been lord over a 
three-thousandfold world. His offerings to Buddhas at that time were beyond the 
estimation of ordinary people today. Even if the Buddha were to explain it to them, 
it would be difficult for them to comprehend. 

In the eighth chapter, “Pure View”, of the Scripture That Is the Buddha s 
Treasure House , it says the following: 

The Buddha once told Shariputra, “I recall from My past, when 
I was chasing after supreme, fully perfected enlightenment, I 
encountered thirty billion Buddhas, all sharing the same name of 
Shakyamuni. I then became a saintly Wheel-turning Lord and, for the 
purpose of seeking after supreme, fully perfected enlightenment, I 
made offerings of shelter, clothing, food, and medicine to all of Them 
and to Their disciples. Even so, those Buddhas did not foretell My 
future, saying, ‘You will certainly realize Buddhahood in some future 
lifetime.’ And why was that? Because My giving had an ulterior 
motive. 2 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past that I was able to 
encounter eight thousand Buddhas, all of whom were called One of 
Constant Radiance. I then became a saintly Wheel-turning Lord and, 
for the purpose of seeking after supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment, I made offerings of shelter, clothing, food, and 
medicine to all of Them and to Their disciples. Even so, those 
Buddhas did not foretell My future, saying, ‘You will certainly realize 
Buddhahood in some future lifetime.’ And why was that? Because My 
giving had an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past that I encountered sixty 
thousand Buddhas all of whom were called One Who Is the 
Brightness of the Light. I then became a saintly Wheel-turning Lord 
and, for the purpose of seeking after supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment, I made offerings of shelter, clothing, food, and 
medicine to all of Them and to Their disciples. Even so, those 


1. The four continents refer to the four regions that lay around the spiritual Mount Sumeru. 

2. Namely, seeking to ‘get’ supreme enlightenment, as if it were something to be purchased by 
doing virtuous deeds. Also, there is no mention in the quotations in this discourse that He 
sought enlightenment for the sake of helping others to realize the Truth. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


983 


Buddhas did not foretell My future, saying, ‘You will certainly realize 
Buddhahood in some future lifetime.’ And why was that? Because my 
giving had an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past My encountering three 
billion Buddhas, all of whom were called One who Nourishes. I then 
became a saintly Wheel-turning Lord and made offerings of the four 
necessities to all of Them, but none foretold My future because My 
giving alms had an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past a time when I succeeded in 
encountering eighteen thousand Buddhas, all of whom were called 
One Who Is a Lord of the Mountain and whose eon was called the 
Upper Eight. Within this assembly of eighteen thousand Buddhas, all 
of us shaved our head, donned a kesa,* and studied the practice of 
supreme, fully perfected enlightenment, but none foretold My future 
Buddhahood because of My having an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past My being able to meet five 
hundred Buddhas, all of whom were called One Who Is Atop the 
Lotus Blossom. I then became a saintly Wheel-turning Lord and made 
alms offerings to all of Them and to Their disciples, but none foretold 
My future Buddhahood because I had an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past having had the opportunity 
to meet five hundred Buddhas, all of whom were called One Whose 
Virtue Is Majestic. Although I gave alms to one and all, none forecast 
My becoming a Buddha because of My having an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past My being able to meet two 
thousand Buddhas, all of whom were called Kaundinya. I then became 
a saintly Wheel-turning Lord for the sake of Them all, giving alms to 
one and all, but none foretold My becoming a Buddha because of My 
having an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past My encountering nine 
thousand Buddhas, all of whom were called Kasho. I supplied Their 
assembly of Buddhas and disciples with alms in the form of the four 
necessities, but none predicted My future Buddhahood because of My 
offering having an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past that there was a period of 
ten thousand eons, during which no Buddha emerged. At that time, 
there were ninety thousand pratyekabuddhas* during the first five 
hundred eons. Throughout the whole of My lifetimes, I made alms 
offerings of clothes, food, bedding, and medicine to all of Them, 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


984 


without exception, while showing My respect by praising Them. 
During the next five hundred eons, I again made alms offerings of the 
four necessities to all of Them, without exception, while showing My 
respect by praising Them. 

“O Shariputra, when these thousands of eons had completely 
passed, there were no more pratyekabuddhas. I then died in 
Jambudvipa* and was reborn in the Brahma Heaven, becoming its 
great Lord Brahma. 3 Tossing about like this for five hundred eons, I 
was then born again in the Brahma Heaven, being reborn as its great 
Lord Brahma rather than being reborn in Jambudvipa. When these 
five hundred eons had completely passed, I was reborn down in 
Jambudvipa, over which I governed. When My life came to an end, I 
was reborn in the celestial world of the Celestial Guardian Rulers of 
the Four Quarters. When My life came to an end there, I was reborn as 
Lord Indra in the Trayastrimsha Heaven with the name Shakrendra. 4 
Rolling on in this manner, I was reborn in Jambudvipa after 
completing five hundred eons and then reborn in the Brahma Heaven 
for five hundred eons, becoming its great Lord Brahma. 

“O Shariputra, for nine thousand eons only once was I reborn in 
Jambudvipa, and for another nine thousand eons I was reborn only in 
celestial worlds. At the time of the conflagration that ends an eon, I 
was reborn in the celestial world called Luminous Sound. When the 
world was completely recreated, I was again reborn in the Brahma 
Heaven. For nine thousand eons I was not reborn within the world of 
humans. 

“O Shariputra, during these nine thousand eons, there were no 
Buddhas or pratyekabuddhas. Human beings who fell into evil ways 
were many indeed! 

“O Shariputra, when these ten thousand eons had come to an 
end, there was a Buddha who emerged in the world called the 
Tathagata Who Guards the Universe, the Arhat,* the One Who Is Fully 
Enlightened, the One Possessed of Wise Discernment Who Travels the 
Way, the One Who Has Attained Emancipation, the One Who Knows 
the Ways of the World, the Unsurpassed One, the Trainer of Ordinary 


3. The Brahma Heaven is the lowest of the four meditation heavens in the world of form. Its 
inhabitants are said to be without sexual desire. 


4. The Trayastrimsha Heaven is the second of the six heavens in the world of desire. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


985 


People and Those in Lofty Positions, the Awakened World-honored 
One. At that time, when My life came to an end in that Brahma 
Heaven, I was reborn in Jambudvipa, where I became a great saintly 
Wheel-turning Lord by the name of the Lord of the Celestial 
Community and had a life span of ninety thousand years by human 
reckoning. I spent the whole of that lifetime making all manner of 
pleasant offerings to the Buddha and ninety thousand of His monks, 
while remaining intent upon chasing after supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment during these ninety thousand years. The Buddha Who 
Guards the Universe also did not predict My future Buddhahood. And 
why? Because at that time I was not able to thoroughly penetrate what 
the True Nature of all thoughts and things is, and therefore indulged in 
the viewpoint of having a personal self with its ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, during this eon, there were a hundred Buddhas 
who had left home life behind, each having a different name. At that 
time, 1 became a saintly Wheel-turning Lord for each of Them and 
spent My entire life making alms offerings to Them, along with Their 
disciples, with the intent of pursuing supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment. However, because of My having an ulterior motive, 
those Buddhas likewise did not foretell My realizing Buddhahood. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past My having been able to 
encounter a thousand Buddhas during seven hundred eons of 
indeterminate length, all of whom were called One Who Is as the 
Golden Sands of the River Jambu. During the whole of that life, I 
made offerings to Them of the four necessities, and still none foretold 
My realizing Buddhahood because of My having an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past My having been able to 
encounter six hundred twenty myriad Buddhas during those great 
seven hundred eons of indeterminate length, all of whom were called 
One Who Sees the True Form of All Things. At that time, 1 became a 
saintly Wheel-turning Lord and throughout My life made all manner 
of pleasant alms offerings both to Them and to Their disciples, but 
again, none foretold My future Buddhahood because I had an ulterior 
motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past My having been able to 
encounter eighty-four Buddhas during those great seven hundred eons 
of indeterminate length, all of whom were called One of Imperial 
Form. At that time, I became a saintly Wheel-turning Lord and 
throughout My life made all manner of pleasant alms offerings both to 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


986 


Them and to Their disciples, but none foretold My future Buddhahood 
because I had an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra, I recall from My past My having been able to 
encounter fifteen Buddhas during those great seven hundred eons of 
indeterminate length, all of whom were called One Who Is as Radiant 
as the Sun. At that time, I became a saintly Wheel-turning Lord and 
through my life made all manner of pleasant alms offerings both to 
Them and to Their disciples, but none foretold My future Buddhahood 
because I had an ulterior motive. 

“O Shariputra I recall from My past My having been able to 
encounter sixty-two Buddhas during those great seven hundred eons 
of indeterminate length, all of whom were called One Whose 
Tranquility Is Spiritually Good. At that time, I became a saintly 
Wheel-turning Lord and throughout my life made all manner of 
pleasant alms offerings both to Them and to Their disciples, but none 
foretold My future Buddhahood, because I had an ulterior motive. 

“I tossed about like this until I met Dipankara, the Buddha 
Whose Radiance Is Constant, whereupon I was immediately able to 
realize the non-arising of all thoughts and things. Because of this, 
Dipankara Buddha foretold My future Buddhahood, saying ‘In the 
future, after the present eon has passed, You will be able to realize 
Buddhahood, and You will be called Shakyamuni the Tathagata, the 
Arhat, the One Who Is Fully Enlightened, the One Possessed of Wise 
Discernment Who Travels the Way, the One Who Has Attained 
Emancipation, the One Who Knows the Ways of the World, the 
Unsurpassed One, the Trainer of Beings High and Low, the Awakened 
World-honored One. ’ ” 

From His initial encounter with thirty billion Shakyamuni Buddhas up to His 
meeting the Tathagata Dipankara, He constantly served as a saintly Wheel-turning 
Lord, spending His whole life offering Them alms. Wheel-turning Lords may well 
live for more than eighty thousand years. His was an alms offering of all manner of 
pleasant things during each lifetime of some eighty or ninety thousand years. The 
one He called Dipankara, the Buddha Whose Radiance Is Constant, is the one we 
know as Dipankara, the Buddha Who Sets the Lamplight Ablaze. In both 
Scriptures, the Buddha-to-be encountered thirty billion Shakyamuni Buddhas. 
What is voiced in the passages from the Scriptural Collection of the Past Deeds of 
the Buddha and from the Scripture That Is the Buddha’s Treasure House is 
essentially the same. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


987 


djb 

CX) 

During His first immeasurable eon, Shakya Bodhisattva* 
encountered seventy-five thousand Buddhas whom He served and to 
whom He gave venerative offerings. The first was called Shakyamuni, 
and the last was one called Ratnashikhin, the One Whose Topknot 
Contains the Jewel. In His second immeasurable eon, He encountered 
seventy-six thousand Buddhas whom He served and to whom He gave 
venerative offerings. The first one was Ratnashikhin, the One Whose 
Topknot Contains the Jewel, and the last was one called Dipankara, 
the One Who Sets the Lamplight Ablaze. In His third immeasurable 
eon, He encountered seventy-seven thousand Buddhas whom He 
served and to whom He gave venerative offerings. The first one was 
Dipankara, the One Who Sets the Lamplight Ablaze, and the last was 
one called Bibashi, He Whose Reflections Are Excellent. 5 During the 
ninety-one eons while He was exploring the deeds done in the past for 
which He was receiving karmic* effects, He encountered the Six 
Buddhas, whom He served and to whom He gave venerative offerings. 

The first of the six was Bibashi Buddha and the last was one called 
Kasho Buddha. 

Generally speaking, in making offerings to Buddhas during the three great eons of 
indeterminate length, He did not begrudge Them anything, beginning with His 
very life and including such things as His kingdom and cities, His wife and 
children, His seven royal treasures, and His male and female servants. 6 This is 
something that goes beyond the ken of ordinary people. Sometimes He made Them 
offerings of golden millet piled high in silver bowls. At other times He made Them 
offerings of the Seven Treasures* piled high in gold and silver bowls. And 
sometimes He made offerings of sweet beans, or of flowers taken from the water 
and the land, or of sandalwood, aloes, and other types of incense. And sometimes 
He made offerings to Dipankara Buddha of five-stemmed blue lotus flowers 
bought at the price of five hundred gold pieces. He even made an offering to 
Dipankara Buddha of His deerskin kesa. 


5. Bibashi Buddha is the first of the Seven Buddhas, of whom Shakyamuni Buddha is the 
seventh. 

6. The seven royal treasures are the Golden Wheel, wise elephants, swift horses, the divine 
Pearl, able ministers, women as precious as jewels, and loyal generals. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


988 


When it comes to offerings for Buddhas, as a rule you need not make 
offerings of what you think must surely be important to Them, just hasten to make 
your offerings while you are still alive, without letting any time—day or night— 
pass by in vain. Of what value is gold or silver to a Buddha? Of what value are 
incense and flowers to a Buddha? Even so, Their accepting what is offered is due 
to Their great wisdom and great compassion in helping us human beings to 
increase our merit. 

djb 

CX) 


In the twenty-second fascicle of the Great Scripture on the Buddha’s 
Parinirvana , it says the following: 

The Buddha once said, “O My good disciples, I recall that 
immeasurable, unbounded eons ago, when the world at that time was 
said to be corrupt, there was a World-honored Buddha who was called 
the Tathagata, the Arhat, the One Who Is Fully Enlightened, the One 
Possessed of Wise Discernment Who Travels the Way, the One Who 
Has Attained Emancipation, the One Who Knows the Ways of the 
World, the Unsurpassed One, the Trainer of Beings High and Low, the 
Awakened World-honored One. For the sake of His assembly, He was 
going to give voice to a great Teaching on His passing, a Teaching like 
this present one. At that time, I turned away from where My friends 
were in order to hear what that Enlightened One was about to say to 
His assembly concerning His Great Passing. Having heard of this 
topic, My heart was filled with joy and I desired to supply Him with 
an alms offering, but I was so poor that I had no possessions to give 
Him. Although I wanted to offer My own body for sale, unfortunately 
it did not sell, so I decided to return home. On My way back home, I 
met a man on the road, and I asked him, ‘I am desirous of offering my 
body for sale. Could you not buy it?’ The man replied, ‘The task that I 
have at my home is beyond what anyone could endure. But if you 
were able to do it, I would indeed buy it. ’ Accordingly, I asked him, 

‘What task is it that no one could endure to do?’ The man, seeing My 
interest, replied, ‘I have a dreadful illness, for which a good physician 
has prescribed that I must take two or three servings of human flesh a 
day. If you, good sir, could supply me with two or three servings of 
your flesh daily, I would by all means provide you with five gold 
coins.’ When I had heard this, a joy arose in My heart. I then told him, 

‘If you will supply me with the coins and allow me seven days to 
wind up my affairs, I will return to you.’ The man responded, ‘Seven 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


989 


days won’t do. If you will do as I have asked, I can allow you one 
day.’ 

“O my good disciples, I then took those coins and returned to 
where the Buddha was and bowed before Him, My forehead touching 
His feet. I then took all that I had received and gave it to Him as an 
alms offering. After that, I listened to His Teaching with an earnest 
heart. But at the time I was dull-witted, so even though I heard His 
Teaching, I was only able to retain the following stanza: 

The Tathagata awoke to what nirvana is 

And cut Himselffree from birth and death forever. 

If you listen to this with a sincere heart, 

You will ever know joy beyond measure. 

“Having taken this verse in, I forthwith returned to the sick man’s 
house. 

“O My good disciples, after My return I gave the man two or 
three pieces of My flesh daily, but because of the karmic effect of My 
reciting that verse, I experienced no pain. Day after day, without 
ceasing, I completed a whole month. 

“O My good disciples, due to the karmic effect of this, the man 
recovered from his illness and My body also returned to normal, 
leaving no wounds or scars behind. At that time, seeing the merit that 
My body had been so fully supplied with, I gave rise to the intention 
to seek supreme, fully perfected enlightenment, for if the strength of 
one of His verses was like this, how much more so were I to fully 
accept, preserve, and recite His whole Scripture! Seeing that this 
Scripture had such profit as this only strengthened My resolve, and I 
vowed that if I were able to realize Buddhahood at a future time, I 
would take the name of Shakyamuni. 

“O My good disciples, because of the strength from the karmic 
effects of this one verse, I have given voice to the whole Scripture 
today for the sake of ordinary people as well as those in lofty 
positions within this great assembly. 

“O My good disciples, because of these karmic effects you 
should know that this Great Scripture on the Buddha s Parinirvana is 
wondrous beyond comprehension, creating immeasurable, boundless 
merit. Accordingly, this Scripture is the Treasure House of Fully 
Awakened Tathagatas, of That which is the Profoundly Mysterious.” 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


990 


The bodhisattva who would sell his own body at that time was a cause from 
the past for the arising of our present-day Shakyamuni Buddha. When we search 
through other Scriptures, we learn that at the very beginning of the first eon of 
indeterminate length, there was a time when He made venerative offerings to a 
previous Shakyamuni Buddha. At that time, He was a tiler who went by the name 
of He Who Is a Great Radiance. When He gave alms to the previous Shakyamuni 
Buddha, along with His disciples, He made three kinds of offerings: namely, 
meditation cushions, sweetened water, and candles. At that time, He made a vow 
that His nationality, name, life, and disciples would be one and the same with those 
of this previous Shakyamuni Buddha. 

The vow that He made has already been fulfilled today. Thus, when you 
consider making an offering to the Buddha, do not say that your body is 
insufficient or that your home is devoid of any value. This account of someone 
selling his own body in order to make an offering to the Buddhas is genuine 
Teaching by our present-day Great Master, the Venerable Shakyamuni. Who would 
not take delight in it? In this story, the Buddha describes someone who would cut 
off three pieces of his own bodily flesh day after day. Even if that person had been 
the sick man’s good spiritual friend, it is not something that any friend could bear 
to do. Even so, aided by his profound desire to give alms to a Buddha, he 
performed the good deeds just described. We are now able to hear the True 
Teaching of the Tathagata because He was able to dispense with His fleshly body 
in ancient times. The four lines of the present stanza are beyond anything that can 
be bought with five gold coins. During your three immeasurable great hundred 
eons, do not forget your receiving and discarding of lives. Truly, there will be merit 
that will boggle the mind in your awakening to the Radiance, just as all the 
Buddhas have done. The disciples who inherit the Dharma should, in all humility, 
receive It upon the crown of their head and recite It from memory. The Tathagata 
has already stated that the power of a single verse can be like this, so immensely 
profound It is. 

djb 

CX) 


In the “Expedient Means” chapter of the Lotus Scripture , there is the 
following verse: 

If people at stupas and shrines, 

And before bejeweled statues and their painted forms 
Make offerings of flowers and incense, banners and 
canopies, 

And all with a reverent heart, 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


991 


Or have others make music 

By beating drums, blowing horns and conches, 

Playing panpipes and flutes, lutes and lyres, 

As well as harps and cymbals and gongs, 

And make all such wondrous sounds as these 
To be their offering, 

Or if, with a heart filled with joy, 

They sing the praises of the Buddha s merit, 

Though it be but a single small sound, 

All will realize the Buddha s Way. 

Even if people with a scattered mind 
Should make an offering to His painted form, 

Though it be but a single flower s bloom, 

They will, at length, meet Buddhas beyond count. 

Or if they bow in deepest respect, 

Or simply make gassho * 

Though it be with the raising of a single hand 
Or a slight nod of the head, 

And thereby make their offering to a pictured Saintly 
One, 

They too, at length, will meet Buddhas beyond count. 

And, personally realizing the Supreme Way, 

They will help countless beings reach the Other Shore. 

This is the very Countenance of the Buddhas in the three temporal worlds. It is 
Their very Eye, so you should strive with all diligence to meet those of wise 
discernment and emulate them. Do not let time vainly pass by. As Great Master 
Sekito Kisen once said, “Do not waste time.” Spiritually beneficial actions like 
these produce Buddhahood in every case and will do so in the past, present, and 
future. There cannot be two ways, or three ways. 7 Realizing the fruits of 
Buddhahood is due to one’s making offerings to Buddhas. 


Our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna once said the following in verse: 

In our seeking the fruits of Buddhahood, 

To extol a single verse, 


7. That is, there is only one way to realize Buddhahood in any time period. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


992 


To recite a single ‘Homage ’, 

To burn a single pinch of incense, 

To offer a single flower, 

Even such small deeds as these, 

Without fail, will enable us to realize Buddhahood. 

Even though this is what our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna Bodhisattva put forth for 
himself, nevertheless we should dedicate our life to it. And what is more, it is 
something that our Great Master Shakyamuni Buddha expressed, and which our 
Ancestral Master Nagarjuna expressed and accurately Transmitted. What can be 
more wonderful than our being so fortunate as to obtain something so precious, as 
we now climb the Treasured Mountain of the Buddha’s Way and enter the 
Treasured Ocean of the Buddha’s Way? 8 Surely it must be due to the power from 
our making offerings to the Buddha over vast eons. You must not doubt that you 
will inevitably realize Buddhahood, for it is a foregone conclusion. It is precisely 
what the Buddha gave voice to. 

djb 


Furthermore, there are instances when a small cause produces 
great fruit and a small karmic condition produces great recompense. In 
our pursuit of the Buddha’s Way, if we extol a single verse, recite 
‘Homage to the Buddha’ one time, or bum a single pinch of incense, 
without fail, we will be able to realize Buddhahood. And what is 
more, if, upon hearing the Teaching, we really know the Tme Form of 
all thoughts and things, which is beyond birth and beyond death, 
beyond non-arising and beyond non-perishing, then we will not likely 
lose sight of whatever karmic causes or conditions we are involved 
with. 

It is clear from this passage that what the World-honored One voiced was 
authentically Transmitted to our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna. His golden words, 
which are faithful to the Tmth, are endowed with what he had inherited through the 
genuine Transmission. Even though they are indeed what our Ancestral Master 
Nagarjuna voiced, they should not be judged by comparing them with what other 
Masters have taught. What can be a greater source of joy than our being able to 
encounter the genuine Transmission that has spread abroad what the World- 


8. ‘The Treasured Mountain’ is an allusion to Mount Sumeru, which is associated with doing 
our training. ‘The Treasured Ocean’ is an allusion to the merit realized through doing that 
training. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


993 


honored One was pointing us to? So, do not compare these saintly Teachings with 
the arbitrary and meaningless preachings of ordinary teachers in China. 


Our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna once said, “Furthermore, it 
follows that, because Buddhas revere the Dharma, They make a 
venerative offering to the Teaching and take the Dharma as Their 
Master. And why is this? Because all Buddhas in the three temporal 
worlds make the True Form of all thoughts and things Their Master.” 

Someone then asked, “Why do They not make offerings to the 
Teaching that is within Their own being, but only make offerings to 
the Teaching in others?” 

Nagarjuna replied, “To make such offerings would be to follow 
worldly ways. If monks are desirous of showing veneration to the 
Treasure of Teaching, they do not make such an offering to the 
Teaching within their own being, but make it to others who are 
preserving the Teaching, who know the Teaching, who understand the 
Teaching. Buddhas are no different. Even though They have the 
Teaching within Their own being, still, They make venerative 
offerings to the Teaching in other Buddhas.” 

The person then asked, “Granted that monks, like Buddhas, are 
not seeking for good fortune or virtue, so why do they make 
venerative offerings?” 

Nagarjuna replied, “The Buddha had been cultivating all 
manner of meritorious deeds over immeasurably long eons, always 
doing what was good. Even so, He did not seek any manner of 
recompense. He made His venerative offerings out of His reverence 
for meritorious deeds. 

“For instance, when the Buddha was alive, there was a blind 
monk who, nevertheless, was able to sew. One day, his needle came 
unthreaded. Thereupon, he asked, ‘Is there someone who so longs for 
the merit from performing good deeds that he would thread this needle 
for me?’ At that very moment, the Buddha had just arrived where the 
monk was and said to him, ‘I am one who longs for the merit from 
performing good deeds, so I will come and thread your needle.’ This 
monk, upon recognizing the Buddha’s voice, immediately stood up, 
put on his kesa, and then prostrated himself before the Buddha’s feet, 
saying, ‘O Buddha, You are already filled to the brim with merit , so 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


994 


why do You say that You long for more?’ The Buddha responded, 
‘Though I may already be filled with merit, I profoundly recognize 
My debt of gratitude for that merit, the effects and recompense from 
good deeds done in the past, and the power of meritorious actions. My 
having attained preeminence among all sentient beings is due to the 
merit from performing good deeds, which is why I long for it.’ The 
Buddha, having finished His praise of meritorious actions, then gave 
an impromptu Dharma Teaching for the monk’s sake. Having attained 
the Pure Eye, this monk’s fleshly eyes were also made clear.” 

I heard this story a long time ago during an evening talk in my late Master’s 
quarters. Later, I was able to check up on it, comparing it against the passage in the 
Commentary on the Heart Scripture. The instructive retelling by my late Master 
who had Transmitted the Dharma to me was clear, without anything left out. This 
passage is in the tenth fascicle of the Commentary on the Heart Scripture. It was 
clear from this that all Buddhas, without exception, take the True Form of all 
thoughts and things to be Their great Teacher. The Venerable Shakyamuni Buddha 
had also given witness to the eternal Truth of all Buddhas. 

Taking the True Form of all thoughts and things to be one’s great Teacher 
means making offerings out of deep respect for the Three Treasures of Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha. For immeasurable, indeterminately long eons, Buddhas have 
amassed meritorious deeds and good spiritual roots without seeking any 
recompense, but simply making offerings out of reverence for meritorious actions. 
Having arrived at the state of wise discernment, which is the fruition of 
Buddhahood, They are fond of doing small virtuous acts, such as threading a 
needle for a blind monk. If you desire to clarify what the meritorious actions are of 
someone who brought Buddhahood to fruition, the present story is certainly a 
precise account of it. 

Therefore, meritorious actions that are based on both the wise discernment 
that is a fruit of Buddhahood and on the underlying principle of what the True 
Form of all thoughts and things is, are not something akin to what ordinary, 
everyday people in the world today would fancy them to be. What ordinary people 
thi nk today is that the True Form of all thoughts and things refers to the 
manufacturing of evil, and that the wise discernment which is the fruition of 
Buddhahood simply means having an ulterior motive. False views like these, even 
though they are known to have existed for eighty thousand eons, have never been 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


995 


free of the eternalist view of past eons or of the nihilistic view of future eons. 9 So 
how could they possibly fully realize that the True Form of all thoughts and things 
is something that each and every Buddha has penetrated through and through? The 
reason for this is that each Buddha and every Buddha has thoroughly explored the 
True Form of all thoughts and things. 

djb 

CX) 

Generally speaking, there are ten types of venerative offerings: 10 

First, making a venerative offering to the Buddha’s Person; 

Second, making a venerative offering to the shrine attached to 
His stupa; 11 

Third, making a venerative offering to a stupa, a shrine, or 
whatever else represents the body of that Buddha; 

Fourth, making a venerative offering to that Buddha where 
there is no such representation; 

Fifth, making a venerative offering by oneself; 

Sixth, urging others to make venerative offerings; 

Seventh, making a venerative offering of goods and money to 
the Buddhas or to Their shrines; 

Eighth, making a venerative offering with a devout mind; 

Ninth, making a venerative offering with a non-attached mind; 

And tenth, making a venerative offering of one’s devotion to 
Buddhist practice. 

Among these, Number 1, making a venerative offering to the Buddha’s 
Person, is explained in the commentary as: “Providing an alms offering to the 
physical body of a Buddha is called making a venerative offering to the physical 
body of a Buddha. 

Number 2, making a venerative offering to the repository of a Buddha, is 
called making a venerative offering to the shrine attached to His stupa. It says in 


9. The eternalist view is that there is something that continues through time as an unchanging, 
unchangeable essence. The nihilistic view is that there is a self which comes to an end at the 
time of death. 

10. Quoted by Dogen from the Writings on the Teachings of Mahayana (Daijogi-sho). 

11. Stupa is a Sanskrit term for a pagoda-shaped structure, which customarily contains the 
funeral ashes of someone who is regarded as a Buddha. The shrine, or in Sanskrit caitya, is a 
ceremonial chapel which is attached to a stupa and which customarily does not contain 
relics. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


996 


the Code of Behavior for the Members of the Greater Sangha, “That which houses 
relics we call a stupa, and that which contains no relics we call a shrine.” Some say 
that both are called a caitya. Also, what is called a stupa in Indie languages is also 
called a pagoda. Also, what is translated here as ‘shrine’ is called a caitya in 
Sanskrit, which in the Agarna Scriptures was pronounced ‘shicha’. But it seems to 
make no difference whether we call it a stupa or a shrine. Even so, as the great 
Tendai Meditation Master Nangaku Eshi said in his commentary, My Humble 
Explanation of the Meditative State That Is a Blossoming of the Dharma : 
“Wholeheartedly do we respectfully bow to the relics of the Buddhas throughout 
the whole universe and to Their venerable portraits, to Their caityas and to Their 
stupas, to Them as Tathagatas of many treasures, and to the treasured stupa that is 
the whole body that They have discarded.” Clearly, stupas and shrines, as well as 
relics and portraits, seem to be separate things. 


The following account comes from the thirty-third fascicle of the Code of 
Behavior for the Members of the Greater Sangha, entitled “The Teaching 
Regarding Stupas”: 

Once when the Buddha was wandering about while sojourning 
in the country of Koshala, He came upon a Brahman who was tilling 
the soil. Upon seeing the World-honored One passing by, he stuck his 
ox-goading staff into the ground as a prop and respectfully bowed to 
the Buddha. The World-honored One, having seen this, broke out in a 
smile. 

His monks said to Him, “We’d really like to hear what has 
caused You to smile.” 

Thereupon, He told His monks, “This Brahman has just paid 
homage to two World-honored Ones.” 

The monks then asked, “Which two Buddhas do you mean?” 

The Buddha then told the monks, “Under that very staff which 
he used when bowing to Me, there is the stupa of Kasho Buddha.” 

The monks then said to the Buddha, “We pray that You will let 
us see the stupa of Kasho Buddha.” 

The Buddha then told the monks, “You must defer to this 
Brahman and ask him for this plot of land, along with its clod of 
earth.” 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


997 


The monks thereupon sought this from the Brahman. The 
Brahman forthwith offered it to them. The World-honored One then 
made the seven-jeweled stupa of Kasho Buddha appear. Its height was 
one yojana,* and the width of its face was half a yojana. When the 
Brahman saw this, he immediately said to the Buddha, “World- 
honored One, my family name is Kasho, and this is the stupa of our 
Kasho.” 

At that time when the World-honored One was fashioning the 
stupa for Kasho Buddha at that place, the monks asked the Buddha if 
the World-honored One would permit them to contribute the earth that 
they had received from the Brahman, to which the Buddha replied that 
they could. He thereupon gave voice to the following poem: 

A hundred thousand loads of purest gold 
Are not the equal of a single lump of soil 
Used, with devoted mind, 

To fashion a Buddha s stupa. 

The World-honored One then personally erected Kasho 
Buddha’s stupa. From its square base, which was bordered on all four 
sides with a railing, there arose two circular terraces, with ornamental 
tusk-like structures coming out from the base at its four comers. From 
the top, there arose a tall pole adorned with banners and ringed with 
parasols. The Buddha said, “This is how a stupa should be 
constructed.” Once the setting up of the stupa was finished, the World- 
honored One Himself made prostrations to it out of respect for the 
past Buddha. 

The monks then asked the Buddha. “World-honored One, may 
we too make prostrations to Him?” 

The Buddha responded, “You may.” He then composed the 
following poem: 

Even hundreds of thousands of gold coins 
Brought here as people s offering of alms 
Do not equal the respect of someone of good 
heart 

Bowing before a Buddha s stupa. 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


998 


At that time, the local people, having heard of the World- 
honored One’s constructing a stupa, brought incense and flowers as 
offerings to the World-honored One. Because the World-honored One 
had paid respect to a Buddha of the past, He forthwith accepted the 
flowers and incense and offered them to the stupa. 

The monks then asked the Buddha, “May we too make 
offerings?” The Buddha replied, “You may.” He then composed the 
following poem: 

Even a hundred thousand carts filled with pure gold 
Brought here as an alms offering 
Do not equal an offering offlowers and incense 
By one of good heart. 

A great assembly then gathered like clouds. The Buddha then 
instructed Shariputra, “You should give voice to the Dharma for the 
sake of these people.” Afterwards, the Buddha composed the 
following poem: 

Even an alms offering of pure gold 
Enough to fill a hundred thousand Jambudvipas 
Does not equal one offering of Dharma 
That persuades others to pursue the practice and 
training. 

At that time, there were those sitting in the assembly who had 
realized the Way. The Buddha then composed the following poem for 
them: 

Even an offering of pure gold 

Enough to fill a hundred thousand worldly realms 

Does not equal one offering of Dharma 

That leads others to see the Truth. 

At that time, a Brahman of unshakable faith set forth before the 
stupa a food offering for the Buddha and His monks. Then King 
Prasenajit, 12 hearing of the World-honored One’s constructing a stupa 
for Kasho Buddha, ordered seven hundred carts to be loaded with 
tiles, then coming to where the Buddha was, he bowed, touching his 
forehead to the Buddha’s feet. He then asked the Buddha, “World- 


12. The king of Koshala, who was a lay disciple of the Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


999 


honored One, I would like to enlarge this stupa. May I do so?” The 
Buddha replied, “You may.” 

The Buddha then told the great king, “In a past age, at the time 
of Kasho Buddha’s passing away, there was a ruler named He of Good 
Fortune. He was desirous of constructing for Him a stupa made of the 
Seven Treasures, when one of his ministers said to the king, ‘At some 
future time, there will be those who are opposed to the Dharma who 
will appear and will destroy this stupa, acquiring heavy wrongdoing. 
O Great King, I beg of you that you will simply construct it of tiles, 
which will then be covered in gold and silver. Even if the gold and 
silver are taken away, the stupa will still be as it was at first’. 
Thereupon, in accord with what the minister had said, the stupa was 
built of tiles, which were then covered over with a thin layer of gold 
foil. Its height was one yojana high and its front face was half a yojana 
wide. The railing was made of copper. It took seven years, seven 
months, and seven days to complete.” 

King Prasenajit then told the Buddha, “That king had an 
abundance of merit along with rare treasures. I too will now build a 
stupa, though I am not that king’s equal.” When seven months and 
seven days had passed, the stupa was completed. Upon its completion 
the king made offerings to the Buddha and His monastic community. 


The Method for Constructing a Stupa 

The base is foursquare, with a railing around the perimeter. Two 
circular terraces rise up from the base, and four tusk-like structures 
emerge from its four corners. A tall spire adorned with banners and 
ringed with parasols arises from the top. If any say, “Even though the 
World-honored One may have freed Himself from greed, hatred, and 
delusion, He still has need for a stupa,” they are harboring a violation 
of the Buddhist Precepts and, for ages, the retribution from that will 
be great indeed. The preceding is called ‘the method for constructing a 
stupa’. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


1000 


Matters Concerning Stupas 


13 


When building a temple, first off, take a survey of land well- 
suited for erecting a stupa. The stupa is not to be located in the south 
or in the west. Rather, it should be located in the east or the north. Do 
not let the place where monks will reside encroach on the Buddha’s 
land, and do not let the place where the Buddhas reside encroach on 
the place for the monks. 14 If the stupa is close to a burial grove or if 
dogs were to desecrate this area by bringing in the remains of what 
they have been eating, by all means, construct a perimeter fence. 
When you construct monks’ quarters, you should locate them in the 
west or in the south. You should build the stupa atop a high place, and 
not let water from the monks’ land flow onto the Buddha’s land, 
though water from the Buddha’s land may be allowed to run onto the 
monks’ land. Within the perimeter of the stupa, you are not to wash or 
dye your robes, set them out to dry, wear leather shoes, cover your 
head, or cover your bare shoulder. Nor should you hack and spit on 
the ground. Were you to say such a thing as, “If the World-honored 
One has rid Himself of greed, hatred, and delusion, what use does He 
have for this stupa?” you would be harboring wrongdoing that 
surpasses what has been spelled out in the monastic Precepts, and the 
karmic consequences will be heavy indeed! These things are what we 
call ‘matters concerning stupas’. 


Stupa Alcoves 

At a time when King Prasenajit paid a visit to the Buddha, he 
bowed down, respectfully touching his forehead on the Buddha’s feet, 
and asked the Buddha, “World-honored One, in making a stupa for 
Kasho Buddha, may we fashion alcoves?” 

The Buddha replied, “You may. In a past generation, after 
Kasho Buddha had passed on into parinirvana, a ruler named He of 


13. In this section, the tenn ‘stupa’ is being used as synonymous with ‘temple’ or ‘monastery’. 

14. That is, the monks’ quarters (in particular, the Meditation Hall) should be kept separate from 
the Buddha Hall, which is to be reserved for ceremonial. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


1001 


Good Fortune raised a stupa for that Buddha. He constructed alcoves 
on its four faces. On their upper parts he fashioned images of lions 
and all sorts of painted ornamental patterns. In front of them he 
constructed railings. The alcoves were places for putting flowers. 

Inside the alcoves he hung banners and parasols. 

“Should people say, ‘The World-honored One has already rid 
Himself of greed, hatred, and delusion, so why does He still take 
pleasure in glorifying Himself?’ they will be harboring wrongdoing 
that surpasses what has been spelled out in the monastic Precepts, and 
the karmic consequences of that will be heavy indeed! This is what we 
call ‘methods for stupa alcoves.’” 

It is evident that, above and beyond the wisdom from realizing Buddhahood, to 
erect a stupa for a past Buddha and to respectfully bow and make offerings to it is a 
customary practice of Buddhas. Although there have been many examples of 
actions such as these, for the present, I will just cite the preceding. As for the 
Buddha Dharma, the Sarvastivadin tradition is supreme, 15 and within that tradition, 
the Code of Behavior for the Members of the Greater Sangha is considered the 
most fundamental. The Code of Behavior for the Members of the Greater Sangha 
was first brought to China by Hoken after he had cleared a path to India through 
brambles and thorns and had climbed the Divine Vulture Peak. The Dharma that 
has been Transmitted by our Ancestors from one to another is in accord with the 
Sarvastivadin tradition. 

djb 

CX) 


Number 3, making a venerative offering to a stupa, a shrine, or whatever else 
represents the body of a Buddha, means making venerative offerings to something 
that is actually right before one’s eyes, such as a Buddha in the flesh or a shrine. 

Number 4, making a venerative offering to a Buddha where there is no such 
representation, means ‘making a venerative offering when there is no Buddha or 
shrine right before us. That is to say, we make offerings not only to what is right 
before us but also to what is not right before us, be it a Buddha, a shrine, a stupa, or 
a tomb. Making offerings to what is right before our eyes earns great merit, and 
making offerings to what is not right before our eyes earns even greater merit, 
because the scope is ever so much broader. Those who make venerative offerings 


15. The Sarvastivadin tradition, though associated with a scholastic Hinayana viewpoint, 
nevertheless shares a common viewpoint with the Mahayana Zen tradition: namely, that all 
thoughts and things have real existence, which thereby affirms the existence of this world. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


1002 


both to what is right before their eyes and to what is not right before their eyes earn 
the greatest amount of merit. 

Number 5, making a venerative offering by oneself, means using our whole 
being to make venerative offerings to Buddhas and shrines. 

Number 6, urging others to make a venerative offering to a Buddha or a 
shrine means that even though what someone has to offer is but something quite 
small, we should help that person not to be shy about offering it. That is, whether 
such an offering is actually made by oneself or by another, it is all the same. One’s 
own making of the offering earns great merit, helping others learn to make 
offerings earns twice as much merit, and making offerings together with others 
earns the greatest merit. 

With Number 7, making a venerative offering of goods and money to 
Buddhas or to Their shrines or stupas or relics, there are three types of offerings. 
The first is the offering of necessities, such as clothing and food. The second is the 
offering of venerative goods, such as incense and flowers. The third is the offering 
of ornamental objects, namely all other kinds of treasures and adornments. 

With Number 8, making a venerative offering with a devout mind, there are 
three types of devotion. With the first, one simply makes various types of offerings. 
With the second, when we have a pure and trusting heart that has faith in the virtue 
of Buddha, then the underlying principle is in accord with what is offered. The 
third is the heart that transfers one’s merit to others, which is the making of our 
offering from within a heart that seeks Buddha. 

Number 9, as to making a venerative offering with a non-attached mind, 
there are two kinds. The first is the mind being untainted, by which we let go of all 
our mistakes. The second is the things offered being untainted, in which we let go 
of all the mistakes that we have made through our not conforming to the Dharma. 

Number 10 is making a venerative offering that attains the Way. That is to 
say, what we call making a venerative offering that attains the Way is our doing 
venerative deeds that comply with the goal. Some call ‘attaining the Way’ by 
names like ‘making an offering of the Dharma’, and some call it ‘making an 
offering of one’s actions’. As to these, there are three types: The first treats making 
an offering that attains the Way as making offerings of material goods. The second 
treats making an offering that attains the Way as making an offering that complies 
with what is good. The third treats making an offering that attains the Way as 
making an offering of one’s training and practice. 

Making venerative offerings to the Buddha already encompasses these ten 
types of offerings. Similar categories also apply to the Dharma and the Sangha. 
That is to say, making venerative offerings to the Dharma is our making offerings 
to the principles that the Buddha taught, as well as to the methods of practice that 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


1003 


He gave expression to, including the Scriptural texts. And making venerative 
offerings to the Sangha is our making offerings to saintly assemblies of all Three 
Courses,* as well as to their temples, along with their iconography and stupas, 
including monastics who have not yet fully awakened. 


Next, there are six types of minds that make venerative offerings. 

The first is the unsurpassed mind that produces good fortune 
like a field abundant with rice. It is the most excellent good fortune 
that arises within such an abundant field. 

The second is the unsurpassed mind that recognizes the virtue 
of indebtedness, since all virtuous joys arise from the Three Treasures. 

The third is the unsurpassed mind that arises within all sentient 
beings. 

The fourth is the mind that is as hard to encounter as a 
flowering udumbara tree. 

The fifth is the solitary, unique mind that is one with the three- 
thousand great-thousandfold universe. 

The sixth is the mind that is fully equipped with dependable 
understanding of all realms and what lies beyond such realms. 

In short, the Tathagata, who fully comprehends the ways of the world and the ways 
beyond the worldly, has been able to supply sentient beings with a reliable 
foundation. This is called ‘being fully equipped with dependable understanding’. If 
you make venerative offerings to the Three Treasures with these six attitudes of 
mind, then even if your offerings are small, you will receive immeasurable, 
boundless merit. How much more so if your offerings were plentiful! 

We should make such alms offerings with a sincere heart, for, without fail, it 
is how Buddhas have been accustomed to making offerings. Stories in Scriptures 
and monastic regulations about such alms offerings are plain to see, still, the 
Buddhas and Ancestors have customarily Transmitted this practice personally. 
Occasions for making venerative offerings abound in the days and months you 
spend attending on others and carrying out your work duties. The methods for 
placing images and relics, for making venerative offerings and respectfully 
bowing, for building stupas, and for constructing shrines have been authentically 
Transmitted only in the quarters of our Ancestors of the Buddha. If these methods 
had not descended from our Ancestors of the Buddha, they would not have been 
authentically Transmitted. 



Shobogenzo: On Making Venerative Offerings to Buddhas 


1004 


Also, if such methods have not been authentically Transmitted in accord 
with the Dharma, they will contradict the Dharma. When the ways of making 
offerings contradict the Dharma, they will not be genuine. When the ways of 
making offerings are not genuine, the merit therefrom will be negligible. Beyond 
question, you need to leam the methods for making venerative offerings that are in 
accord with the Dharma and authentically Transmit them. Meditation Master Reito 
spent many years tending to Daikan Eno’s stupa. The temple worker Ro spent his 
days and nights pounding rice as his alms offering for the assembly. Both of these 
are instances of methods for making venerative offerings that accord with the 
Dharma. 16 These are but a small sample of such instances, which 1 do not have the 
time to quote extensively. You should make your alms offerings in a similar 
manner to theirs. 

On a day during the summer retreat in the seventh year of the Kencho era (1255). 

Copied in the Monks’ Hall at Eihei-ji Temple on the twenty-third day of the sixth lunar month in 
the second year of the Koan era (August 2, 1279). 


16. Reito was a monk in Eno’s monastery on Mount Sokei. After Eno’s death, Reito spent the 
rest of his life—he died at age 95—devoted to tending Eno’s stupa, which housed the kesa 
that Eno had received from his Master Daiman Konin as confirmation of his having fully 
awakened to the Truth. This kesa is said to be the one that Shakyamuni Buddha Transmitted 
to Makakasho. It is still in existence at the monastery. Ro is Eno’s family name. It is used 
here to refer to the time when he worked as a lay laborer at Konin’s monastery. 



87 


On Taking Refuge in the Treasures 
of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha 

(Kie Bupposo Ho) 

Translator’s Introduction: This discourse is also known as “On Taking Refuge in the Three 
Treasures” {Kie Sambo). As the postscript indicates, this discourse is an early draft which Dogen 
did not finish before his death, though he apparently was planning to include it in his projected 
one-hundred-discourse Shobogenzo. It contains several quite long quotations, but Dogen had not 
yet cited the sources of some of them in the text. 


It says in the Procedures for Cleanliness in a Zen Temple (First fascicle, 
question 120), “Do you show respect for Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha?” It is 
quite clear that in India and China, the Buddhas and Ancestors authentically 
Transmitted the practice of making venerative offerings to Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha out of respect for Them. If you do not take refuge in Them, you will not 
revere Them, and if you do not revere Them, you will not be able to take refuge in 
Them. We invariably receive the spiritual merit of taking refuge in Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha whenever there is a spiritual connection between Them and 
us sentient beings, as well as between Master and disciple. Whether we are in some 
exalted celestial state, or among ordinary human beings, or in some hell, or acting 
like some demon or beast, if a spiritual connection takes place, we do not fail to 
humbly take refuge in Them. Once we have taken refuge, we promote merit in life 
after life, in generation after generation, in existence after existence, and in place 
after place as we strive to accumulate merit and achieve supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment. Even if we happen to be misled by bad companions or to meet up 
with some devilish hindrance so that our good roots are severed for the time being, 
or even if we act like an icchantika,* ultimately our good roots will continue on 
and we will promote their spiritual merit. The meritorious virtue of taking refuge in 
the Three Treasures is, ultimately, not subject to extensive decay. 

Taking refuge in the Three Treasures means wholeheartedly acting from pure 
trust—be it while a Tathagata is in the world or be it after a Tathagata has become 
extinct—and, with hands in gassho* and bowed head, reciting the following aloud: 


* See Glossary. 


1005 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1006 


I humbly take refuge in the Buddha, 

I humbly take refuge in the Dharma, 

I humbly take refuge in the Sangha. 

I humbly take refuge in the Buddha, the most venerated 
among humans, 

I humbly take refuge in the Dharma, the most venerated 
among those who have forsaken their passions, 

I humbly take refuge in the Sangha, the most venerated 
among those in our assemblies. 

I have taken refuge in the Buddha, 

I have taken refuge in the Dharma, 

I have taken refuge in the Sangha. 

In our aspiring to the far-off wisdom that is the fruition of Buddhahood, we begin 
by bringing into existence just such a protective garb. 1 Thus, even though our body 
and our mind right now, instant by instant, are arising and vanishing, our aspiration 
for Buddhahood will surely long continue to thrive until we fully realize our 
enlightenment. 

The term kie, ‘to take refuge’, is made up of two characters. The first, ki, 
means ‘to keep returning to’ and the second, e, means ‘to submit ourselves 
devotedly to’. Thus, kie, ‘to take refuge’, more literally means ‘to devote oneself to 
returning to’. The form of this returning is like that of a child returning again and 
again to its parent. ‘To submit ourselves devotedly to’ is like people depending on 
their leader. In other words, this term is synonymous with ‘to be rescued by’, ‘to be 
freed by’. Because ‘the Buddha’ refers to our Great Master, we therefore take 
refuge in Him. Because ‘the Dharma’ refers to good spiritual medicine, we take 
refuge in It. Because ‘the Sangha’ refers to excellent spiritual friends, we take 
refuge in them. 

djb 

CX) 

A Chinese commentary on Mahayana* Buddhism has the following 
dialogue: 

Someone once asked a Master, “Why do we take refuge in these 

Three Treasures?” 

The Master answered, “Because in the long run, by making 


1. That is, taking the Three Refuges acts like a suit of armor to protect us from whatever 
attacks us spiritually. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1007 


these Three Treasures what we return to, They can help us sentient 
beings free ourselves from the delusion of ‘life and death’ and realize 
the Great Awakening. This is why we take refuge in Them.” 

These Three Refuges are ultimately of astounding spiritual merit. In India, the 
word ‘Buddha’ was pronounced like buddhaya, and in China, the term ‘supreme, 
fully perfected enlightenment’ was translated simply as ‘awakening’. In India, the 
term for ‘the Teaching’ was pronounced as Dharma in Sanskrit or as Dhamma in 
Pali. In China, it was translated by the character that we read as ho. All meanings 
of ho —good, bad, or neutral—are called ‘dharma’, but the Dharma that we now 
take refuge in is the Dharma that is the Wheel of the Law. What we call sogya is 
pronounced as Sangha in India, and is translated as ‘the harmonious community’ in 
China. The following is how we habitually speak when praising Them. 2 

The Three Treasures as things that physically exist and 
which we preserve: 

The Buddha Treasure as religious statues and pictures, along 
with shrines and reliquaries. 

The Dharma Treasure as the Scriptural scrolls, which are made 
of yellow paper wound around a red rod, and which have been handed 
down to us. 

The Sangha Treasure as those who shave their heads, dye their 
robes, and observe the Precepts which are the True Teaching. 

The Three Treasures as the means for teaching sentient 
beings: 

The Buddha Treasure as the World-honored Shakyamuni 
Buddha. 

The Dharma Treasure as His turning of the Wheel of the Law, 
along with the saintly Teaching that He propagated. 

The Sangha Treasure as the five companions, namely, Ajnyata 
Kaundinya and the others. 3 


2. The source of the quotation that follows has not been located. It may be of Dogen’s 
composition. 

3. An allusion to the five ascetics who accompanied Prince Siddhartha while he was training as 
a forest hermit. They were the first of the Buddha’s followers to realize the Truth and 
become arhats. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1008 


The Three Treasures as Embodiments of Truth: 

The Buddha Treasure as what is provisionally called ‘the five 
merits of the Dharma Body’. 4 

The Dharma Treasure as what is provisionally called ‘the 
principle of the cessation of suffering through non-attachment’. 

The Sangha Treasure as what is provisionally called ‘the merit 
of pursuing through one’s training what is beyond conventional forms 
of training’. 

The Three Treasures as being essentially one and the same: 

The Buddha Treasure as what is provisionally called ‘That 
which realizes the Truth as ultimate enlightenment’. 

The Dharma Treasure as that which is provisionally called 
‘That which is immaculate and free of any taint’. 

The Sangha Treasure as that which is provisionally called 
‘those who have realized the Truth and, in harmony with It, are 
neither bound nor limited by It’. 5 

This is the way that one humbly takes refuge in the Three Treasures. If people are 
scant of good fortune or slight in merit, they do not hear even the name of the 
Three Treasures, so how could they possibly take refuge in Them! 


In the Lotus Scripture , there is the following poem: 

All these besmirched creatures, 

Pass through countless eons 

Hearing not the name of the Triple Treasure 

Due to their wretched karma. * 

The Lotus Scripture is the karmic connection to the One Great Matter* of all 
Buddhas and Tathagatas. Within all the Teachings that were expressed by our Great 
Master, the Venerable Shakyamuni, the Lotus Scripture is the most sovereign and 


4. That is, the five kinds of merit embodied in one who has realized enlightenment, namely, 
being free from any offences against the Precepts, being free from all delusory thoughts 
while remaining tranquil in heart, being possessed of wise discernment, being rid of all 
entanglements, and being aware of having become free of all entanglements. 

5. That is, there is no tinge of fatalism in what such a one does. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1009 


our greatest teacher. All the other Scriptures and Teachings are as the Lotus 
Scripture's loyal subjects or as Its familial relatives. What is voiced within the 
Lotus Scripture is the Truth. All that is expressed within our other Scriptures is 
tinged with expedient means, which is not the fundamental intent of the Buddha. 
Were you to bring forth what is expressed in the other Scriptures in order to 
evaluate what is in the Lotus Scripture, you would be getting things backwards. If 
they were not cloaked in the meritorious powers of the Lotus Scripture, these other 
Scriptures could not exist. All these other Scriptures are waiting to return to, and be 
in accord with, the Lotus Scripture. The Lotus Scripture contains what is being 
expressed here and now. Be aware that the merits of the Three Treasures are said to 
be the most esteemed and most sublime. 


The World-honored One once said the following: 

When ordinary people become apprehensive over something 
that seems foreboding, they often seek refuge in such places as 
mountains or parklands, as well as in some monastery, up some tree, 
or in some mausoleum. These refuges are not particularly of the 
highest quality, nor are they the most valuable. People cannot free 
themselves from human suffering by relying on such refuges. When 
people take refuge in the Buddha, as well as in the Dharma and the 
Sangha, then, by means of their wise discernment, they continually 
observe everything from within the Four Noble Truths, namely, being 
aware of suffering, being aware of how suffering accumulates, being 
aware of how suffering is transcended forever, and being aware of the 
Noble Eightfold Path. Taking this refuge is to take the most excellent 
refuge; it is the one to be most valued. Without fail, it is by means of 
taking refuge in this way that we can rid ourselves of suffering. 

The World-honored One has stated this clearly for the sake of all human beings. 
Human beings, vainly acting out of fear of what is foreboding, should not seek 
refuge in such beings as mountain spirits or demonic spirits, or in such places as 
the mausoleums of non-Buddhists, for there is no escape from human suffering by 
relying on such places for refuge. 

To put it more broadly, following the false teachings of non-Buddhists, 
people engage in ascetic practices which take the form of precepts for oxen, 
precepts for deer, precepts for rakshasas, precepts for demons, precepts for dumb 
beasts, precepts for deaf beings, precepts for dogs, precepts for chickens, or 
precepts for pheasants, and they may adorn their bodies with ashes and let their 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1010 


hair grow long. Or they may sacrifice a sheep, killing it after they have first 
chanted mantras. Or they may perform fire rituals for four months, or feast on air 
for seven days, or offer up hundreds of thousands of myriad blossoms to celestial 
beings. And they claim that, by such means, they will succeed in getting their 
wishes fulfilled. There is no truth in the belief that methods such as these can bring 
about liberation from suffering. Such methods are not praised by those of wise 
discernment, for people who do such practices continue to suffer in vain, devoid of 
any good outcome. 

Because this is so, you should clearly examine whether you are vainly 
seeking to take refuge in some false path. Even if some method is different from 
the practice of the non-Buddhist precepts, if its underlying principle conforms to 
the principle of seeking refuge in a tree or a mausoleum, do not take such a refuge. 
A human body is hard to come by and the Buddhist Treasures are rarely met with. 
How sad it would be if you rashly spent your life as kith and kin of some demonic 
spirit or vainly let many lifetimes flow by while holding onto false views. By 
quickly taking refuge in the Three Treasures of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, you 
will not only be liberated from suffering but you will also fully realize 
enlightenment. 

djb 

CX) 


In the Scripture on Rare Occurrences it says, “Teaching others about the 
four earthly continents or the six heavenly worlds of desire so that all may realize 
the four stages* of arhathood does not equal the merit of one single person taking 
the Three Refuges.” The four earthly continents are the eastern, western, southern, 
and northern continents. 6 7 Among them, those in the northern continent cannot be 
reached by the teaching of the Three Vehicles;* to successfully teach those in that 

n 

continent how to become arhats would be rare indeed. Even if such a benefit 
could be obtained, it would not be equal to the spiritual merit of teaching one 
single person how to take the Three Refuges. It is also rare for those in the six 
celestial worlds of desire to realize the Way. Even if we were able to help such 
beings attain the fourth stage of arhathood, it would not be equal to the merit of 
one single person taking the Three Refuges, so great and profound They are. 


6. These are the four ‘continents’ that surround Mount Sumeru. Mount Sumeru is considered to 
be the center of the universe, the pivotal point of the wheel of the six worlds of existence, as 
well as one’s sitting place in meditation. 

7. That is, the vehicles used by shravakas, pratekyabuddhas, and bodhisattvas are not effective 
enough to bestir the inhabitants of the northern continent from their customarily blissful 
state; only a Buddha—the One of the One Vehicle—has the capacity to do that. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1011 


In the fourth of the Agama Scriptures it says: 

There was once a celestial being in the Trayastrimsha Heaven 
who, upon seeing the five signs of his decay manifesting, knew he 
would be reborn as a wild boar. His bemoaning over this reached the 
ears of Lord Indra, who ruled over that heaven. Upon hearing the 
reason for his lamenting, Lord Indra called the celestial being forth 
and instructed him, saying, “You should take refuge in the Three 
Treasures.” By immediately doing as he had been instructed, the being 
escaped being reborn as a boar. 

The Buddha, creating a poem for the occasion, spoke thus: 

If beings take refuge in the Buddha, 

o 

They fall not into the three evil paths, 

Their passions spent, they dwell within some human 
or celestial realm 

And sure as sure will reach nirvana s holy shore. 

Once this celestial being had taken the Three Refuges, he was 
reborn into a rich man’s family and was also able to leave home life 
behind, ultimately reaching the state of one who has gone beyond 
being a novice. 

In short, there is no scale upon which the merit of taking refuge in the Three 
Treasures can be weighed, for it is immeasurable and boundless. 


When the World-honored One was in the world, twenty-six 
million hungering dragons, as a group, paid a visit to where the 
Buddha was staying. To a one, they were all shedding a veritable flood 
of tears as they addressed Him, saying, “All we desire is that You, out 
of Your pity, will rescue us from our suffering. O greatly 
compassionate World-honored One, we recall a time in a past age 
when we dwelt within the Buddha Dharma and had been able to leave 
home life behind, but we then went to great lengths to cultivate all 
manner of evil deeds. Because of these evil deeds, we have spent 
immeasurable eons in these bodies of ours, dwelling in the three evil 


8. The three evil paths are the worlds of beasts, hungry ghosts, and those in hellish states. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1012 


paths. Also, because of residual retribution, we have been reborn as 
dragons and experience exceedingly great suffering.” 

The Buddha instructed the dragons, saying, “Without exception, 
you should forthwith take the Three Refuges and wholeheartedly 
practice what is good. Due to these conditions, you will encounter the 
last Buddha in the Eon of the Wise Ones, the one named He Who Has 
Arrived at the Tower. 9 During the generation of that Buddha, you will 
be able to rid yourselves of your wrongdoings.” 

When the dragons heard these words, they all spent the rest of 
their lives in wholehearted devotion, each having taken the Three 
Refuges. 

Aside from imparting the Three Refuges to them, the Buddha Himself had no other 
method or technique for helping rescue the dragons. When they left home life 
behind in a previous age, they had received the Three Refuges, but as retribution 
for their evil acts, they had become hungering dragons, and by that time there was 
no other means for rescuing them. This is why He had imparted the Three Refuges 
to them. You need to keep in mind that the merit from the Three Refuges is the 
most esteemed and the most sublime, mind-boggling in its profundity. The World- 
honored One had already clearly attested to the truth of this, and human beings 
should by all means accept it in faith. He did not have them recite the names of the 
Buddhas in the ten quarters, but simply had them take the Three Refuges. The 
Buddha’s intention is profound, so who is there that would not sound its depths? 
Human beings today should quickly accept the Three Refuges rather than vainly 
reciting the name of every single Buddha, so that they do not foolishly remain in 
the dark and treat such great merit lightly. 


At that time, there was a blind female dragon among those 
assembled. 10 Her mouth was filled with festering tumors that were 
crawling with all manner of worms, a condition that resembled 
excrement. It was wickedly foul, like the uncleanness within a female 
organ at the time of menstruation, with a fetid stench that was difficult 


9. The Eon of the Wise Ones is a reference to our present eon, so-called because there will be 
many who realize Buddhahood during that time. 

10. In addition to its literal meaning, a dragon woman can be understood as someone who is 
intellectually brilliant. Also, her being blind may be understood literally or, possibly more to 
the point, figuratively, as being spiritually blind. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1013 


to bear. All kinds of things were feeding off her. Pus and blood were 
oozing out of her, and her whole body was constantly being bitten by 
mosquitoes and stung by wasps, while other poisonous insects were 
gnawing at her. The foul condition of her body was hard to look upon. 

The World-honored One, seeing the dragon woman’s blindness 
and the depth of her suffering, asked her from His great 
compassionate heart, “My little sister, what conditions have caused 
you to have such a wretched body? What deeds in a former life have 
brought you to such a state?” 

The dragon woman replied, “World-honored One, this body of 
mine is now struck with such forms of suffering that I have not a 
moment’s respite. Even should I try to put it in words, there is no way 
I have of expressing it. In thinking about my past over the previous 
thirty-six million years, for hundreds of thousands of years I have 
experienced suffering like this in the form of an evil dragon up to the 
point that it has not ceased even for a moment, day or night. The 
reason for this is that in the distant past, during the ninety-first eon, I 
became a female monastic within the Teaching of Bibashi Buddha, but 
I thought about lustful things, thoughts surpassing even those of some 
drunken person. Further, even though I had left home life behind, I 
was unable to live in accord with the Dharma, so I spread out my 
bedding in a temple and committed impure acts in order to satisfy my 
greedy heart and produce great pleasure. Sometimes I would seek out 
what belonged to others, often taking the alms that they had been 
given by the faithful. For just such reasons as these, I have been 
continually unable to receive the body of one in the human or celestial 
worlds, constantly being reborn in one of the three evil paths.” 

The Buddha then asked her, “If that is the case, when the eon 
that we are now in comes to an end, where, my little sister, will you be 
reborn?” 

The dragon woman responded, “Due to the strength of the 
causal conditions of my past behavior, even if I were born in some 
other world when this eon has exhausted itself, driven by the winds of 
my evil deeds, I shall still be reborn in this state.” The dragon woman 
then made the following plea, “O World-honored One of Great 
Compassion, pray, rescue me! I pray, rescue me!” 

At that moment, the World-honored One scooped up some 
water in His hand and gave her instruction, saying “We call this water 
‘the medicine that brings the joy of one’s true wishes being fulfilled’. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1014 


Now, in all sincerity, I say to you that, in the distant past, I once cast 
my life aside in order to rescue a dove and, to that end, I did not waver 
in my resolve or feel regret in my heart. If these words of yours are 
true, you will be completely cured of your afflictions.” The World- 
honored Buddha then took the water into His mouth and sprayed it 
forth over the blind dragon woman’s body, whereupon she was cured 
of all her sores and stench. 

Now that she had been cured, she made the following plea, “I 
beg the Awakened One to permit me to receive the Three Refuges.” 
Thereupon, the World-honored One gave the Three Refuges to the 
dragon woman. 

This dragon woman had become a female monastic within the Teaching of Bibashi 
Buddha. Although she admitted that she had broken Precepts, once she had 
penetrated that Buddha’s Teaching, she must have been aware of where she had 
become obstructed. Having now encountered Shakyamuni Buddha, she begged to 
receive the Three Refuges from Him. Receiving the Three Refuges from the 
Buddha must be said to be due to good, strong spiritual roots. The merit of meeting 
the Buddha must certainly have derived from the Three Refuges. 11 Although we 
are not blind dragons and we do not have the bodies of beasts, yet, unlike her, we 
did not personally encounter the Tathagata or receive the Three Refuges from the 
Buddha. The ability to actually encounter the Buddha is something far in the past, I 
am afraid to say. The World-honored One Himself bestowed upon her the Three 
Refuges. You should keep in mind that the merit from the Three Refuges is 
something that is extremely profound and immeasurable. For instance, when 

Shakrendra bowed to the wild fox and received the Three Refuges from it, 

12 

everything depended on the depth of the merit of the Three Refuges. 


Once when the Buddha was staying in a banyan grove outside 
the city of Kapilavastu, His lay disciple Mahanama of the Shakya clan 
came to where the Buddha was and asked him, “Just what is a lay 
Buddhist?” 

Thereupon, the Buddha explained the matter to him, saying, “If 


11. That is, it derived from her having taken the Three Refuges when she became a monastic 
within the assembly of Bibashi Buddha. 


12. Dogen will tell the story of Shakrendra and the wild fox later in this discourse. Shakrendra is 
another name for Indra. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1015 


there are good disciples, male or female, who are in possession of 
their faculties and have accepted the Three Refuges, they are called 
lay Buddhists.” 

Mahanama then asked, “World-honored One, what is meant by 
calling someone a ten-percent lay Buddhist?” 

The Buddha replied, “My dear disciple Mahanama, if one 
accepts the Three Refuges along with one of the Ten Great Precepts, 
that person is called a ten-percent lay Buddhist.” 

Becoming a disciple of the Buddha invariably depends on the Three Refuges. 
Whichever Precepts we may accept, we invariably take the Three Refuges, and 
only then do we take Precepts. Therefore, it is in accord with the Three Refuges 
that one obtains the Precepts. 

djb 

CX) 


The following story is related in the Dhammapada : 

Long ago, there was a guardian deity named Shakrendra, who 
intuitively knew that when his present life ended, he would be reborn 
as a donkey. Without ceasing to bemoan his fate, he said, “The only 
person who can save me from the suffering of such misfortune is the 
World-honored Buddha.” 

Thereupon, he went to where the Buddha was staying and, 
performing a full prostration, took refuge in the Buddha. He had not 
yet arisen from his prostration when his life came to an end and he 
arose within the womb of a donkey. The mother donkey broke free 
from her reins and smashed some bowls in a nearby pottery shop. The 
potter struck her, which ultimately caused her to abort, whereby 
Shakrendra reemerged in his guardian deity body. 

The Buddha said, “Just as you were dying, you were taking 
refuge in the Three Treasures, so the retribution for your wrongdoings 
had already come to an end.” Upon hearing this, Shakrendra obtained 
the first fruits of arhathood. 

In sum, the World-honored Buddha was unsurpassed in rescuing sentient beings 
from the sufferings and misfortunes of the world. This is why Shakrendra hastened 
to call on the World-honored One. While he was prostrate on the ground, his 
present life came to an end and he was reborn within a donkey’s womb. Through 
the merit of his taking refuge in the Buddha, the mother donkey broke her reins and 
smashed dishes in the potter’s shop. The potter struck her and her body was so 
injured that she aborted the donkey colt in her womb. Thereupon, the guardian 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1016 


deity returned to enter his former body. His attaining the first fruits of arhathood 
upon hearing what the Buddha said was due to the strength of the merit from his 
taking refuge in the Three Treasures. 

In other words, the strength of the Three Refuges not only freed Shakrendra 
from the three evil paths, it also permitted him to reenter his guardian deity body. 
And not only did he gain the fruits and rewards from being in a celestial place, but 
he also became a saintly being who had realized the first stage of arhathood. Truly, 
the ocean of merit of the Three Treasures is immeasurable, unbounded. While the 
World-honored One was in the world, ordinary people and those in lofty positions 
enjoyed the blessings and good fortune from this. Now, in the final, degenerate five 
hundred years following the disappearance of the Tathagata, what can we humans 
do? Well, such things as statues and pictures of the Tathagata, as well as His relics, 
are still housed in the world. If we take refuge in these, we will also receive the 
merits as described above. 13 

djb 


The following is recounted in the Scripture of Unparalleled Events : 

The Buddha once said, “I recall a time innumerable eons ago 
when there was a wild fox on a mountain in the great kingdom of 
Vima. 14 It so happened that it was being pursued by a lion who was 
bent on making a meal of it. As it fled, it fell into a well and was 
unable to get out. After three days had passed, it realized that it was 
going to die there, and so composed the following poem: 

Oh, woe is me! To be thus on suffering’s brink, 

Losing my life, drowned deep in some hillside well. 

How transient all myriad things prove to be! 

Alas that I cannot leave my body for the lion s feast. 

In homage, I take refuge in the Buddhas of the ten 
quarters. 

May They know that my heart is pure and free of all self. 

“At that moment, Shakrendra overheard someone taking refuge 
in the Buddha. Awestruck, his hair stood on end. Being mindful of the 


13. However, not because there is some magical power inherent in these objects, but because 
they are reminders to trust in Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, and to keep to the Precepts. 


14. The kingdom of Vima is a place within Jambudvipa, the legendary continent south of Mount 
Sumeru. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1017 


Buddha of old, he thought to himself, ‘I, a solitary drop of dew, lack a 
Master to guide me as I drown myself in my addictions to sensory 
greeds.’ 

“Thereupon, along with a celestial host of eighty thousand, he 
flew down, desiring to explore more closely what was going on in the 
well. He saw the wild fox at the bottom of the well, attempting to claw 
its way up and out, but without success. Once more thinking only of 
himself, Shakrendra then said, ‘Saintly person, you may well be 
thinking that you are lacking in some way. Though I now see the form 
and figure of a wild fox, clearly you are a bodhisattva* and not 
someone who is limited only to mundane abilities, for it was not a 
mundane verse that you recited, O benevolent being. I pray that you 
will give voice to the essentials of the Dharma for the sake of this host 
of celestial beings.’ 

“At this point, the wild fox looked up and replied, ‘Even though 
you are a guardian deity of the Dharma, you have obviously not had 
instruction in It. While a Dharma Master is down below you, you have 
placed yourself above him. You ask for the essentials of the Dharma, 
but completely fail to show proper respect! 15 Because the Waters of 
Dharma are untainted and pure, they can save people, so how come 
you crave to have them by prideful means? ’ 

“When the guardian deity heard this, he was filled with shame. 
The celestial beings who attended upon him were startled and laughed 
nervously. Then one said, ‘Although our celestial lord has come down 
to this place, that does not greatly benefit us. ’ 

“Thereupon, the guardian deity Shakrendra addressed the 
celestial beings, saying, ‘I pray, do not, in this regard, hold onto your 
astonishment and fears. What he said is undoubtedly due to my self- 
deception and greed, along with my lack of virtue. By all means, we 
must listen to the essentials of the Dharma from this person. ’ 

“He then lowered his celestial robe to help the fox, who 
grabbed hold of it and climbed out from the well. The celestial beings 


15. In Buddhism, the traditional courtesy is to offer a meal to the Dharma Master as alms and 
then, after the meal, to ask the Master to give a Dharma talk whilst seated in a higher seat 
than those for whom the talk is intended. To ignore such a courtesy and put oneself above 
the Dharma Master is therefore seen as the height of disrespect. Shakrendra, so eager to hear 
the Teaching for His own sake, had failed to extract the wild fox from the well, much less 
offer him a meal, before asking for spiritual Teaching. 



Shobogenzo: On Taking Refuge in the Three Treasures 


1018 


prepared a meal of nectar for the creature. After the wild fox had 
finished its meal, its vitality was restored. In the midst of calamity, it 
had met with such unanticipated good fortune that its heart leapt for 
joy, and its delight was immeasurable. The wild fox then gave 
extensive explanation of the essentials of the Dharma for the sake of 
Shakrendra and his host of celestial beings.” 

This story is called ‘Shakrendra’s bowing to an animal and taking it for his 
teacher’. Clearly, you need to realize that the guardian deity’s taking a wild fox for 
his teacher is evidence of how difficult it is to hear the words Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha. Now, in accord with the help from our good deeds in past lives, we have 
encountered the Dharma bequeathed us by the Tathagata so that, day and night, we 
may hear the precious name of the Three Treasures, without regressing over time. 
This is surely the essence of the Dharma. Even Mara, the Lord of Bedevilment, 
along with his demons of desire, all escape tribulation by taking refuge in the 
Three Treasures. How much more can others strive to pile up merit and accumulate 
virtue by means of the meritorious nature of the Three Treasures! So, why, pray, 
would you neglect to fathom them? 

To summarize, in practicing the Way as disciples of the Buddha, we first 
reverently bow to the Three Treasures in all ten quarters, then we call on the Three 
Treasures in all ten quarters to come to us as we offer incense and scatter flowers to 
Them, and only then do we perform our spiritual disciplines. This is an excellent 
example of practice from ancient times, an age-old ritual of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors. If there are any who have never yet done this ritual of taking refuge in 
the Three Treasures, you need to know that theirs is a non-Buddhist teaching and 
that it may well be the teaching of the Lord of Bedevilment. The Dharma of 
Buddha after Buddha and Ancestor after Ancestor invariably begins with the 
ceremony of taking refuge in the Three Treasures. 

On a day during the summer retreat in the seventh year of the Kencho era (1255), I finished 
making this proofed copy from my late Master s draft. It had not yet reached the stage of 
a clean copy, much less a middling draft. Undoubtedly, he would have made additions 
and deletions. Since such a process is now impossible, I am leaving the Master s draft 
just as it is . 16 

I made this copy on the twenty-first day of the fifth lunar month in the second year of the Koan 
era (July 1, 1278), whilst staying at Shinzenko-ji Temple in Nakahama, Echizen Province. 

Giun 


16. This first portion of the postscript is clearly by Ejo. 



88 

On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 

(Jinshin Inga) 

Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse Dogen once again takes up the koan story of 
Hyakujo’s fox, which he had commented on in Discourse 73: On the Great Practice ( Daishugyd). 
Here, however, he presents a series of poems that various Masters had composed in relation to 
the subject of cause and effect, all of which Dogen feels support non-Buddhist views. His own 
comments make quite clear that no one, under any circumstances, is ever free of cause and 
effect. 


Hyakujo Ekai was a Dharma heir of Baso. Whenever people 
came to hear him give a public Dharma talk, there was an old man 
who always came into the Dharma Hall immediately following those 
in the monastic assembly. He always listened to the Dharma talk and 
then, when the monks would leave the hall, he would leave at the 
same time. Then one day, he lingered behind. 

Thereupon, the Master asked him, “You who are standing here, 
who are you?” 

The old man replied, “To speak truly, I am a non-human being. 
Long ago during the eon of Kasho Buddha, 1 I dwelt upon this 
mountain as Abbot. Then, one day, a trainee asked me, ‘Is even the 
one who does the Great Practice still subject to cause and effect?’ I 
replied that such a one is no longer subject to cause and effect. After 
that, as a consequence, I was reduced to being reborn as a wild fox for 
five hundred lives. I now beseech you, O Venerable Monk, say 
something that will turn me around, for I long to rid myself of this 
wild fox’s attitude of mind.” 

Thereupon, he asked the Master, “Is even someone who does 
the Great Practice subject to cause and effect?” 

The Master replied, “Such a one is not blind to causality.” 

Upon hearing these words, the old man had a great awakening. 
Prostrating himself before the Master, he said, “Since I have already 


1. Among the Seven Buddhas, the One whose eon directly preceded that of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. 


1019 



Shobogenzo: On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 


1020 


shed the outer trappings of a wild fox, I have taken to dwelling on the 
far side of this mountain. Dare I ask the Venerable Abbot to perform 
for me a monk’s funeral service?” 

The Master had the senior monk who supervises the Meditation 
Hall strike the wooden gong to signal the monks to assemble so that 
he might tell them that, after their meal, there would be a funeral 
service for a deceased monk. The whole assembly was at ease with 
this, though they wondered about it, since there was no sick person in 
the temple infirmary. After the meal, the Master simply led the 
assembly up to the base of a rock on the other side of the mountain, 
where they saw him use his traveling staff to point out the corpse of a 
wild fox. They cremated the remains in accordance with the 
appropriate procedure. 

At nightfall, the Master went to the Dharma Hall where he gave 
the monks a talk on the preceding events. His Dharma heir Obaku 
then asked him, “In the past, the man said the wrong thing to turn his 
disciple around and, as a consequence, was reduced to being a wild 
fox for five hundred lives. Suppose he had not made this mistake, 
what would have become of him?” 

The Master said, “Come up close and I will tell you.” 

Thereupon, Obaku went on up and gave the Master a slap. The 
Master clapped his hands and laughed, saying, “I’ve always thought 
that the beards of foreigners were red, and here is a red-bearded 
foreigner.” 

This story occurs in the T’ien-sheng Era Record of the Far-reaching Torch. 
Even so, people doing the training who are not clear about the fundamental 
principle of causality fall into the error of denying cause and effect, and to no avail. 
Sad to say, they tend to be frivolous and casually let the authority of the words and 
ways of the Ancestors go into decline. ‘Not being subject to cause and effect’ is 
surely their denial of causality, and accordingly, they fall into evil realms. 2 Clearly, 
‘not being blind to cause and effect’ is what ‘being profoundly convinced of cause 
and effect’ means, and accordingly, those who hear this rid themselves of evil 
conditions. Do not doubt this: do not mistrust it. Among those of our recent 
generations who call themselves students of Zen practice, there are many who have 
denied causality. And how do we know that they have denied causality? Because 


2. That is, the three worlds of hungry ghosts, animals, and those in hells. 



Shobogenzo: On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 


1021 


they are of the opinion that there is no difference between ‘not being subject to’ 
and ‘not being blind to’. Accordingly, we know that they have denied causality. 


Our Nineteenth Indian Ancestor, the Venerable Kumorata, once said the 
following: 

For the time being, we may say that retribution for our good 
and bad acts has three periods, but, in general, worldly people only see 
a benevolent person coming to an early end while some violent person 
is having a long life, or see an evil one enjoying good fortune while a 
virtuous one is experiencing calamities, and thereby worldly people 
conclude that cause and effect is a dead issue and that ‘wrong 
behavior’ and ‘happiness’ are devoid of any significance. Such people 
in particular are ignorant of the fact that shadows and sounds are in 
accord with their source, without even a hair’s breadth of discrepancy 
between them. And even with the passing of hundreds of thousands of 
myriad eons, there is no diminishing of that connection. 

Clearly, we see from what this patch-robed monk says that he never denied cause 
and effect. Present-day trainees who have been negligent in their training with the 
traces left by our ancient teachers have not clarified what the kind instruction of 
this Ancestor of our tradition is. Those who have been negligent in this training, 
while at the same time calling themselves good spiritual friends and guides for 
ordinary people and those in lofty positions, are malicious troops of scholars and 
great thieves preying on the ordinary and the lofty. Those of you who have come 
before me and those who will come after me, do not teach the younger generation 
or the veteran monks with the aim of negating the existence of cause and effect, for 
this is false teaching and not the Dharma of the Buddhas and Ancestors. It is due to 
your being negligent in your studies that you have fallen into this false view. 

Patch-robed monks, among others in present-day China, are accustomed to 
saying, “Even though we have received a human body and have encountered the 
Dharma of the Buddha, we still do not know the details of one or two of our past 
lives. The former Hyakujo who became a wild fox was able to know five hundred 
of his past lives. So, it is obvious that he did not lapse into that state due to 
retribution for his past deeds. It must be as Meditation Master Doan said in a poem: 



Shobogenzo: On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 


1022 


Even if restrained by golden chains or unseen barriers, 
nowhere do I abide. 

Going amidst all manner of beings, I just roll on through 
cycles of birth and death. ” 

This is the way that this bunch who are considered to be good spiritual 
friends and guides see and understand the matter. It is hard to place such a way of 
seeing and understanding within the house of the Buddhas and Ancestors. Among 
humans, and foxes, as well as those in the other worlds of existence, there are those 
who have the ability to get a glimpse of their past lives. Be that as it may, such an 
ability is not the seed of clear understanding, but is what someone experiences 
from having previously performed wicked deeds. The World-honored One, for the 
sake of the ordinary and the lofty, has spoken extensively about this fundamental 
principle. Not to know it is the height of negligence in one’s study. How sad! Even 
if someone were to know a thousand of his or her past lives, or even ten thousand 
of them, that would not necessarily bring forth the Buddha’s Dharma. There are 
non-Buddhists who already know of their past lives from over eighty thousand 
eons, but they have still not produced something we could call ‘the Buddha’s 
Dharma’. To know a mere five hundred past lives is no great ability. 

In present-day Sung China, among those doing the practice of seated 
meditation, the folks who are the most in the dark are those who do not know that 
the teaching of not being subject to cause and effect is a false view. Sad to say, in a 
place where the genuine Dharma of the Tathagata has spread abroad and there has 
been a genuine Transmission from Ancestor to Ancestor, heretical gangs have 
formed who deny cause and effect. Those who are exploring the Matter* through 
training with their Master should by all means hasten to make clear the 
fundamental principle of cause and effect. The later Hyakujo’s principle of not 
being blind to cause and effect means not ignoring the presence of causality. 
Hence, the underlying principle is clear: we feel the effects of the causes that we 
put into action. In sum, if you have not clarified what the Buddha’s Dharma is, do 
not go about recklessly preaching for the sake of the worldly and the celestial. 


Our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna once said: 

If, like non-Buddhists, you argue against there being cause and 
effect in the world, then there could be no past or future. If you argue 


* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 


1023 


against there being cause and effect in the realm of enlightenment, 
then there could be no Triple Treasure, Four Noble Truths, or four 
stages* of arhathood. 

Be very clear about this: no matter whether it is secular people or monastics 
who are arguing against the existence of cause and effect, they will be off the Path. 
To assert that the present is unreal is tantamount to saying, “One’s physical form 
exists in this particular state, but one’s spiritual nature has been returning to the 
enlightened state for ever so long, for one’s spiritual nature is one’s mind, and 
one’s mind is not the same as one’s body.” To understand the issue in this way is to 
be off the Path. And there are those who say, “When someone dies, they invariably 
return to the ocean of spiritual nature. Even if they have not studied the Buddha’s 
Dharma, they will naturally return to the ocean of enlightenment, at which point 
the wheel of birth and death will cease to turn. This is why there is no future life.” 
This is the non-Buddhist doctrine of nihilism. Even if they resemble monks 
physically, folks who hold to such wrong views are not disciples of the Buddha at 
all, but simply people who are off the Path. In short, to deny cause and effect is to 
make the mistake of denying the existence of past and future. These people’s denial 
of cause and effect stems from their having failed to train under a genuinely good 
spiritual guide. Those who train for a long time under a genuinely good spiritual 
guide will not hold to the false view that denies cause and effect. We need to 
reverently trust the compassionate instruction of our Ancestral Master Nagarjuna 
and humbly place it above our head. 

djb 

CX) 


The monk Yoka Genkaku was an outstanding disciple of Daikan Eno. 
Originally, he trained in the Tendai tradition of the Lotus Scripture, sharing 
quarters with Great Master Sakei Genro, the Eighth Chief Master of the Tendai 
tradition. Once while Genkaku was perusing the Great Scripture on the Buddha s 
Parinirvana a golden light suddenly filled his room, and he profoundly 
experienced a spiritual awakening to That which transcends birth and death. He 
then proceeded to pay a visit to Eno to report to our Sixth Ancestor what he had 
experienced. Our Sixth Ancestor then gave him the seal* that confirmed his 
awakening. Later, Genkaku composed “The Song That Attests to the Way”, in 
which there are the lines: 

Vacant-headed notions of emptiness which deny causality 
Bring about calamities as dire as a raging conflagration 
or a rampaging flood. 



Shobogenzo: On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 


1024 


Be very clear about this: denial of causality will bring about calamities. The 
old virtuous ones of past generations were quite clear about causality, whereas 
trainees in more recent times all tend to be skeptical. But even in present times, 
there are those who cultivate the Enlightened Heart and, for the sake of the Buddha 
Dharma, study the Buddha Dharma. Like the ancient worthies, they will be clear 
about cause and effect. To say that there are no causes and no effects is to be off the 
Path. 

djb 

CX) 


In extolling the view of cause and effect contained in Genkaku’s lines, our 
Old Buddha Wanshi once said: 

It s like a foot of water making a ten-foot wave: 

There s nothing to be done about five hundred past lives. 

Though people go on about ‘not being subject to ’ or ‘not 
being blind to ’, 

They’re all still in a pit, entangled in the tendrils of 
discriminatory thought. 

Ha, ha, ha! What a laugh! 

Simply, do you get It, or not? 

If you ’re truly detached and rid of conventionalities, 

You ’ll not try to inhibit me from saying, ‘Goo goo, ga 

t >> 

ga! 

The gods sing and the heavenly spirits dance, as the 
music comes forth all by itself, 

And clapping hands join in with merry shouts of laughter. 

Now, the lines, 

Though people go on about ‘not being subject to ’ or ‘not 
being blind to ’, 

They’re all still in a pit, entangled in the tendrils of 
discriminatory thought, 

are tantamount to his saying that ‘not being subject to’ and ‘not being blind to’ 
really amount to the same thing. 


3. That is, both phrases are the product of the discriminative thinking of those who have not 
yet ‘got It’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 


1025 


In short, this discussion of ‘cause and effect’ has not yet completely 
exhausted the term’s fundamental principle. And why? Because even though 
Wanshi has shed his wild fox’s attitude of mind right here and now before us, he 
does not say that after people escape from the attitude of mind of their wild fox, 
they are reborn in the human world, nor does he say that they are reborn in the 
celestial world, nor does he say that they are reborn in any other world, but this is 
something we should wonder about. Once people have dropped off their wild fox’s 
attitude of mind, those who should be reborn in a favorable world are reborn 
among celestial beings or among ordinary human beings, whereas those who 
should be reborn in an unfavorable world are reborn in one of the four unfavorable 
worlds . 4 Once people have dropped off their wild fox’s attitude of mind, they will 
not be reborn in some place other than one of the six worlds* of existence. If 
someone says that when we die, we return to an ocean of spiritual nature or we 
return to a universal self, such are the views of those who are off the Path. 


Meditation Master Engo Kokugon once said in a poem commenting on an 
ancient Ancestor’s koan* story: 

When fish swim, they may muddy up the water; 

When birds fly, they may shed a feather. 

It is hard indeed to escape the ever-bright Mirror . 5 

The Great Void knows no bounds. 

Once something has passed, it is far, far gone. 

The five hundred rebirths were simply dependent on the 
fox s Great Practice with cause and effect. 

A thunderbolt may suddenly smash a mountain and the 
wind churn up the sea, 

But the Pure Gold, though refined a hundred times, never 
changes Its color. 

Even this verse leans towards denying cause and effect and, at the same time, tends 
to support the view of etemalism . 6 


4. That is, favorable or unfavorable for hearing the Dharma. 

5. The ever-bright Mirror reflects the karmic consequences of our actions. 

6. Eternalism is the belief that the self and the world are both eternal. 



Shobogenzo: On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 


1026 


djb 

CX) 

The monk known as Meditation Master Daie Soko once said the following 
in a congratulatory poem: 

‘Not being subject to ’and ‘not being blind to ’ 

Are merely stones and clods of earth. 

Having met them along the path between the rice fields, 

I pulverized the silver mountain. 

Clapping my hands, I give a hearty “Ho, ho!” wherever I 
am, 

For here in Koshii, this foolish Laughing Buddha is to be 
found . 7 

Present-day people in Sung dynasty China consider monks like Daie to be Masters 
skillful in leading trainees, but Daie’s opinions and understanding never reached 
the level of skillful means in instructing others in the Buddha Dharma. If anything, 
he leaned towards naturalism . 8 

djb 


Speaking more generally, there are more than thirty who have composed 
poems and commentaries on this story of Hyakujo’s fox, and not even one of them 
has had the slightest doubt that ‘not being subject to cause and effect’ means 
‘doubting cause and effect’. Sad to say, these persons have not clarified what cause 
and effect is and have vainly wasted their lives, going astray in a state of 
confusion. In your exploring of the Buddha Dharma through your training with a 
Master, number one is clarifying what cause and effect is. Undoubtedly, those who 
deny cause and effect will, in their fierce pursuit of profits, give rise to false views 
and thereby become people who sever their own good spiritual roots. 

To summarize, the principle of cause and effect is quite clear, and it is totally 
impersonal: those who fabricate evil will fall into a lower state, whereas those who 
practice good will rise to a higher state, and without the slightest disparity. If cause 
and effect had become null and void, Buddhas would never have appeared in the 
world and our Ancestral Master would not have come from the West. In short, it 


7. ‘The silver mountain’ is an allusion to a mountain that is impossible to scale. It is used in 
Zen Buddhism as a metaphor for the realm of enlightenment, which is beyond 
discriminative thought. 

8. In Buddhism, naturalism is the belief that things just happen to happen, which is a denial of 
cause and effect. 



Shobogenzo: On the Absolute Certainty of Cause and Effect 


1027 


would be impossible for human beings to encounter a Buddha and hear the 
Dharma. The fundamental principle of cause and effect was not clear to Confucius 
or Lao-tzu. It has only been clarified and Transmitted by Buddha after Buddha and 
by Ancestor after Ancestor. Because the good fortune of those who are seeking to 
learn in these degenerate days of the Dharma is scant, they do not encounter a 
genuine Master or hear the authentic Dharma, and so they are not clear about cause 
and effect. If you deny causality as a result of this error, you will experience 
excessive misfortune, since you would be as ignorant as an ox or a horse. Even if 
you have not committed any evil act other than denying cause and effect, the 
poison of this view will immediately be terrible. Therefore, if you who are 
exploring the Matter through your training with a Master have put your heart that 
seeks awakening as the first and foremost matter, and therefore wish to repay the 
vast benevolence of the Buddhas and the Ancestors, you should swiftly clarify 
what causality really is. 


On a day during the summer retreat in the seven th year of the Kencho era (1255), I copied this 
from the Master s draft. It had yet to reach the state of a cleaned-up draft, much less a 
clean copy. Even so, I have made this copy of it. 

Ejo 



89 

On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 

(Sanji Go) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this discourse, Dogen discusses the good or ill recompense we 
receive immediately in this lifetime, in our next lifetime, or in some later future lifetime as a 
result of our deliberate acts. He gives the Buddhist perspective on why people who seem to be 
doing good deeds may experience misfortune and why people who are continually committing 
wrongful acts may seem to be enjoying good fortune. 


When our Nineteenth Ancestor, the Venerable Kumorata, 
arrived at a country in Central India, there was a virtuous monk there 
named Shayata who raised a question with him, saying, “My parents 
have always had faith in the Triple Treasure, but they have continually 
been subject to illnesses and all their endeavors have come to naught, 
whereas our neighbor, who persists in behaving like Chandala the 
Outlaw, has always been fit and healthy and his illegal undertakings 
successful. How come he has had such good fortune and where have 
we gone wrong?” 

The Venerable One responded, “Why do you entertain such 
doubts? The karmic* effects of good and bad actions will come to 
fruition in one of three temporal periods. In general, people see that 
the benevolent may suffer untimely or violent deaths whilst the cruel 
may live long, or that the wicked may be fortunate whilst the morally 
upright meet with misfortune. As a result of this, they say that there is 
no cause and effect and that ‘vice’ and ‘good deeds’ are meaningless 
words. Above all, they do not understand that consequences inevitably 
follow upon even the slightest actions, that even were hundreds of 
thousands of myriad eons to elapse these consequences would still not 
be wiped away, and that cause and effect are, of necessity, in accord 
with each other.” 

Once Shayata heard these words, he was immediately freed 
from his doubts. 


* See Glossary. 


1028 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1029 


The Venerable Kumorata was the nineteenth in line from the Tathagata to receive 
the Dharma. The Tathagata had personally mentioned his name and prophesied his 
future Buddhahood . 1 Not only had Kumorata clarified what the Dharma of the 
Venerable Shakyamuni Buddha was and received the authentic Transmission, he 
had also fully realized the Dharma of all Buddhas in the three temporal periods. 

Having profited from his present question, the Venerable Shayata became a 
follower of the Venerable Kumorata and undertook the study of the authentic 
Dharma, ultimately becoming our Ancestral Master of the twentieth generation. 
Here, too, the World-honored One had prophesied much earlier that our Twentieth 
Ancestor would be Shayata. So, above all, you need to learn what our Ancestral 
Masters knew by studying their comments on the Buddha Dharma. Do not join in 
with the flock of that present-day worldly bunch with false opinions, who are 
ignorant of cause and effect, who are in the dark about karmic retribution from 
deliberate acts, who know nothing of the three temporal periods, and who do not 
know the difference between good and evil. 

What we call the three temporal periods are the three time periods in which 
we receive the retribution from our good and evil acts. These are, first, the 
retribution experienced in one’s present life; second, the retribution experienced in 
one’s next life; and third, the retribution experienced in some later future life. 
Through your practice of the Way of the Buddhas and Ancestors you leam, first 
off, to clarify what the principle of karmic retribution in these three time periods is. 
If you do not do so, you will make many errors and fall into false views. You will 
not just fall into false views, you will also give rise to evil ways and undergo 
suffering for a long time. By failing to continue developing your good roots, you 
will lose much spiritual merit and will have long-standing obstructions on your 
path to enlightenment. 

The karmic retribution experienced in these three temporal periods comes 
from both good and evil acts. 

n 

In the first temporal period, the retribution is experienced in 
one’s present lifetime. That is to say, when we engage in karmic 
activities in this lifetime and then, according to the seeds we have 
sown, receive the fruits thereof in this lifetime, we call this 
‘retribution experienced in one’s present lifetime’. 


1. That is, the Buddha had predicted that someone in the future would be called Kumorata, 
‘The Youthful One’, and that he would realize Buddhahood in his lifetime. 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1030 


In other words, when there is someone who fashions his life by good or by evil 
actions, and then receives the consequences of those actions in this lifetime, we call 
that ‘retribution experienced in one’s present life’. 

n 

The following story is an example of creating evil and receiving the 
consequences therefrom in this present life. 

There was once a woodcutter who had gone off into the 
mountains when he encountered a blizzard and completely lost his 
way. It was at that time when the day was coming to an end. The snow 
was so deep and it was so freezing cold that he knew he would 
certainly be dead before long. He made his way onwards and had just 
entered a dense, dark patch of woods when he saw a bear. There it 
was, right before him in the woods. Its body was a deep blue-black, 
and its eyes were like two glowing coals. The man was filled with 
terror, certain that he would lose his life, but the creature was, in truth, 
a bodhisattva* who had manifested in the form of a bear. 

Seeing the man’s dreadful fear, it then spoke in a consoling 
manner, counseling him, “Now you must not be afraid. Though one’s 
parents may sometimes harbor wrong intentions towards their child, I 
do not harbor evil thoughts towards you.” It then came forward, lifted 
the man onto its back, and carried him into a cave where it warmed 
him with its own body until it completely resuscitated him. Gathering 
some roots and berries, it encouraged him to eat what he would. 
Fearing lest the woodcutter should die, it lay down and held him in its 
arms. In this way it kindly tended him until six days had passed. On 
the seventh day, the sky cleared and the pathway became visible. The 
bear, having realized that the man desired to return home, again 
gathered sweet berries to satisfy his hunger and sustain him. It 
accompanied him out of the woods, and ever so politely bade him 
farewell. The man fell to his knees and said, “How can I ever repay 
you?” The bear replied, “I seek no recompense now. I only pray that, 
just as I protected your body these past days, you will also do the 
same with my life.” The man respectfully agreed. 

As the man was coming down the mountain shouldering his 
firewood, he encountered two hunters, who asked him, “What kind of 
creatures have you encountered on the mountain?” The woodcutter 
replied, “I haven’t seen any creatures apart from just one bear.” The 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1031 


hunters begged him, “Can you show us where?” The woodcutter 
replied, “If I can have two-thirds of your prey, I will gladly show 
you.” The hunters agreed and they all went off together, ultimately 
slaying the bear. They divided the meat into three parts. As the 
woodcutter was just about to pick up the bear’s flesh with his two 
hands, he lost the use of his arms, as if they were a string of pearls that 
had been cut or a lotus root that had been sliced off. The hunters were 
startled by this and, in their concern, asked him what had happened. 

The woodcutter, feeling deeply ashamed, gave a detailed account of 
what he had done. The two hunters upbraided the woodcutter, saying, 

“That bear had such great compassion for you! How could you 
possibly have carried out such a wicked act of betrayal now? It is truly 
a wonder that your whole body hasn’t rotted away!” Thereupon the 
hunters, in company with the man, gave the meat in charity to a 
monastery. 

At that time, the elderly and virtuous abbot, one who had the 
wondrous ability to fathom what others desired, had entered a state of 
deep contemplation, thereby knowing that it was the flesh of a great 
bodhisattva who had created benefits and joy for the sake of all 
sentient beings. Coming out from his meditative state, he then spoke 
to his assembly concerning this matter. The assembly, hearing the 
story, was appalled and saddened. Together, they gathered fragrant 
wood and cremated the bear’s body. They then collected what bones 
remained, placed them in a stupa,* and made prostrations and 
offerings to them. 

The karma from an evil act, such as the one in this story, will 
inevitably incur its recompense, regardless of whether its effects are 
received immediately or come to fruition in a future life. 

Effects such as these are called ‘misfortunate recompense experienced in one’s 
present life’. To generalize, when receiving a kindness, we should intend to repay 
it. In doing kindnesses for others, do not seek for recompense. As in this story, one 
who would turn against a kindly being and thereby bring harm to such a one will 
inevitably receive evil karma. O my fellow beings, may you never have a heart like 
that of this woodcutter! Once out of the woods, he took his leave of the bear, and 
even though he asked how he could possibly repay the bear’s kindness, when he 
reached the foot of the mountain and met the hunters, he greedily sought two-thirds 
of the meat. Being dragged by his avarice, he slew one who had shown him great 
kindness. May you, both laity and monks, ever have a heart that does not fail to 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1032 


recognize kindness. The power of evil karma to sever both your hands strikes faster 
than any sword could cut them off. 

n 

Long ago, King Kanishka of the nation of Gandhara had a 
eunuch—one born lacking normal male genitals—who supervised the 
affairs of the court. While momentarily departing from the city, he 
encountered a herd of cattle, at least five hundred in number, being led 
in through the city gate. He asked the herdsman, “What kind of cattle 
are these?” The herdsman replied, “They are bulls being taken to be 
castrated.” Upon hearing this, the eunuch thought to himself, “Due to 
evil karma in a past life, I received a body lacking normal male 
genitals. I shall now use my wealth to rescue these bulls from just 
such a hardship.” He ultimately paid their price and then set them all 
free. 

Because of the power of this good karma, the eunuch’s body 
was fully restored to that of a normal male. Filled with profound joy, 
he went back into the city and, standing at the palace gate, sent a 
messenger to ask the king’s permission to enter for an audience. The 
king had him summoned, wondering why he had asked for an 
audience. Thereupon, the eunuch presented the above in great detail. 

Upon hearing it, the king was surprised and delighted. He generously 
bestowed on his servant great treasure and, in turn, promoted him to a 
high office, making him privy to the external affairs of state. 

Good karma like this inevitably receives its fruits, either 
immediately or in a future life. 

Clearly you need to realize that to rescue animals, even though their lives may not 
be treasured, earned the man good fruits. How much more so, by our honoring the 
kind and the virtuous, shall we garner all manner of good . 2 Effects such as these 
are called ‘fortunate recompense experienced in one’s present life’. There are many 
stories like these, which arise from either good or evil deeds, but there is not time 
enough to quote them all. 


2. An allusion to the four cultivated fields of merit: that derived from being kind to animals, to 
the needy, to one’s parents, and to the saintly ones of the Three Vehicles. 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1033 


n 

In the second temporal period, retribution is experienced in 
one’s next lifetime. That is to say, when we engage in karmic activities 
in this lifetime and then, according to the seeds we have sown, receive 
the fruits thereof in our next lifetime, we call this ‘retribution 
experienced in one’s next lifetime’. 

In other words, when there are people who have committed any of the five most 
treacherous deeds, they will inevitably fall into a hellish state in their next lifetime. 
‘The next lifetime’ means the lifetime that follows this lifetime. For other 
wrongdoers, there are those who will fall into a hellish state in their next lifetime, 
and there are those who would sink into a hellish state in their next lifetime were it 
not for some intervening good karma. For these five most treacherous deeds, 
however, people invariably fall into a hellish state along with whatever karma they 
carry with them into their next lifetime. ‘The next life’ is also called ‘one’s second 
life’. 

n 

The five most treacherous deeds are, first, killing one’s father; 
second, killing one’s mother; third, killing an arhat;* fourth, shedding 
the blood of a Buddha; and fifth, destroying the harmony within the 
Sangha. 

With these five most treacherous deeds, those who commit just one of them will 
invariably fall into a hellish state in their next lifetime. There have been those who 
have committed all five of the most treacherous deeds, such as the female monastic 
Utpalavama during the time of the Kasho Buddha . 3 And there have been those who 
have committed just one of them, such as King Ajatashatru who killed his father 
during the lifetime of Shakyamuni Buddha. And there have been those who 
committed three of these most treacherous deeds. During the time of Shakyamuni 
Buddha there was Ajita, who killed his father, his mother, and an arhat. This Ajita 
committed these acts while in home life. Later, he was permitted to leave home life 
behind and become a monk. The monk Devadatta committed three of the most 
treacherous deeds, namely, creating a schism in the Sangha, shedding the Buddha’s 
blood, and killing an arhat. He was also called Daibadatto, which translates as 
Tennetsu (He of Celestial Passion). 


3. Utpalavarna’s story is told in several discourses, with the most extensive account being 
given in Discourse 84: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa (Kesa Kudoku). 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1034 


The story of Devadatta’s creating a schism in the Sangha is as follows: 

Devadatta induced five hundred monks who were either foolish 
or new to the training to follow him atop Mount Gaya where he 
promoted five false teachings, thereby splitting his followers away 
from the rest of the Sangha who kept true to the Buddha’s Teaching. 
Shariputra, being weary of this, caused Devadatta to fall into a deep 
sleep, while Moggallana roused Devadatta’s assembly and attempted 
to get them to return. When Devadatta awoke and saw what was 
happening, he gave rise to a vow that he would make the two disciples 
pay for their actions. Lifting up a boulder that was thirty hastas high 
and fifteen hastas wide, he hurled it at the Buddha . 4 5 A mountain spirit 
intercepted the stone with its hand, shattering it into shards, one of 
which wounded the Buddha’s foot, causing it to bleed. 

According to this account, Devadatta’s splitting of the Sangha came first and the 
spilling of blood happened later. According to other accounts, it is not clear which 
came first, the splitting of the Sangha or the spilling of blood. Also, Devadatta beat 
to death with his own fists the female monk Utpalavama, who was, by that time, an 
arhat. These are his three most treacherous deeds. 

In his wicked attempt to split the Sangha, he tried to spread false teaching 
and to split himself off from the monks who kept to the Teaching of the Buddha. 
Attempting to spread false teaching can only occur in three of the continents, the 
northern continent being excluded^ These attempts to spread false practices began 
while the Tathagata was still alive and will continue to occur right up to the time 
when the Dharma has disappeared. False teachings such as these occurred 
throughout all three of these continents only while the Tathagata was still alive. 
After His death, they appeared only in the southern continent of Jambudvipa* and 
not in the other continents. Expounding such false teachings is the most wicked act 
of all. 

As a result of his committing these three treacherous deeds, Devadatta fell 
into a hellish state of constant suffering in his next lifetime . 6 There are people who 


4. A hasta is an Indian unit of measurement equivalent to roughly 18 inches. 

5. The northern continent is excluded because it is inhabited only by blissful celestial beings, 
who would be impervious to what monks were up to. 

6. This state of constant suffering is known as the Avichi Hell and is the lowest hellish state 
among the six worlds of existence. Though the length of time someone may be in such a 
state is unpredictable, in Buddhism it is not a place of eternal damnation. 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1035 


have gone to great lengths to commit all five of these treacherous acts, and there 
are people who have committed only one of them, and there are those who, like 
Devadatta, have committed three of them. All of them fall into hellish states of 
continual suffering. Those who have committed just one treacherous deed will 
spend one eon in some hellish state of continual suffering as recompense. Those 
who have committed all five of them may receive five types of recompense within 
a single eon or they may receive them one after the other. 

An ancient worthy once said, “It says in the Agama Scriptures and in the 
Great Scripture on the Buddha s Parinirvana alike that such a one resides for an 
eon in various types of fire.” Furthermore, these Scriptures also state that the 
suffering varies according to the seriousness of their treacherous deeds. Now, 
Devadatta committed three treacherous acts, one after the other, and therefore will 
have three times the suffering which a wicked person receives from committing 
just one treacherous act. But Devadatta, upon reaching the end of his life, recited 
the word ‘homage’, which gave his wicked heart a bit of relief. Regretfully, he died 
before he could complete the phrase ‘Homage to the Buddha’. Though he had 
fallen into the state of continual suffering, Devadatta continued to take refuge in 
Shakyamuni Buddha, even though He was far away, and was thus able to resume 
doing good deeds. 

There were four other monks similar to Devadatta who had fallen into a 
hellish state of continual suffering. A monk named Kokalika was one among the 
thousand from the Shakya clan who left home life behind to become monks. When 
Devadatta and Kokalika were going out the city gate, the horse that they were 
riding suddenly stumbled, and the two fell off, their hats falling off as well. All 
those who saw this at the time said, “These two will not receive the benefits from 
the Buddha’s Teaching.” This monk Kokalika was also called Gukari. During his 
lifetime he slandered Shariputra and Moggallana, accusing them of committing 
acts that warranted expulsion from the Sangha. Although the World-honored One 
tried at the time to dissuade him, Kokalika did not stop, and even Lord Brahma 
came down to dissuade him, but again he did not stop. Due to his slandering the 
two venerable monks, he fell into a hellish state in his next lifetime. Even now, he 
is not provided with the conditions for developing good spiritual roots. 

When the monk who had attained the fourth meditative state reached the end 
of his life, he fell into a hellish state of continual suffering for having slandered the 
Buddha, even though he died in the intermediate world associated with the fourth 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1036 


meditative state . 7 Such a condition is called ‘retribution experienced in one’s next 
life’. 

n 

We characterize the effects of the five most treacherous deeds as being 
without interruption, and for five reasons: 

First, because the effects that such deeds produce occur 
immediately. That is, no sooner has such a wicked one performed such 
a deed than he immediately falls into a hellish state without 
experiencing any intervening state. 

Second, because the suffering that this person experiences from 
these effects is continual. For any of these five most treacherous acts, 
the wicked one falls into the Avichi Hell and, within the temporal 
space of a single immeasurable eon, experiences suffering that 
constantly streams on without the least moment of relief. Thus, we 
describe such an effect as being without interruption in accord with 
the suffering that it produces. 

Third, because the length of time during which any being is in 
this hellish state is not set and is beyond our ability to calculate. 
Hence, we speak of the effects of these five most treacherous deeds as 
being incessant because one who commits any of them will fall into 
the Avichi Hell and, within a single span of time, will experience 
suffering that streams on indefinitely without the least moment of 
relief. 

Fourth, because the span of that wicked one’s life while in the 
Avichi Hell is equally unlimited and beyond our ability to calculate. 

When someone falls into the Avichi Hell due to any of these five 
treacherous deeds, that person remains fully awake for an 
immeasurable eon, knowing no diminishing of suffering. Thus, we 
describe this hellish state as being without interruption in accord with 
the effects that it produces. 

Fifth, because while in the Avichi Hell, one’s very existence 
appears to be unlimited and immeasurable, filling the hell completely. 

This hell is eighty-four thousand yojanas* in length and breadth. 


7. The story of this monk is the subject of Discourse 91: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative 
State (Shizen Biku). The intennediate world refers to the period after death and before 
rebirth. 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1037 


When someone enters that hell, his existence completely fills the 
space and then, when any other person comes to enter it, that person’s 
existence also completely fills the space, and without the two 

o 

obstructing each other. 

Thus, we speak of the effects of the five most treacherous deeds 
as being without interruption in accord with the effects these deeds 
produce. 

n 

In the third temporal period, the retribution is experienced in 
some future lifetime. That is to say, when we promote or entertain 
karmic deeds in this lifetime and then, according to the seeds we have 
sown, fall into a hellish state in our third or fourth lifetime, or even 
hundreds of thousands of eons beyond, we call this ‘retribution 
experienced in some future lifetime’. 

In other words, there are those in this lifetime who have done good deeds and those 
who have done evil deeds. Even if they have ceased perpetuating such deeds, they 
will experience their good or evil karma in their third life, or their fourth life, or 
even after a hundred thousand future lives. This is what we call ‘the retribution 
experienced in some later future lifetime’. Most of a bodhisattva’s merit is the 
retribution that he or she experiences in a future lifetime from deeds accumulated 
over three asamkhyeya eons . 8 9 Not knowing such an underlying principle, trainees 
entertain ever so many doubts, like the Venerable Shayata in the opening story did 
whilst he was still in home life. Had he not met the Venerable Kumorata, he would 
have had a difficult time clarifying his doubts. 

When a trainee’s thinking is good, his evil thoughts disappear, and when his 
thinking is evil, his good thoughts immediately disappear. 

H 

Long ago in the country of Shravasti there lived two men. One 
was always doing what was good and the other was always doing 
what was evil. The trainee who was always doing what was good was 


8. That is, for any person in the Avichi Hell, nothing other than that hellish state seems to 
exist. 

9. An asamkhyeya eon is a period of time that is experienced as being intenninably long. A 
bodhisattva experiences these endless-seeming stretches of time just before entering 
Buddhahood. 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1038 


always practicing good deeds with his whole being, never entertaining 
what was harmful. The trainee who invited evil was always doing bad 
things with his whole being, never practicing what was good. 

When the one practicing good deeds approached the end of his 
life, a hellish intermediate world appeared before him, due to the 
strength of evil karma from several lifetimes earlier. Thereupon, he 
thought, “In my whole life I have always practiced good deeds and 
have never entertained evil. Surely, I should have been reborn in some 
celestial world. What conditions have caused this hellish intermediate 
world to appear before me?” Then the thought arose, “I must surely be 
receiving some bad karma from earlier lifetimes which has now 
become ripe, and therefore this hellish intermediate world has 
appeared.” He then remembered the good karma from his practice 
throughout his present lifetime, and a profound joy arose in him. 

Due to the thoughts of his good deeds appearing before him, the 
hellish intermediate world disappeared and a celestial intermediate 
world suddenly appeared in its place. After this, when his life had 
completely ended, he was reborn in a celestial world. 

This person who was always doing good not only thought, “This body of mine is, 
no doubt, receiving retribution from wicked deeds done in several past lifetimes,” 
but he also had a further thought, “For the good that I have practiced throughout 
my life, I shall surely receive recompense in the future.” This was why he was so 
deeply filled with joy. Because these thoughts of his were true, the hellish 
intermediate state disappeared and a celestial intermediate state immediately 
appeared before his eyes, and when his life completely ended, he was reborn in a 
celestial world. If this person had been a wicked one, and at the end of his life a 
hellish intermediate world appeared before his eyes, he might well have thought, 
“My practice of good throughout my whole life has brought me no merit. If good 
and bad karma exist, how come I am seeing a hellish intermediate world?” At this 
moment, he would be denying cause and effect, and would be slandering the Three 
Treasures. Should he be like this, then when he reached the end of his life, he 
would fall into some hellish state. Because this person was not like this, he was 
reborn in a celestial world. You need to grasp this fundamental principle and be 
clear about it. 

When a trainee who does wicked things reaches the end of his 
life, he may unexpectedly see before his eyes a celestial intermediate 
world of existence, due to the strength of his good deeds in former 
past lives. He may then think, “Throughout my life I have always 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1039 


done wicked practices and failed to ever practice what is good. By all 
rights, I should be reborn in some hell. What circumstances could 
there possibly have been that this intermediate world has appeared 
before my very eyes?” 

Thus, a false view has arisen, and he denies the existence of 
good and evil, as well as the fruition of much earlier good seeds, 
because he had sown only harmful seeds in his present life. Hence, 
when his life came to an end, he was reborn in some hellish world. 

As long as he lived, this person had consistently committed evil acts, and further, 
he had not practiced even one good deed. Not only that, when his life came to an 
end, he saw before his very eyes a celestial intermediate world, but he did not 
know about recompense from distant former lives. Thus, he thought, “During my 
whole life I committed evil acts, but I am about to be reborn in a celestial world. It 
is clear to me that good and evil karma have never existed.” Because of the 
strength of his false views, he denied the existence of good and evil karma in this 
way, so that the celestial intermediate world that appeared fell away and a hellish 
intermediate world quickly appeared before him and, ending his life, he fell into 
some hell. It was due to this false view of his that the celestial intermediate world 
disappeared. So, you trainees, by all means do not hold to false views! Leam which 
views are false and which are true until your bodily life has exhausted itself. 

First off, to deny causality, to slander Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, and to 
deny both the three temporal worlds and liberation from them are all false views. 
You need to keep in mind that, in this lifetime, you will not have two or three 
bodies. Were you to vainly fall into false views and experience evil karma to no 
avail, how regrettable that would be! When someone, while engaged in some evil 
act, thinks that it is not evil simply because they hold to the erroneous belief that 
such an act does not produce retribution for wrongdoing, this does not mean that 
this person will not experience recompense for their evil deeds. According to their 
wrongful thinking, the recompense for good that comes may turn around and come 
back at them as recompense for evil. 

n 

The Imperial Chaplain Kogetsu once asked the venerable monk 
Chosa Keishin, “An ancient worthy once said, ‘After we have fully 
understood, we see that our karmic hindrances have been empty all 
along. When we have not yet fully understood, then we must, by all 
means, pay off all our old debts.’ So, how were those like the 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1040 


Venerable Shishibodai and our great Master Eka, the Second Chinese 
Ancestor, able to pay off all their old debts ?” 10 

Chosa replied, “O my virtuous one, you have not yet 
experienced their being empty all along.” 

Kogetsu then asked, “What, pray, is this ‘being empty all 
along?’” 

Chosa responded, “It is what karmic hindrances are.” 

Kogetsu then asked, “Just what are karmic hindrances?” 

Chosa replied, “What has been empty all along.” 

Kogetsu was at a loss for words. Chosa then gave him the 
following poem: 

What conditionally exists, from the first, is not 
That which truly exists, 

And the disappearance of the conditioned is not 
a case of there being nothing. 

The meaning of “Nirvana is the paying off of 
old debts ” 

Is that our one True Nature is free from the 
discriminatory. 

Chosa Keishin was Meditation Master Nansen Fugan’s foremost disciple. He had a 
reputation for having explored the Matter 515 with his Master over a long period of 
time. Be that as it may, in the present story he was not able to fully grasp the 
fundamental principle. For instance, he did not understand what Yoka Genkaku 
was talking about , 11 nor had he clarified what Kumorata’s compassionate 
instructions to Shayata were. Far and away, it was as if he had not encountered 
even in his dreams what had been voiced by the World-honored One. Since all that 
the Buddhas and Ancestors have been expressing had not been Transmitted to you, 
Chosa, who could esteem and respect you? 

There are three type of spiritual hindrances: karmic hindrances (which arise 
from our deliberate deeds), compensatory hindrances (which arise as recompense 
for our past deeds), and defiling hindrances (which arise from our pursuit of our 
passions). What we call the ‘five most treacherous deeds’ are an example of karmic 


10. Shishibodai and Taiso Eka were both executed and were, therefore, unable to complete their 
full natural life span. 

11. An allusion to Genkaku’s famous poem, “The Song that Attests to the Way”. One translation 
of this is found in Buddhist Writings on Meditation and Daily Practice, (Shasta Abbey Press, 
1994), pp. 223-241. 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1041 


hindrances. Although this was not at the heart of what Kogetsu was asking, what he 
was saying concerning the past was based on the assumption that karma never 
disappears but tends to arise as karma from some distant past life. Your error, 
Chosa, was that when you were asked, “What, pray, does ‘being empty all along’ 
mean?” you responded that it refers to karmic hindrances. But how could ‘karmic 
hindrance’ mean ‘something that has been empty all along’? Since karmic 
hindrances are something created by our actions, how can something we have 
created be ‘empty all along’? ‘Created’ and ‘non-created’ exist only in relation to 
each other. If we did not create them, they would not be karmic hindrances, and if 
they are something that is created, they would not be something that has been 
empty all along. It is a non-Buddhist view that karmic hindrances are empty when 
their true nature has not yet been stirred up. If, as you say, karmic hindrances are 
‘empty all along’, then human beings who indulge in creating karma would have 
no chance of liberating themselves. If they had no way of liberating themselves, 
then Buddhas could not have come forth in the world. If Buddhas had not come 
forth in the world, then our Ancestral Master Bodhidharma could not have come 
from the West. If our Ancestral Master had not come from the West, there could not 
have been a Nansen. If there had not been a Nansen, who would you have 
exchanged the Eyes of training with? 

Further, when Kogetsu asked, “Just what, pray, are karmic hindrances?” you 
replied, “What has been empty all along.” This resembles the old ‘tethering the 
horse’ response . 12 Even so, it would appear that, due to your weak abilities, you did 
not fully understand the Matter and were not the equal of the shrine priest who was 
long in training. This must have been why you gave rise to silly words like those in 
this dialogue. 

Afterwards, you gave him your poem, with the lines: 

The meaning of “Nirvana is the paying off of 
old debts ” 

Is that our one True Nature is free from the 
discriminatory. 

As to the one True Nature of which you spoke, just what is that ‘True Nature’? 
Pray, which among the three natures do you consider It to be ? 13 Would it be fair to 


12. That is, when someone asks, “Who tethered the horse?” the one asked replies, “The owner 
of the horse,” and when then asked, “Who is the owner of the horse?” the one asked replies, 
“The one who tethered the horse.” 

13. A reference to the nature of our deliberate acts. That is, they are good, bad, or neutral. 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 


1042 


say that you do not know that ‘our True Nature’ refers to ‘nirvana being our having 
paid off our old debts? ’ When you speak of nirvana, what is this nirvana of yours? 
Would it be the nirvana of the shravakas?* Or the nirvana of the 
pratyekabuddhas? * Or the nirvana of the Buddha? No matter which, yours cannot 
equal the meaning of ‘paying off old debts’. What you are expressing is not what 
the Buddhas and Ancestors expressed. Further, you need to buy some straw sandals 
and go off hunting for a true Master. Those like the Venerable Shishibodai and our 
great Master Eka, the Second Chinese Ancestor, have suffered personal injury for 
the sake of wicked people. Why would you want to resemble those transgressors 
who caused such harm? This is not your final body, nor is it a body that will not 
have an intermediate world, so why would you not experience retribution in some 
future lifetime? If the time is already ripe for you to receive recompense in the 
future, it will not be something for you to doubt now. Obviously, you need to 
recognize that Chosa had not yet clarified what the effects of karma in the three 
temporal worlds are. 

Those who are truly serious in their training must clarify what the effects of 
karma in the three temporal periods are. Then they will undoubtedly be like the 
Venerable Kumorata. This is already the activity of those in our Ancestral tradition, 
so it should not be discarded or neglected. Besides that, you need to explore 
extensively through your training all eight kinds of karma, which includes such 
things as temporally unfixed karma . 14 Those who have not yet understood karmic 
retribution cannot have received the genuine Transmission of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors. Those who are not yet clear about the principle of karmic retribution in 
the three temporal periods should not go about recklessly calling themselves 
teachers and spiritual guides for ordinary people and those in lofty positions. 

n 

The World-honored One once said: “Even were hundreds of 
thousands of eons to pass, the karmic consequences from what we 
have created do not disappear. When dealing with causes and 
conditions, we naturally receive the fruits therefrom as karmic 
recompense. By all means, you should all know that if your moral acts 
are completely impure, you will get completely impure results when 
the recompense from this matures. And if your moral acts are 


14. The eight kinds of karma are good karma that acts within each of the three temporal periods, 
plus good karma that is not limited to just one of these periods, and misfortunate karma 
within each of these three periods, plus unlimited misfortunate karma. 



Shobogenzo: On Karmic Retribution in the Three Temporal Periods 1043 

completely pure, you will get completely pure results when the 
recompense from this matures. And if your moral acts are a mix of 
impure and pure, you will get mixed results when the recompense 
from this matures. Therefore, by all means, you should avoid acts that 
are completely impure or a mix of impure and pure. You should make 
every effort to explore through your training with your Master what 
completely pure deeds are.” 

Then, having heard what the Buddha voiced, all in the great 
assembly rejoiced and received it in trust. 

As the World-honored One has taught, when the members of the assembly have 
ceased to create mixed good and bad karma, even were hundreds of thousands of 
myriad eons to pass, they will not let our practice die out. Whenever any of them 
encounter causality, invariably they immediately become aware of it. Thus, when 
we feel remorse for our evil deeds and, in repentance, bring them to a halt, that will 
alter our heavy misdeeds, causing us to receive lighter consequences. If we take 
joy in good deeds—be they one’s own or another’s—we will want to increase them 
more and more, which is what I mean by ‘not letting the practice die out’. And 
there is, indeed, recompense for that! 

Copied on the ninth day of the third lunar month in the fifth year of the Kencho era (March 8, 
1253) whilst in the Chief Junior s quarters at Eihei-ji Temple. 

Ejo 



90 

On ‘The Four Horses’ 

(Shime) 

Translator’s introduction: This discourse is based on a widely quoted description of four kinds 
of trainees when they encounter the Buddhist Teaching on impermanence. The training of the 
four kinds is likened to the training of four types of horses. 

One day a non-Buddhist came to where the Buddha was in 
order to pay the World-honored One a visit. He said to the Buddha, “I 
do not ask You whether You have words for It, nor do I ask You 
whether there are no words for It.” 

The World-honored One sat in silence for some good while. 

Thereupon, the non-Buddhist humbly bowed and, in praise, 
said, “How fine, O World-honored One! Your great benevolence and 
great compassion have parted the clouds of my delusion and made it 
possible for me to enter the Truth.” He then made a prostration and 
departed. 

After the non-Buddhist had departed, Ananda then asked the 
Buddha, “What did the non-Buddhist realize that led him to say that 
he had entered the Truth and then, after praising You, depart?” 

The World-honored One replied, “He was like a good horse 
who just goes forth upon seeing but the shadow of a riding crop.” 

Since the time when our Ancestral Master Bodhidharma came from the West up to 
the present, there have been many good Masters who have taken up this account 
and given it to those training under them. Among the trainees, there were those 
who took years and others who took months or even just days before they clarified 
the Matter* and came to trust in the Buddha’s Dharma. We call this the account of 
the non-Buddhist who asked for the Buddha’s explanation of the Matter. You need 
to realize that the World-honored One had two sorts of explanation: by spiritual 
silence and by spiritual explanation. Those who are able to enter the Truth via this 
narrative are all like a good horse who sees the shadow of the riding crop and 


* See Glossary. 


1044 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Four Horses ’ 


1045 


gallops forth. Those who are able to enter the Truth via a way of explaining the 
Matter that goes beyond spiritual silence and spiritual explanation are also like this. 


Our Ancestral Teacher Nagarjuna once said the following, “When I explain 
some phrase from a Scripture for the benefit of someone, it is as if that person were 
a swift horse who has seen the shadow of a riding crop and takes to the appropriate 
path.” On any occasion whatsoever, whether when listening to Teaching on that 
which arises and That which does not arise, or listening to Teaching on the Three 
Vehicles* and the One Vehicle, there are often those who gallop off on a false path, 
but just as often there are those who can see the shadow of the riding crop and 
thereby take to the genuine Path. If you encounter such a person in your pursuit of 
a Master, there will be no place where he or she does not express some Scriptural 
phrase for your benefit, nor will there be any time when you can say that the 
shadow of the riding crop is not to be seen. Those who see the shadow of the riding 
crop immediately upon sitting in meditation, those who see the shadow of the 
riding crop after three immeasurably long eons, and those who see the shadow of 
the riding crop after innumerable eons of eons are all capable of entering the 
genuine Path. 


In one of the Agama Scriptures, there is the following passage: 

The Buddha once told his monks that there were four kinds of 
horses. The first, upon seeing the shadow of the riding crop, is startled 
and forthwith follows the wish of its rider. The second, startled when 
the crop touches its hair, forthwith follows the wish of its rider. The 
third is startled after the crop touches its flesh. The fourth is awakened 
only after the touch of the riding crop is felt in its bones. 

The first horse is like the person who hears about the death of 
someone in a distant monastic community and forthwith feels aversion 
for things of the world. The next horse is like the person who hears of 
the death of someone within their own monastic community and then 
feels aversion for things of the world. The third horse is like the 
person who hears of the death of someone near and dear to them and 
then feels aversion for things of the world. The fourth horse is like the 
person whose own body experiences sickness and suffering, and only 
then feels aversion for things of the world. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Four Horses ’ 


1046 


This is the metaphor of the four horses in the Agama Scriptures. When you are 
exploring through your training what the Buddha’s Dharma is, this is certainly a 
good place to study. Those among ordinary people or those in lofty stations who 
emerge as spiritually good friends and guides, later, as emissaries of the Buddha, 
become Ancestral Masters. All of them have invariably explored this Teaching 
through their practice and pass it on for the benefit of their disciples. Those who do 
not know it are not spiritually good friends and guides for ordinary people or for 
those more lofty. Those human disciples who have grown good, thick roots and are 
intimate with the Buddha’s words and ways have invariably been able to hear this 
Teaching. Those who are ever so far from the Buddha’s words and ways have not 
heard it, nor do they know it. Hence, those who would be master teachers should 
consider presenting it without delay, and disciples should pray that they may hear 
of it without delay. 

The meaning of ‘feeling aversion for things of the world’ has been given in 
the Vimalakirti Scripture , as follows: 

When the Buddha gives voice to a single utterance of Dharma, 
sentient beings are able to free themselves from suffering in accord 
with their type. Some will experience fear, some will feel joy, some 
will give rise to aversion for things of the world, some will cut 
through their doubts. 


The Great Scripture on the Buddha’s Parinirvana quotes the Buddha as 
saying the following: 

Next, my good disciples, it is like training horses. Generally 
speaking, there are four kinds of horses. With the first, contact is made 
through their hair. With the second, contact is made through their skin. 

With the third, contact is made through their flesh. With the fourth, 
contact is made through their bones. They obey the trainer’s wish, 
depending on which part is contacted. 

The situation is also like this for the Tathagata. By means of 
four methods, He restrains and subdues sentient beings. With the first, 
the Buddha explains for their benefit what ‘being alive’ means, 
whereby they accept what He says. They are like horses who follow 
the wish of their rider once he has made contact with their hair. With 
the second, the Buddha explains what ‘being alive, along with aging’ 
means, whereby they accept what He says. They are like horses who 
follow the wish of their rider once he has made contact with their hair 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Four Horses ’ 


1047 


and skin. With the third, the Buddha explains what ‘being alive, along 
with aging and sickening’ means, whereby they accept what He says. 

They are like horses who follow the wish of their rider once he has 
made contact with their hair, skin, and flesh. With the fourth, He 
explains what ‘being alive, along with aging, sickening, and dying’ 
means, whereby they accept what the Buddha says. They are like 
horses who follow the wish of their rider once he has made contact 
with their hair, skin, flesh, and bones. 

O my good disciples, there is nothing assured when it comes to 
a rider training a horse, but with the World-honored Tathagata’s 
restraining and subduing sentient beings, His efforts are assured and 
never in vain. This is why the Buddha was given the epithet of Tamer 
and Subduer of Those Who Are Strong in Their Determination. 

This is called “The Four Horses of the Great Scripture on the Buddha’s 
Parinirvana ”. There are no trainees who have failed to leam of it and no Buddhas 
who have failed to teach it. We hear it when we follow the Buddha. Of necessity, 
we pay heed to it whenever we encounter and offer our service to a Buddha. Once 
we have had the Buddha Dharma Transmitted to us, we continually give expression 
to It for the sake of sentient beings. When we ultimately arrive at Buddhahood, we 
voice It for the sake of the great assembly of bodhisattvas* and all others—worldly 
and celestial—who will listen, just as if it were the first time that our wish to 
realize the Truth had arisen. This is why the Three Treasures of Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha have continued on without interruption. 

Because this is the way things are, what Buddhas teach is far from what 
bodhisattvas teach. You need to keep in mind that, generally speaking, there are 
these four methods of a trainer of horses, namely, making contact with the hair, 
making contact with the skin, making contact with the flesh, and making contact 
with the bones. It may not be apparent what the object is that makes contact with 
the hair, but in the opinion of virtuous bodhisattva-mahasattvas* who Transmit the 
Dharma, it might be a whip. 1 At the same time, among the methods for training a 
horse, there are those who may employ a whip and those who do not employ a 
whip, since the training of horses may not invariably require a whip. 


1. The word ben translates both as ‘riding crop’ and ‘whip’. In neither case is its use viewed as 
an instrument of punishment in Buddhist training. Rather, it may be considered as an 
instrument for getting someone’s attention or pointing the way. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Four Horses ’ 


1048 


Horses that stand eight feet high are called dragon horses. There are few 
humans who are prepared to train such horses. There are also horses called 
thousand-league horses, since they can run a thousand leagues in one day. When 
running five hundred leagues, these horses are said to sweat blood, but after five 
hundred leagues, they speedily run on, refreshed. Those who ride these horses are 
few, as are those who know how to train them. There are no such horses in China, 
but there are some in other lands. It seems that one does not often need to apply a 
whip to these horses. Even so, an old worthy once said, “In training horses, one 
invariably applies a whip. Without a whip, a horse is not trained, for this is the 
method for training a horse.” 

Now, there are the four methods of contacting the hair, the skin, the flesh, 
and the bones. To contact the skin while leaving the hair untouched is not possible, 
nor can one contact the flesh and the bones without touching the hair and the skin. 
This is how we know that one needs to add the whip. That this has not been 
explained here is due to something lacking in the old worthy’s statement." There 
are many places like this in Scriptural writings. 

The World-honored Tathagata, Tamer and Subduer of Those Who Are Strong 
in Their Determination, was also like such a horse trainer. He subdued and 
restrained all sentient beings by means of these four methods, assuredly and never 
in vain. That is to say, there were those who accepted His words when He 
explained for their benefit what ‘being alive’ means. And there were those who 
accepted His words when He explained what ‘being alive and aging’ means. And 
there were those who accepted His words when He explained what ‘being alive, 
aging, and sickening’ means. And there were those who accepted His words when 
He explained what ‘being alive, aging, sickening, and dying’ means. Those who 
leam of the last three cannot avoid the first one. It is just as in training horses in the 
world: there is no contacting skin, flesh, or bones apart from contacting hair. 
Explaining for the sake of others what ‘being alive, aging, sickening, and dying’ 
means that it was He, the World-honored Tathagata, who taught the meaning of 
‘being alive, aging, sickening, and dying’. He did not do so in order to help people 
to cut themselves off from being alive, aging, sickening, and dying. Nor did He 
teach that being alive, aging, sickening, and dying is what Truth is. Nor did He 
teach this in order to get people to understand that being alive, aging, sickening, 
and dying are what Truth is. He taught this ‘being alive, aging, sickening, and 
dying’ for the sake of others in order to put before all sentient beings the Truth of 


2. In the original Chinese text of what the old worthy said, the word ‘whip’ does not occur. 
Dogen’s Japanese paraphrase is unclear as to whether he is referring to a whip or a riding 
crop. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘The Four Horses ’ 


1049 


supreme, fully perfected enlightenment. Thus, the success of the World-honored 
Tathagata’s efforts to restrain and subdue sentient beings are assured and never in 
vain. This is why He is called the Awakened One, Tamer and Subduer of Those 
Who Are Strong in Their Determination. 

On a day during the summer retreat in the seventh year of the Kencho era (1255), I finished 
copying and proofing this from the Master s draft. 

Ejo 



91 

On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


(Shizen Biku) 


Translator’s Introduction: In the first part of this discourse, Dogen quotes a cautionary tale 
concerning a monk who misunderstood what he was experiencing in his meditation and thought 
that he had realized arhathood, whereas he had simply realized a state of meditative equanimity 
associated with the removing of delusions from within the world of form. 

In the second part of this discourse, Dogen takes up ‘The Tripod Theory’, a view that was 
popular in China at the time. It held that Chinese culture was based on the teachings of Lao-tzu, 
Confucius, and Shakyamuni, the respective founders of Taoism, Confucianism, and Buddhism, 
and that, just as a tripod needs all three of its legs in order to remain upright, so too the Chinese 
needed all three of these teachings in order to maintain their culture. The underlying premise for 
this view was that these three represented three essential ways of stating the same fundamental 
teaching. In refutation of this theory, Dogen points out that Buddhism does not need Taoism or 
Confucianism to justify Its existence in China or anywhere else and that, in addition, the Buddha 
Dharma is not the same as the teachings of Confucius and Lao-tzu. 


Our Fourteenth Indian Ancestral Master Nagarjuna once said the following: 

There was once a certain monk among the Buddha’s disciples 
who, upon experiencing the fourth meditative state, became filled with 
conceit, fancying that he had attained the fourth stage of arhathood. 
Previously, upon experiencing the first meditative state, he 
straightaway imagined that he had attained the first stage of 
arhathood, that of being a stream-entrant. 1 2 3 When he experienced the 
second meditative state, he imagined that he had attained the second 
stage of arhathood, that of a once-returner. When he experienced the 
third meditative state, he imagined that he had attained the third stage 

■j 

of arhathood, that of a non-returner. When he experienced the fourth 


1. That is, one who has understood the Truth of the Buddha’s Teachings and, as a result of 
following those Teachings, will be subject to no more than seven rebirths in the future. 

2. That is, one who will be reborn but one more time. 

3. That is, one who will not be reborn into the world of desire again. 


1050 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1051 


meditative state, he imagined that he had attained the fourth stage of 
arhathood, that of a full arhat . 4 Confident of this, he became proud of 
himself and did not seek to advance any farther in his training. 

When his life was just about to end, he saw rising before him 
what appeared to be an intermediate world, one associated with the 
fourth meditative state . 5 Thereupon he gave rise to a mistaken notion, 
thinking, “There is no nirvana. The Buddha has deceived me.” 
Because of his unrepentant mistaken view, the intermediate world of 
the fourth meditative state disappeared and a hellish intermediate 
world arose. Then, upon his death, he was reborn into a hellish world 
of incessant suffering. 

The monks asked the Buddha, “At the end of this mistaken 
monk’s life, where was he reborn?” 

The Buddha replied, “That person was reborn in a hellish world 
of incessant suffering.” 

The monks were greatly dismayed, “Can doing meditation and 
keeping to the Precepts lead to that?” 

The Buddha answered as before and then added, “This was all 
due to his being filled with conceit. When he experienced the fourth 
meditative state, he fancied that he had attained the fourth stage of 
arhathood. Facing the end of his life, he saw the appearance of the 
intermediate world of the fourth meditative state, and then gave rise to 
a mistaken view, thinking, ‘There is no nirvana. Now even though I 
am an arhat, I am to be reborn. The Buddha has deceived me.’ 
Because of this, he saw the appearance of a hellish intermediate world 
and, after his passing, he was reborn into that hellish world.” The 
Buddha then composed the following verse: 

Though hearing much, holding to the Precepts, and doing 
meditation, 

He had not yet acquired the method for bringing his 
excesses to an end. 

Though he had the merit from his actions, 

It was hard for him to have faith in this matter. 


4. That is, one who has cleansed his or her heart of all greed, hatred and delusion and will not 
be reborn into any of the six worlds of existence again. 

5. The intermediate world refers to the period between death and rebirth. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1052 


It was for his slandering Buddha that he fell into a hell, 

Which was in no way connected with the fourth great 
meditative state. 

This monk is known as ‘the monk in the fourth meditative state’, as well as ‘the 
monk who did not give ear to the Teaching’. We are being cautioned about 
mistaking the fourth meditative state for the fourth stage of arhathood, as well as 
being cautioned about harboring false views that slander the Buddha. All the 
people in His great assembly, whether ordinary people or those in lofty positions, 
knew about this event. From the time when the Tathagata was in the world up to 
this very day, both those in India and those in China, have ridiculed mistaken views 
in order to caution someone against being attached to what is wrong, saying, “That 
is like realizing the fourth meditative state and taking it to be the fourth stage of 
arhathood.” 

Let me summarize for you three ways in which this monk was mistaken . 6 In 
the first place, he was someone who did not give ear to the Teaching and therefore 
was not up to distinguishing between the fourth meditative state and the fourth 
stage of arhathood. And he vainly kept his distance from the Buddha as well as idly 
living off by himself. He was fortunate enough to live at a time when the Tathagata 
was in the world. Had he continually paid visits to where the Buddha was, 
regularly encountering Him and listening to His Teaching, he would not have made 
the mistakes that he did. Nevertheless, because he lived off by himself like a hermit 
and did not go to places where the Buddha was in order to hear His Teaching, he 
was the way he was. Even though he failed to go where the Buddha was, he could 
have gone to where the great arhats were and received instruction from them. To 
live alone to no good purpose is a mistake born of conceit. 

In the second place, to attain the first meditative state and think it to be the 
first stage of arhathood, then to attain the second meditative state and think it to be 
the second stage of arhathood, then to attain the third meditative state and think it 
to be the third stage of arhathood, then to attain the fourth meditative state and 
think it to be the fourth stage of arhathood, this was his second mistake. How could 
he possibly have compared the way the first, second, third, and fourth meditative 
states appear with the way the first, second, third, and fourth stages of arhathood 
appear? This was due to the fault of his not giving ear to the Teaching, a fault 
derived from his not taking refuge in his Master and thereby remaining in the dark. 


6. The first two ways are given in this paragraph and the following one. The third way is not 
given until later in the discourse. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1053 


djb 

Among the disciples of Ubakikuta, there was a certain monk 
who, in all good faith, had left home life behind, and upon realizing 
the fourth meditative state, took it to be the fourth stage of arhathood. 
Ubakikuta, using his skillful means, had him go live in some distant 
place. He then made a band of thieves, along with five hundred 
merchants, materialize upon the monk’s path. The thieves threatened 
to slaughter the merchants. The monk, seeing this, feared for his life, 
but then it suddenly occurred to him, “I am surely not an arhat. I must 
just be at the third stage of arhathood .” 7 

After all the merchants had fled, only the daughter of a wealthy 
merchant remained behind. She asked the monk, “All I pray for is 
that, out of your great virtue, you will let me come with you.” The 
monk replied, “The Buddha does not permit us to travel with a 
woman.” The young girl said, “Be that as it may, I will just follow 
behind you, my virtuous monk.” Taking pity on her, the monk went 
forth, fulfilling the wishes of both by maintaining a proper distance 
between them. 

The Venerable Ubakikuta then caused a great river to appear. 
The young woman said, “O great virtuous one, will you cross this 
with me?” The monk was downstream and the young woman was 
upstream when the woman fell into the water. “O great virtuous one, 
save me!” she cried. Then, as the monk reached out his hands to pull 
her from the river, thoughts of how soft she felt welled up in him, by 
which he knew that he was not a non-retumer. Feeling intense craving 
for her, he picked her up and took her to a secluded place, desiring to 
have intercourse with her, when he saw that she was actually his 
Master. Giving rise to deep shame, he stood with his head hanging 
low. 

The Venerable One then instructed him, saying, “For a long 
time you have fancied yourself to be an arhat, so how could you 
possibly want to commit such an act?” Leading the monk back to the 
community, He had him express his remorse to them, and explained to 


7. The fourth stage is marked by equanimity, which the monk realized that he lacked due to his 
feelings of fear. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1054 


him the essence of the Dharma, thereby causing him to truly attain 
arhathood . 8 

Although this monk’s mistake in the first place was having an inflated view of 
himself, more specifically, when he witnessed the threat of a massacre, he gave 
way to fear. At the time he thought, “I am not a full arhat,” still he made the 
mistake of thinking that he must be in the third stage of arhathood. Later, when he 
gave rise to thoughts of how soft the woman felt, thereby allowing carnal desires to 
well up, he knew that he was not a non-returner. Moreover, unlike the monk in the 
fourth meditative state, he did not give rise to thoughts that slandered the Buddha, 
nor to thoughts that slandered the Dharma, nor to thoughts that violated the 
Scriptures. Because this monk had the strength from having formally studied the 
sacred Teachings, he realized that he himself was not an arhat or even a non¬ 
returner. People today who do not give ear to the Teaching do not know what an 
arhat is, much less what a Buddha is, so they do not know that they themselves are 
not yet an arhat or a Buddha; they just recklessly go around thinking, “I am 
Buddha,” which is an enormous mistake. Their’s must be a deep-seated fault. 
Students of the Way must, by all means, learn first off just what a Buddha is. 


A virtuous one of old once said, “Those who study the saintly Scriptures 
know, for the most part, what follows upon what, so, should they go beyond the 
proper bounds, their fault is easily recognized and corrected.” How true are these 
words of that virtuous one of old! Though people give rise to personal opinions, if 
they have studiously learned even a little bit of the Buddha’s Teachings, they will 
not be deceived by themselves or be deluded by others. 

There was once a man—or so have I heard—who thought he 
had realized Buddhahood, but as he waited, the light of dawn did not 
emblazon the sky, as he had anticipated, so he thought it must be due 
to an obstruction by Mara. When the dawn finally came to full 
daylight, he did not encounter Brahma encouraging him to give voice 
to the Dharma. So, he knew he was not a Buddha, and thus he 
reckoned he was an arhat. But when others reviled him over this, his 
mind gave rise to negative thinking, so he knew that he was not an 
arhat. Thus, he imagined that he was at the third stage of arhathood. 


8. This quote comes from a commentary on a text written by Master Tendai Chigi, the founder 
of the Tendai tradition. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1055 


And then, when he encountered certain women, he gave rise to 

lascivious thoughts, thereby knowing that he was not a saintly person. 

Here too was one who truly knew the forms of the Teaching and therefore was not 
different from the person in the previous story. 

Now, those who know the Buddha Dharma recognize their mistakes all on 
their own. Those who are ignorant of their mistakes vainly stay in their befuddled 
state of mind for the whole of their lives. And it may be like this for them in life 
after life. Even though that disciple of Ubakikuta’s had attained the fourth 
meditative state and took it for the fourth stage of arhathood, he was wise enough 
to know that he was not an arhat. Even with the monk who did not give ear to the 
Teaching, if upon seeing an intermediate world of the fourth meditative state at the 
end of his life, he had realized that he was not an arhat, he would not have 
committed the wrong of slandering the Buddha. And what’s more, it had been a 
long time since he had realized the fourth meditative state, so why did he not 
realize upon reflection that it could not be the fourth stage of arhathood? And if he 
already knew that it was not the fourth stage of arhathood, why did he not correct 
his thinking? Instead, he idly stuck to his mistaken view, drowning in his false 
opinion of himself. 

In the third place, as his life came to an end, he made a huge mistake. The 
fault was so profound that he ultimately fell into a hellish state of incessant 
suffering. I want to say to him, “Even if, during your whole lifetime, you were 
convinced that you had come to the fourth stage of arhathood, and then, at the end 
of your life an intermediate world of the fourth meditative state appeared, you 
should have acknowledged your lifelong error, realizing that you were never at the 
fourth stage of arhathood. How could you possibly harbor the thought, ‘The 
Buddha has deceived me. Even though there is no nirvana, He has invented one?’ 
This was a fault due to your not giving ear to the Teaching. This wrongful way 
slanders the Buddha. Accordingly, when the intermediate state of a hellish world 
appeared, you ended your life by falling into a hell of incessant suffering. How 
could anyone possibly be the equal of a Tathagata, even a saintly one of the fourth 
stage of arhathood?” 

Shariputra had long been a saintly person at the fourth stage of arhathood. 
Were we to gather up all the spiritually wise discernment that exists in the three- 
thousand great-thousandfold world and, after excluding that of the Tathagata, treat 
what remained as one tenth, and then compare a sixteenth of Shariputra’s wise 
discernment with that wise discernment that remained in the three-thousand great- 
thousandfold world, it would not equal one tenth of that sixteenth that Shariputra 
had. Even so, upon hearing the Tathagata give voice to Teaching that he had never 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1056 


heard before, Shariputra did not think, “What the Buddha is now saying is different 
from what He said earlier. Surely, He is deceiving me.” Rather he says in praise of 
the Tathagata, “Mara the Tempter has nothing like this to offer!” The Tathagata 
once ferried a rich man to the Other Shore, one whom Shariputra would not ferry 
to the Other Shore: this is clearly the difference between Shariputra’s having only 
realized the fourth stage of arhathood, whereas the Tathagata had realized 
Buddhahood . 9 

If the universe in all ten quarters were filled with folks like Shariputra and 
his disciples and they all together tried to fully fathom the Buddha’s wise 
discernment, they could not succeed. And Confucius and Lao-tzu never had such 
meritorious virtue. Who among those who have pursued a study of the Buddha 
Dharma would be unable to fathom the teachings of Confucius or Lao-tzu ? 10 But 
among those who have devoted themselves to a study of Confucius or Lao-tzu, 
have any ever been able to fathom what the Buddha Dharma is? Nowadays, folks 
in Sung China, by and large, hold to the notion that the teachings of Confucius and 
Lao-tzu are in agreement with the Buddha’s Dharma. Theirs is a most profoundly 
distorted view, one we shall explore by and by. 

When the monk in the fourth state of meditation took his distorted view as 
being true, he fancied that the Tathagata had deceived him, and turned his back on 
the Buddha for ever so long. The enormity of his folly was the equal of such 
persons as the six non-Buddhist teachers . 11 

A virtuous one of old once said: “Even when our Great Master was in the 
world, there were people with fallacious views and personal opinions. And what is 
worse, after His passing, there have been those who have been unable to 
experience meditative states for want of a Master.” The Great Master referred to 
here is the World-honored Buddha. In truth, even those who had left home life 
behind and received ordination when the World-honored One was in the world 


9. An allusion to a wealthy man who, at the age of one hundred, resolved to be a monk. 
Shariputra did not allow him to enter the assembly because of his age. The Buddha, hearing 
of this, did permit him to become a monk, which ultimately led him to realize Buddhahood. 

10. A thorough knowledge of the works attributed to Confucius, Lao-tzu, and, later, Chuang-tzu 
was considered essential for any educated Chinese male, and this continued for over twenty- 
five hundred years, until their writings were replaced by Mao’s Little Red Book. 

11. They lived at the time of the Buddha and are identified in Pali Scriptures as Purana Kassapa 
(an amoralist who denied that good and evil exist), Makkari Gosala (a fatalist), Sanjati 
Belattiputta (a skeptic), Ajita Kesakambara (a materialist), Pakudha Kaccayana (who 
explained the universe in terms of seven elemental factors), and Nigantha Natapuha 
(Founder of Jainism, who believed in the relativity of all things). 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1057 


found it difficult to avoid having mistaken views and personal opinions, due to 
their not giving ear to His Teaching. How much less can we avoid mistakes, we 
who live in a remote land during the last five hundred year period following the 
demise of the Tathagata! Even someone who has given rise to the fourth 
meditative state is like this. How much less worthy of mention are those who have 
not even reached the fourth meditative state and vainly drown in their craving for 
fame and their greed for gain, that bunch who yearn for official careers and worldly 
pursuits! Today in Great Sung China there are many ill-informed and silly people, 
who say, “The teachings of Lao-tzu and Confucius are in accord with what the 
Buddha Taught, so their paths are not divergent.” 


In Great Sung China during the Chia-tai era (1201-1205), there was a monk 
named Shoju who presented to the emperor a thirty-fascicle work that he had 
edited entitled the Chia-tai Era Record of the Lamp Whose Light Reaches 
Everywhere. In it, he said: 

Your humble subject heard the words of Kozan Chi’en who 
said, “My way is like a tripod, and its three teachings are like its legs. 
Should the tripod lack one leg, it would tip over.” Your humble 
subject has deeply admired that man for ever so long and has explored 
his persuasive remarks. Thus I have come to realize that the essence of 
the teachings of Confucius is sincerity and the essence of the 
teachings of Taoism resides in a non-judgmental heart. The essence of 
the Shakya’s teaching resides in seeing one’s True Nature. ‘Sincerity,’ 
‘non-judgmentalism,’ and ‘seeing one’s True Nature’ are different in 
name but the same in substance. When we reach the place that they all 
ultimately come down to, there is nothing to be understood except this 
teaching, and so forth... 

People who hold such mistaken views and personal opinions are many indeed; they 
are not limited to Chi’en and Shoju. The error of these folks is more profound than 
those who have realized the fourth meditative state and think that they have 
experienced the fourth stage of arhathood, for they are surely slandering Buddha, 
slandering Dharma, and slandering Sangha. They have already denied liberation, 
the three temporal worlds, and cause and effect. Beyond doubt, in their jungle of 


12. ‘The last five hundred years’ refers to the third and final five hundred year period when the 
Dharma will have become so degenerate as to be spiritually ineffective. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1058 


entanglements and confusion, they have invited calamity and woe. They are the 
equals of that bunch who think that there are no Three Treasures, Four Noble 
Truths, or four types of monks. The essence of the Buddha Dharma has never 
been simply seeing one’s True Nature. Where have any of the Seven Buddhas* or 
our twenty-eight Indian Ancestors said that the Buddha Dharma is merely the 
seeing of one’s True Nature? The Platform Scripture of the Sixth Ancestor contains 
the phrase, ‘seeing one’s True Nature’, but this text is a fraudulent document, it is 
not a work associated with the Treasure House of the Dharma, nor is the phrase one 
of Daikan Eno’s sayings, nor is it a text that the descendants of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors have ever relied on. Because Shoju and Chi’en did not have a clue about 
even a cubbyhole’s worth of the Buddha’s Dharma, they manufactured this false 
concoction of a three-footed tripod. 

djb 

CX) 


A virtuous one of old once said: 

Even Lao-tzu and Chuang-tzu were still unaware of the Lesser 
Course’s* possibility of being attached and what it is that gets 
attached, as well as the possibility of breaking free from attachments 
and what it is that gets broken free, to say nothing of actually being 
attached to attachments and actually breaking free from attachments 
within the Greater Course.* This is why their teaching is not the least 
bit like the Buddha Dharma. Even so, confused, worldly people who 
are deluded by names and forms, as well as by dubious meditative 
practices, have wandered off from the genuine principle. Such people 
would like to equate such Taoist terms as ‘the meritorious function of 
the Tao’ or ‘just strolling along’, 14 with the teaching of liberation in 
the Buddha Dharma, but how could such as this possibly be? 

From ancient times, people who are confused by names and forms, as well as those 
who do not know what the genuine principle is, have equated Chuang-tzu and Lao- 
tzu with the Buddha Dharma. From ancient times, no one who has had even the 
slightest bit of training within the Buddha Dharma has attached importance to 
Chuang-tzu or Lao-tzu. 


13. The four types of monks are those who are excellent in the practice, those who expound the 
Dharma, those who devote their lives to exploring the Dharma, and those who disgrace the 
Dharma. 

* See Glossary. 

14. The latter tenn might find a closer equivalent today as ‘just going with the flow’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1059 


djb 

It says in the Scripture on the Immaculate Practice That Accords with the 
Dharma: 15 “Those in China call the Bodhisattva* of Moonlight by the name of 
Yen-hui, 16 the Bodhisattva Whose Light Is Pure by the name of Chung-ni, 17 and 
Kashyapa Bodhisattva by the name of Lao-tzu.” From ancient times, people have 
cited this teaching, saying, “Confucius and Lao-tzu were bodhisattvas and, as a 
consequence, what they expressed must fundamentally be the same as what the 
Buddha expressed.” Further, they have said, “They may well have been emissaries 
of the Buddha, so what they expressed would naturally be what the Buddha 
expressed.” All such assertions are wrong. 

A virtuous one of old once made a comment about that text, saying, “In 
conformity with the catalogues of Scriptural works, all consider this so-called 
‘scripture’ to be spurious.” Relying upon this remark of his, we can say that the 
Buddha’s Dharma is all the more divergent from the teachings of Confucius and 
Lao-tzu. To assert that they are already bodhisattvas does not alter this, for 
bodhisattvahood cannot be compared to realizing the fruition of Buddhahood. 
Furthermore, the meritorious action of ‘concealing one’s light and accommodating 
oneself to others’ 18 is a method used only by Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the three 
temporal worlds. It is not something that ordinary, secular people can do. How 
could an ordinary, secular person who is truly keeping to his worldly occupation be 
free enough to accommodate himself to others? Neither Confucius nor Lao-tzu 
ever spoke of accommodating themselves for the sake of others. Even less did 
Confucius and Lao-tzu know about karmic causes from the past or their effects in 
the present. Their aim was simply to artfully serve their sovereign and govern their 
households by means of loyalty and filial piety for merely their own single 


15. This text (J. Shojo Hogyo Kyo) has long been considered one of the so-called ‘spurious 
scriptures,’ whose teaching is patently false. As a consequence, it is not included in the great 
collections of Buddhist Scriptures, such as the Taisho Daizokyo. 

16. Yen-hui was the chief disciple in Confucius’s entourage. 

17. Chung-ni was another name for Confucius. 

18. ‘Concealing one’s light and accommodating oneself to others’ is a technical Buddhist term. 
‘Concealing one’s light’ refers to the ability of Buddhas and bodhisattvas to ‘turn down’ the 
brilliance that may naturally shine forth due to the effects of Their spiritual attainments, 
which may put others into awe and thereby stimulate feelings of inadequacy in them. 
‘Accommodating oneself to others’ refers to the ability of Buddhas and bodhisattvas to 
assume a presence that does not frighten people. Both abilities are used in order to help ferry 
beings to the Other Shore. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1060 


generation, since they had nothing to teach future generations. They may already 
have been equals of the nihilists. 19 Those who felt an aversion towards Chuang-tzu 
and Lao-tzu and said, “They did not even know of the Lesser Course, much less of 
the Greater Course!” were bright Masters of old. Anyone who says, as Chi’en and 
Shoju did, that the three teachings are fundamentally one and the same teaching is 
an ignoramus during this later, degenerate age of ours. O Chi’en and Shoju, I ask 
you, what brilliance do you two have that you would disregard what former 
virtuous ones have expressed by arbitrarily asserting that Confucius and Lao-tzu 
are surely the equals of the Buddha’s Dharma? Your views are in no way equal to 
the task of discussing what is penetrable and what is impenetrable in the Buddha’s 
Dharma. Pack up your belongings and go seek out a clear-minded Master to 
explore the Matter* with. O Chi’en and Shoju, the two of you are more in the dark 
about the Greater and Lesser Courses than that monk who mistook the fourth 
meditative state for the fourth stage of arhathood. How pitiful that, wherever the 
winds of degenerate times are blowing, there are so many devils like these two. 


A virtuous one of old once said: 

According to what Confucius and the ancient Chinese emperor 
Chou-kung said, as well as what the legendary three emperors and 
five rulers of antiquity wrote, when filial piety governs a household 
and loyalty governs a nation, they help the nation and profit its people. 

Even so, this is limited to a single period of time; it does not relieve 
past or future suffering. Since this does not compare with the benefits 
from the Buddha Dharma in all three temporal periods, how could 
theirs possibly not be a mistaken view? 

How true they are, these words of the virtuous one of old! He has arrived at a deep 
understanding of the Truth of the Buddha Dharma and has clarified the principle 
underlying the secular world. The words of the three emperors and the five rulers 
still do not come up to the teaching of a saintly Wheel-turning Lord* and should 
never be discussed alongside what a Lord Brahma or a Shakrendra give voice to. 20 
The karmic recompense that these Chinese rulers would have received from their 


19. Nihilists are those who believe that there is a self which comes to an end at death. 

20. Lord Brahma rules over the lowest of the four meditative heavens in the world of form. 
Shakrendra, Lord Indra, rules over the world of the thirty-three heavens which comprise the 
second of the six realms in the world of desire. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1061 


governance over their realms would have been decidedly second-rate. And not 
even Wheel-turning Lords, Lord Brahma, or Shakrendra himself are the equal of a 
monk who has left home life behind and been ordained. How much less could they 
be the equal of the Tathagata! Further, the writings of Confucius and Chou-kung 
cannot compare with the eighteen great Vedic texts, much less come up to the four 
Vedas themselves. India’s Brahmanic Scriptures are still not the equal of the 
Buddhist Scriptures, not even those of the followers of the Lesser Course. How sad 
that in a small, remote country like China there is the false doctrine of the three 
teachings being one and the same teaching. 


Our Fourteenth Ancestor, the bodhisattva Nagarjuna once said, “The great 
arhats and the pratyekabuddhas* had direct knowledge of eighty thousand great 
eons, whereas the great bodhisattvas and the Buddha had direct knowledge of 
immeasurable eons.” People like Confucius and Lao-tzu never knew the past and 
future within their own single age, so how could they possibly have known of a 
couple of their past lives? How much less could they have possibly known even a 
single eon? How much less could they have possibly known a hundred eons or a 
thousand eons? How much less could they have possibly known eighty thousand 
great eons? And how much less could they have known an immeasurable eon? 
When compared with the Buddhas and bodhisattvas who have illumined and 
known these immeasurable eons more clearly than They knew the palms of Their 
hands, those like Confucius and Lao-tzu do not even warrant being called 
ignoramuses. Cover your ears and do not listen to such a phrase as ‘the three 
teachings are one and the same teaching’, for among erroneous mouthings, it is the 
most erroneous. 

djb 


Chuang-tzu once said, “Feeling noble and feeling base, despising suffering 
and craving pleasure, being right and being wrong, having and losing, are all 
natural states.” This viewpoint was already the equal of the Naturalist perspective 
of non-Buddhists in India. 22 Feeling noble and feeling base, despising suffering 
and craving pleasure, being right and being wrong, having and losing, are all what 
we feel from our good or wicked acts. Because Chuang-tzu did not know about the 


21. The eighteen Vedic texts are the four Vedas—the Scriptures of Brahmanism—plus fourteen 
commentaries. 

22. The Indian Naturalists denied cause and effect. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1062 


karma that fills us up and the karma* that pulls us along, 23 or about understanding 
what past and future are, he was ignorant of the present, so how could he possibly 
be the equal of the Buddha Dharma? 

djb 


There are some who assert the following: 

Because the Buddha Tathagatas have broadly affirmed the 
ultimate reality of the universe, every tiny mote of the universe is 
what all Buddhas have affirmed. Thus, because both the external 
conditions and the internal characteristics that we receive as karmic 
recompense are what Tathagatas are affirming, the great earth with its 
mountains and rivers, the sun, moon, and stars, and the four delusions 
and three poisons are all being affirmed as well. 24 To see mountains 
and rivers is to see the Tathagata. The three poisons and the four 
delusions are nothing other than the Buddha Dharma. Seeing a dust 
mote is the same as seeing the whole universe. Every moment of time, 
without exception, is one of fully perfected enlightenment, which we 
call ‘the great liberation’. This has been christened as ‘the Way of the 
Ancestors, which is the Direct Transmission of and the direct pointing 
to the Truth’. 25 

In Great Sung China, folks like these are as prevalent as rice and flax, bamboo and 
reeds. The government and the general populace are filled to the brim with them. 
However, it is not clear just whose offspring these people are, for they have no 
understanding of the Way of the Ancestors of the Buddha. Even though ‘the great 
earth with its mountains and rivers’ describes what Buddhas have awakened to, that 
does not mean that the Great Earth with Its Mountains and Rivers is something that 
ordinary people might not suddenly encounter. But they have not learned or even 
heard of the principle that all Buddhas have come to realize. For such folks to say 


23. The karma that fills us up refers to the purely individual characteristics that we may be born 
with, such as being bom with certain abilities or propensities. The kanna that pulls us along 
refers to the general characteristics that we share with many, such as being bom as a human 
being. 

24. The four delusions are that the physical world is permanent, that the world is a source of 
pleasure, that the physical world is pure, and that there exists a real, unchanging, personal 
self. 

25. This quotation borrows the vocabulary of Buddhism in order to support what is essentially a 
materialist perspective. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1063 


that seeing a dust mote is equivalent to seeing the whole universe is like their 
saying that being a commoner is equivalent to being a king. Further, why do they 
not say that seeing the whole universe is like seeing a single dust mote? If the view 
of these folks was equivalent to the Great Truth of the Buddhas and Ancestors, the 
Buddhas need not have left home life behind, our Ancestral Master Bodhidharma 
need not have put in an appearance, and none of us would be able to realize the 
Way. Even if such folks thought they had penetrated the meaning of “That which 
arises is the very thing that is beyond arising,” it would still not be what the Truth 
is really saying. 

djb 

<X> 

Tripitaka Master Paramartha once said, 26 “In China, there are two fortunate 
things. The first is that there are no rakshasas. The second is that there is no one 
who is a non-Buddhist.” This saying is indeed something imported by a non- 
Buddhist Brahman from India. Even if there were no one who had deliberately 
followed the ways of non-Buddhists, that does not mean that there could not have 
been folks who gave rise to non-Buddhist views. Even though rakshasas had yet to 
be seen, this does not mean that there were none who were the equivalent of non- 
Buddhists. Because ours is a small country in a remote comer of the world, it is not 
the same as India or China. Though the Buddha Dharma has been studied a bit 
here, there is no one who has grasped what awakening is as they understood it in 
India. 

djb 


A virtuous one of old once said: 

Nowadays, there are ever so many monks who are returning to 
lay life. Fearing lest they will then have to become the working dog of 
some lord, they enter into non-Buddhist paths. They set themselves up 
as teachers by stealing the principles of the Buddha Dharma and, 
undetected, apply them to explain Chuang-tzu and Lao-tzu. Ultimately 
they create total confusion, misleading innocents as to what is right 


26. Paramartha was a monastic scholar from Western India who was invited to come to South 
China by Emperor Wu of Liang to translate Scriptures. He arrived in 546 C.E., about a 
decade after Bodhidharma’s death. 

27. Arakshasa is a type of malevolent demon who stalks the night. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1064 


and what is wrong by claiming that theirs is the view that unfolds 
what the Vedas taught. 28 

Keep in mind that that bunch who do not know right from wrong and confuse the 
Buddha Dharma with the teachings of Chuang-tzu and Lao-tzu create confusion for 
someone who is a neophyte. They are our present-day Chi’en and Shoju. Not only 
is this the utmost in human idiocy, it also shows their lack of study and training, 
which is all too obvious, all too clear. Among the senior monks and their disciples 
during recent times in the Sung dynasty, not even a single one of them knew that 
the teachings of Confucius and Lao-tzu were not the equal of the Buddha Dharma. 
Although people who called themselves the offspring of the Buddhas and 
Ancestors were as prolific as rice and flax, bamboo and reeds, and filled the 
mountains and fields of the nine divisions of China, there was not a person, not 
even half a person, upon whom it dawned that the Buddha Dharma was foremost in 
insight and far beyond what was put forth by Confucius and Lao-tzu. Only that Old 
Buddha, my late Master Tendo, clearly understood that the Buddha Dharma was 
not one and the same with the sayings of Confucius and Lao-tzu, a fact that he kept 
affirming day and night. Though there were those who had reputations as teachers 
and academic lecturers on the Scriptures and commentaries, it had not dawned on 
any of them that the Buddha Dharma far surpasses the borderlands of Confucius 
and Lao-tzu. Many a modem academic lecturer over the past century has studied 
the customs of those who do seated meditation and follow the Way, hoping to walk 
off with what these practitioners had come to comprehend. Such a one, I dare say, 
is making a terrible mistake. 

djb 

<X> 


In Confucius’s writings, there is ‘the person with inborn knowledge,’ 
whereas in Buddhist Scriptures, there is no one who has such inborn knowledge. 29 
In the Buddha Dharma there is talk of sacred relics, whereas Confucius and Lao- 
tzu did not know whether there are sacred relics or not. Even if the two intended to 
jumble their two teachings together, ultimately they would not end up with a broad, 
far-reaching perspective, whether it was penetrable or not. 


28. At the time of this quotation, the Chinese government was anti-Buddhist yet supported those 
who claimed to be Taoists or to have knowledge of non-Buddhist Indian philosophy. 

29. Though neither Confucius nor Dogen specifically identifies what this inborn knowledge is, 
the context of Confucius’s writings implies that it refers to instinctively knowing how to 
behave like a sagely one, and without having to be taught. Dogen does not seem to be as 
concerned with what the knowledge is about as with the notion of having any type of inborn 
knowledge. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1065 


It says in the Analects of Confucius, “The person who is bom already 
knowing something is a superior being. The person who knows something through 
study is next. The person who leams it through great effort is next to him. The one 
who fails to leam it even with great effort, people will treat as the lowest.” If he is 
saying that there is inborn knowledge, then his is the fault of denying causality. In 
the Buddha Dharma there is no talk that denies causality. When the monk in the 
fourth meditative state reached the end of his life, he immediately fell into the error 
of slandering Buddha. Should you think that the teachings of Confucius and Lao- 
tzu are on a par with the Buddha Dharma, your error in slandering Buddha during 
your lifetime would be profound indeed. O you scholars, you should quickly 
discard the notion that erroneously considers the teachings of Confucius and Lao- 
tzu to be in accord with the Buddha Dharma. Those who put store in that viewpoint 
and do not discard it ultimately end up in some evil world/ 0 

O you scholars, be very clear about this: Confucius and Lao-tzu did not 
know the teaching on the three temporal worlds, nor did they know the principle of 
cause and effect, nor did they know anything about how to establish peacefulness 
in one continent, much less establishing it in all four continents. They still knew 
nothing about the six celestial worlds of desire, much less could they have known 
the Teaching concerning the nine divisions within the three worlds of desire, form, 
and beyond form. They could not have known anything about the small¬ 
thousandfold worlds or the middle-thousandfold worlds, so how could there have 
been a mler who had encountered or known about three-thousand great¬ 
thousandfold worlds? Even in the singular nation of China, Confucius and Lao-tzu 
were petty officials who had not risen to an imperial rank. They are not to be 
compared with the Tathagata who was the Lord of the three-thousand great¬ 
thousandfold worlds. In the Tathagata’s case, there were Lord Brahma, the imperial 
Shakrendra, and the Wheel-turning Lords, among others, offering Him veneration 
and protection day and night, and continually asking him to give voice to the 
Dharma. Confucius and Lao-tzu did not have merit like this. They were merely 
commoners wandering about through the realms of existence. They never knew 
anything of the path to achieving liberation through renouncing the world, so how 
could they possibly have fully realized the True Nature of all things as the 
Tathagata did? If they had not fully realized It, how could they possibly have been 
the equal of the World-honored One? Confucius and Lao-tzu had no inner 
meritorious behavior nor any outer usefulness. They could never have reached the 
level that the World-honored One did. How could the Buddha have possibly given 


30. The evil worlds are those of the hells, the animals, and the hungry ghosts. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1066 


voice to the false teaching that the three are of one accord? Confucius and Lao-tzu 
were unable to thoroughly penetrate the borders of the world and what lies beyond 
those borders. They neither knew nor saw the breadth of the world, nor its 
magnitude. And not only that, they had not seen the most minute forms and could 
not have known what the shortest span of a moment is. The World-honored One 
saw the most minute forms and knew directly how long the shortest span of a 
moment is, so how could we possibly treat Confucius or Lao-tzu as one equal to 
Him? Those like Confucius, Lao-tzu, Chuang-tzu, and Hui-tzu were simply 

O 1 

common men. They could not have even come up to the level of a stream-entrant 
of the Lesser Course, so how could they possibly have been the equal of those at 
the second, third, or fourth stages* of arhathood? 

At the same time, that you scholars, out of your ignorance, put them on the 
same level with the Buddhas is plainly your wandering deeper into your delusions. 
Not only were Confucius and Lao-tzu ignorant of the three temporal worlds and 
therefore did not know what the many eons are, they were unable to comprehend 
what a single moment of mindfulness is or to know the One All-embracing Buddha 
Mind. They do not even bear comparison with the celestial beings of sun and 
moon, nor could they compare with the Four Great Guardian Kings or the host of 
celestial beings. In comparison with the World-honored One, whether they be 
monastics or lay people, they are wandering off in delusion. 


• i 32 

It says in the Biographies of Commoners: 

Yin-hsi was a high-ranking government official in the Chou 
dynasty. He was particularly skilled in reading heavenly omens. One 
day, he was traveling to the east to investigate an unusual 
meteorological condition. Upon encountering it, as might be expected, 
he met up with Lao-tzu, who had composed a five thousand word text 
at Yin-hsi’s request. 33 Yin-hsi also, for his part, compiled a nine- 
section work, entitled The Barrier Gatekeeper (C. Kuan Ling Tzu ), 


31. Hui-tzu was a famous orator during the Wei dynasty. 

32. The Biographies of Commoners (C. Li eh Oman) is the major section of a classic Chinese 
work known as the Records Compiled by the Historian (C. Shih-chi ), which is one of the 
Chinese dynastic histories, compiled in the first century B.C.E. by Ssu-ma Ch’ien. It was a 
basic text in the classical education of young boys, who were expected to memorize large 
portions of it, if not the whole. 

33. Later known as The Way and Its Power (C: Tao-te Ching ). 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1067 


modeled on the Scripture on Lao-tzu s Converting the Barbarians (C. 

Hua Hu Ching ). 34 Later, when Lao-tzu was about to cross over the 
barrier to the Western Region, Yin-hsi thought he would like to 
accompany him. Lao-tzu said, “If what you desire within your heart is 
to be my follower, you must bring me the heads of seven people, 
including those of your father and mother. Then you will be able to 
come with me.” Yin-hsi followed Lao-tzu’s instruction, but on his 
return, the seven heads had all turned into those of wild boars. 

A virtuous one of old once said: 

Thus, Confucianists who are well-versed in their secular texts 
are worshipful even to carved images of their parents, but when Lao- 
tzu laid down his rules, he had Yin-hsi harm his parents. In the 
gateway to the Tathagata’s Teaching, great compassion is the starting 
point of training, so how could Lao-tzu have possibly made such a 
topsy-turvy view the basis for his method of teaching? 35 

Long ago, there was that wrong-minded bunch who treated the World-honored One 
as on a par with Lao-tzu, and nowadays, there are foolish fellows who treat the 
World-honored One as on a par with Confucius and Lao-tzu. How can we not pity 
them! Confucius and Lao-tzu cannot even measure up to the Wheel-turning Lords 
who govern the secular world by means of the ten good deeds. 36 How could those 
legendary three emperors and five rulers of antiquity, of whom Confucians speak, 
possibly come up to the level of the Wheel-turning Lords of the Gold, Silver, 
Copper, and Iron Wheels, who are equipped with thousands of the seven precious 
jewels* and who have governance over the four continents or rule some three¬ 
thousandfold world? Confucius himself cannot even be compared with those 
legendary ones. The Buddhas and the Ancestors of past, present, and future have 
all considered the starting point of training to lie in filial-like piety towards one’s 
parents, one’s Master and fellow monks, and the Three Treasures, as well as in the 


34. A pseudo-scriptural treatise that attempts to show through various accounts that Buddhism is 
an inferior, watered-down form of Taoism suited for barbarians but not for Chinese and that 
Lao-tzu went to India (the Western Region) where he became the Buddha and converted the 
‘barbarians’. 

35. This quotation is from the commentary on Tendai Chigi’s lectures on Great Quietness and 
Reflection (Makashikan). 

36. ‘The ten good deeds’ refers to actively abstaining from behaving contrary to the Ten Great 
Precepts. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1068 


making of alms offerings to those who are ill, for example. Since time immemorial, 
They have never considered the harming of one’s parents to be the starting point of 
training. Therefore, Lao-tzu and the Buddha Dharma are not one and the same. To 
kill one’s parents will invariably create karma that will be felt in one’s next life, a 
life in which it is a foregone conclusion that one will fall into a hellish world. Even 
though Lao-tzu may idly chatter on about emptiness, those who harm their parents 
will not escape the arising of retribution. 


In the Ching-te Era Record of the Transmission of the Lamp , it says the 
following: 

Our Second Chinese Ancestor was wont to voice a lament, 
saying, “The teachings of Confucius and Lao-tzu are merely 
concerned with the arts of courtesy and the standards for social 
behavior, whereas the writings of Chuang-tzu and the Book of 
Changes have never come close to the Wondrous Principle.” 

Then one day, he heard that Great Master Bodhidharma had 
taken up residence in Shaolin Monastery. “One who has reached the 
Other Shore is not far away. With him, I shall indeed attain the 
Wondrous Frontier.” 

People today should clearly trust that the authentic Transmission of the Buddha 
Dharma in China was wholly due just to the strength of our Second Chinese 
Ancestor. Though our First Chinese Ancestor, Bodhidharma, came from the West, 
had it not been for our Second Ancestor, the Buddha Dharma would not have been 
passed on. If our Second Ancestor had not passed on the Buddha Dharma, there 
would be no Buddha Dharma in Eastern lands today. In short, our Second Ancestor 
is not to be grouped among the masses. 

It says in the Record of the Transmission of the Lamp, “The monk Shinko 
was a broad-minded, scholarly gentleman. 37 For a long time, he resided in the Ilo 
district. He was well read in a wide variety of subjects and was able to discuss 
abstruse principles.” Our Second Ancestor’s being well read in a wide variety of 
subjects in the distant past may well be different by far from what people today 
read. After having awakened to the Dharma and having the kesa* Transmitted to 
him, he made no remarks like, “In the past, I was wrong to think that the teachings 
of Confucius and Lao-tzu were merely concerned with the arts of courtesy and the 


37. Shinko was Great Master Eka’s name when he was a young mo nk . 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1069 


standards for social behavior.” Keep in mind that our Second Ancestor had already 
thoroughly grasped that the teachings of Confucius and Lao-tzu were devoid of the 
Buddha Dharma, so why do his distant descendants go counter to their ancestral 
parent and insist that the teachings of Confucius and Lao-tzu are in accord with the 
Buddha’s Dharma? You need to know that this is the spreading of false teaching. If 
someone were not a distant descendant of our Second Ancestor, such a one might 
rely upon the explanations of a Shoju or his likes. But if you would be a true 
offspring of our Second Ancestor, do not say that the three teachings are in accord. 


When the Tathagata was in the world, there was a non-Buddhist 
who was called the Mighty Debater. He was of the opinion that there 
was no one his equal in debate, due to the enormity of his prowess, 
which is why he was called the Mighty Debater. Receiving the funds 
raised by five hundred Licchavis to pay for his services, 38 he selected 
five hundred difficult, debatable issues, and came to pose them to the 
Buddha. When he arrived at where the Buddha was residing, he asked 
the Buddha, “Is there one ultimate truth or, for the sake of people, are 
there many ultimate truths?” 

The Buddha replied, “There is just one Ultimate Truth.” 

The Mighty Debater said, “We teachers each have our own 
ultimate truth, which we teach. Among non-Buddhists, each believes 
his own teaching is right and slanders the ways of others. Since we 
mutually judge what is right or wrong in what everyone else is 
teaching, we end up with many ultimate truths.” 

At that moment, Migaslsa, whom the World-honored One had 
already converted and who had gone beyond the stage of still being a 
student of Buddhism, came and stood next to the Buddha. 39 The 
Buddha asked the Mighty Debater, “Among the many ways that truths 
are expressed for the sake of others, whose is the foremost for you?” 
The Mighty Debater replied, “Migaslsa’s is foremost.” 


38. The Licchavis were a group within the country of Vaishali who were early supporters of 
Shaky amuni. 

39. Migaslsa was a Brahman who was converted to Buddhism after he had undertaken to debate 
with the Buddha and ended up dumbfounded by Him. By the time of this story, he had 
already realized arhathood. 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1070 


The Buddha then said, “If his is foremost, why then did he 
discard his own way and become My disciple, thereby entering into 
My Truth?” 

The Mighty Debater, fully realizing this, dropped his head in 
embarrassment and then, taking refuge, entered the Way. At this time, 
the Buddha, in order to thoroughly express the Matter, spoke the 
following in verse: 

When someone thinks, ‘Mine is the ultimate in truth, ” 

When someone falls in love with his own opinions, 

When someone assumes that he is right and all others 
wrong, 

Then none such yet knows the Ultimate Truth. 

Such people readily enter into wrangling and debate, 

All eager to clarify what ‘nirvana ’ really means. 

In squabbling over who s right, who s wrong, 

Those who outwit feel elated, the outsmarted in misery 
sink. 

The victors fall into vanity’s pit, 

While the bested plunge into some gloomy hell. 

Thus it is that those whose discernment is truly wise 
Fall not into either of these two ways. 

O Mighty Debater, by all means know 

That in the Dharma for My disciples 

There is no meaningless ‘emptiness ’, no mundane ‘truth ’. 

So what is it that you so desire to seek from Me? 

If you desire to debase what I have voiced, 

Forthwith you already lack the grounds for doing that. 

Impossible the task to know what the whole of 
knowledge is. 

Strive for that and you strive in vain. 

Now, this is what the World-honored One’s golden words were like. O you foolish 
and dimwitted people in the Eastern lands, do not recklessly turn your back on 
what the Buddha taught, saying that there are paths equal to the Way of the 
Buddha, for that would be slandering both the Buddha and the Dharma. Those in 
India, from Migaslsa and the Mighty Debater to the Brahmacharins like 



Shobogenzo: On the Monk in the Fourth Meditative State 


1071 


Dirghanakha and Shrenika, 40 were eminent scholars, the likes of whom have never 
existed in Eastern lands, even from ancient times. What is more, Confucius and 
Lao-tzu could never come up to them. All of them abandoned their personal ways 
and took refuge in the Buddha’s Way. If we were now to compare worldly persons 
like Confucius and Lao-tzu with the Buddha Dharma, even those who listened 
would be involving themselves in wrongdoing. And what is more, even arhats and 
pratyekabuddhas will all eventually become bodhisattvas, with not even one 
finishing up in the Lesser Courses. But when it comes to Confucius and Lao-tzu 
who never entered the Buddha’s Way, how could we possibly say that they are the 
equals of Buddhas? That indeed would be an enormously false view. To conclude, 
in that the World-honored Tathagata goes far beyond all others, He is praised and 
so recognized by all the Buddha Tathagatas and by all the great bodhisattvas, as 
well as by Lord Brahma and Lord Shakrendra. It is something that our twenty-eight 
Indian Ancestors and our six Chinese Ancestors all knew. In short, all who have the 
capacity to do the training and explore the Matter with their Master have come to 
know this. As people of these present degenerate days of the Dharma, do not 
involve yourself with the wild words of those ignoramuses of the Sung dynasty 
who speak of the three teachings being one, for theirs is the height of ignorance. 

On a day during the summer retreat in the seventh year of the Kencho era (1255), I finished 
making this copy of the Master s first draft. 

Ejo 


40. As used here, Brahmacharin refers to someone who was a Brahman priest and scholar in his 
younger years, and later converted to Buddhism. There is a tradition that Dirghanakha was 
Shariputra’s father and became a Buddhist, due to his son’s example. His name, actually a 
nickname, means He of the Long Nails, referring to his not cutting his nails because he was 
so deeply absorbed in his scholarly pursuits. Shrenika’s pre-Buddhist teaching is discussed 
in Discourse 1: A Discourse on Doing One’s Utmost in Practicing the Way of the Buddhas 
(Bendowa). 



92 


On the One Hundred and Eight Gates 
to What the Dharma Illumines 

(Ippyakuhachi Homyomon) 

Translator’s Introduction: Except for the final paragraphs in this text, which were written by 
Dogen, this work is comprised of a lengthy quotation in Chinese from the Scriptural Collection 
of the Past Deeds of the Buddha (Butsu Hongyo Jikkyd). 


Gomyo Bodhisattva,* the One Who Is a Guardian of Wisdom’s 
Light, then brought to a close His study of the family into which He 
was to be reborn. 1 At that time, there was a celestial palace in the 
Tushita Heaven named Lofty Banners. Its length and width were 
equal—sixty yojanas.* From time to time, the Bodhisattva would go 
up into this palace and give voice to the essence of the Dharma for the 
sake of the celestial beings residing in the Tushita Heaven. On this 
particular occasion, the Bodhisattva went up into this palace and, 
having finished His peaceful seated meditation, He gave instruction to 
the celestial ones of the Tushita Heaven, saying, “You who are 
celestial beings, by all means come gather around Me, since My 
present being will soon descend into a human form. I now wish to 
explain in their entirety the gates to what the Dharma illumines, for 
they are known as the gates which are the skillful means for 
comprehending the forms that all thoughts and things take. I leave 
these Teachings as My final instructions for you, that you may 
remember Me by Them. If you listen to what these gates of the 
Dharma are, they will surely produce great joy and delight within 
you.” 

When the great assembly of celestial beings in the Tushita 
Heaven—including the beautiful celestial women and their 
entourage—heard what the Bodhisattva had just said, they came up 


* See Glossary. 

1. Gomyo Bodhisattva was in the Tushita Heaven, prior to His rebirth as Shakyamuni Buddha. 


1072 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1073 


and gathered about Him. Seeing the multitude that had gathered in the 
celestial palace, He desired to give expression to the Dharma for their 
sake. 

Employing His marvelous spiritual abilities, He produced atop 
the original palace of Lofty Banners a celestial palace so grand and 
spacious that it covered the four continents. 2 So delightful was it in its 
ordered grandeur that few things could be likened to it. Lofty in its 
majesty, it was encrusted with masses of jewels. Among all the 
celestial palaces within the world of desire, there was none to compare 
with it. When the celestial beings within the world of form saw this 
extraordinary palace, they felt as if their own palaces resembled burial 
mounds. 

Gomyo Bodhisattva had already performed valued deeds, 
planted virtuous roots, brought about much happiness, and was now 
endowed with much merit. He ascended to the Lion’s Seat,* which He 
had so magnificently created, and sat down upon it. While seated on 
this Lion’s Throne, Gomyo Bodhisattva adorned it with intricate 
patterns of jewels beyond measure. He spread over this seat all 
manner of celestial robes, and perfumed that seat with various types of 
wondrous incense which He burned in innumerable bejeweled 
censers. He brought forth all manner of marvelously scented flowers 
which he scattered over the ground. Around his lofty Dharma Seat 
were many treasures of great value. Hundreds of thousands of myriad 
light beams shone forth, magnificently illumining this palace of His. 
from top to bottom, the palace was hung with jeweled nets, and from 
those nets hung many golden bells, whose tinkling sound was 
wondrous indeed. Countless light rays of various types shone forth 
from this great palace. This priceless palace was hung with thousands 
of myriad banners of various brilliant hues, from that great palace 
hung all sorts of tassels. Beautiful celestial maidens by the hundreds 
of thousands of millions, each carrying various varieties of the Seven 
Precious Jewels,* sang the praises of the Bodhisattva in songs that 
told of His countless past merits. The guardian lords of the earth were 
there by the billions, standing to His left and right, protecting this 
palace. The Guardian Lord Indras by the millions made prostrations 
before this palace, and millions of celestial Brahmas made their 


2. That is, the four that lie to the north, south, east, and west of Mount Sumeru. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1074 


venerative offerings. Also, millions upon millions upon millions of 
bodhisattvas came to protect this palace, and the Buddhas of the ten 
quarters were there by untold millions, keeping watch over it. Practice 
and training previously done over countless eons as well as acts of 
freeing others from their suffering were achieving their spiritual 
reward. Good causes and their accompanying conditions were being 
fulfilled and were being promoted day and night, so that 
immeasurable merit was making everything magnificent. All of this is 
too difficult to express, too difficult to put into words. 

The Bodhisattva, sitting upon that great exquisite Lion’s 
Dharma Seat, addressed this multitude, saying, “Now, O you celestial 
beings, as to the hundred and eight gates to what the Dharma 
illumines, when bodhisattvas and monks are in a Tushita Heaven 
palace awaiting their next rebirth, and are about to descend through 
conception to be born in the human world, they must, of necessity, 
proclaim and voice to this celestial host these one hundred and eight 
gates to what the Dharma illumines, leaving them for the remaining 
celestial beings to memorize. O you celestial beings, with a heart of 
utmost sincerity, listen closely to and absorb what I am now going to 
voice, which is the one hundred and eight gates to what the Dharma 
illumines.” 

djb 

CX) 


Right trust is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
thereby we keep our persevering mind from being 
defeated. 

A pure heart is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
it is not sullied by defilements. 

Joy is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for it is 
evidence of a tranquil mind. 

A loving feeling of ease is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for it purifies our mind. 

Being proper in our bodily behavior is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for due to that, the actions of 
our body, speech, and mind are pure. 

Being pure in our speech is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for it eradicates the four evil attitudes 
associated with beings in the hells, asurasf 
hungry ghosts,* and beasts. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1075 


Being pure in our intentions is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for this eradicates the three 
poisons of greed, anger, and delusion. 

Being mindful of Buddha is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for thereby our perception of a Buddha 
is clear. 

Being mindful of the Dharma is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for thereby our seeing what is 
Dharma is clear. 

Being mindful of the Sangha is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for it helps us to be steadfast in 
our pursuit of the Way. 

Being mindful of generosity is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for due to that we do not expect rewards. 

Being mindful of the Precepts is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for due to that we fulfill all our 
vows. 

Being mindful of the highest is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for thereby we give rise to a 
heart that seeks the Truth far and wide. 

Being benevolent towards others is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for thereby good roots take 
hold in all of life s situations. 

Being compassionate is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for thereby we do not kill or harm any 
living being. 

Being morally good is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for thereby we rid ourselves of all that is 
not morally good. 

Renunciation is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
thereby we weary of the five greeds and abandon 
them. 1 ’ 


3. That is, being greedy for possessions, sexual pleasures, food and drink, fame, and sleep. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1076 


Reflecting on impermanence is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for thereby we perceive the 
cravings of those in the three temporal worlds of 
past, present, and future. 

Reflecting on suffering is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for thereby we give up all cravings. 

Reflecting on there being no unchanging, permanent self 
is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for thereby 
we refrain from fettering ourselves by thinking that 
such a false self is what we truly are. 

Reflecting on the tranquil realm of nirvana is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for thereby we do not 
disrupt the intention we hold in our heart. 

Repentance is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
thereby we experience tranquility within our hearts 
and minds. 

Humility is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
thereby the malevolence of others vanishes. 

Sincerity is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for, 
having it, we will not deceive lofty or mundane 
beings. 

Truth is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for, having 
it, we will not deceive ourselves. 

Our pursuing the Dharma is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for we are humbly submitting ourselves 
to the pursuit of the Dharma. 

The Three Refuges in Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha are 
a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for they 
cleanse the three evil paths that those in hells, 
those who are asuras, and those who are beasts 
pursue. 4 


4. Traditionally, the three are beasts, those in some hell, and hungry ghosts. At the same time, 
asuras may resemble hungry ghosts in their constant hunger for power. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1077 


Recognizing the good intentions of others is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for thereby we do not 
ignore their good roots. 

Repaying our indebtedness to others is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for thereby we do not cheat or 
disregard others. 

Not deceiving ourselves is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for thereby we do not go around 
praising ourselves. 

Acting for the sake of sentient beings is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for thereby we do not slander 
others. 

Expressing the Dharma for the sake of others is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for it is our acting in 
conformity with the Dharma. 

Being aware of the limitations of time is a gate to what 
the Dharma illumines, for then we do not treat 
lightly the words spoken for our benefit. 

Weeding out self-pride is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for then we fulfill wise discernment. 

Not giving rise to wicked intentions is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for then we protect ourselves 
and others. 

Recognizing that hindrances do not actually exist is a 
gate to what the Dharma illumines, for then our 
mind is free of doubts. 

Trusting that we may understand is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for then we can fully 
comprehend the One Great Matter. * 

Reflecting on what is impure is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for then we may abandon the 
mind that is tainted with craving. 

Ceasing from quarreling is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for thereby we eradicate being offended 
and accusing others. 

Not being foolish is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, 
for then we cease killing living beings. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1078 


Taking pleasure in the meaning of the Dharma is a gate 
to what the Dharma illumines, for then we are 
seeing what the meaning of the Dharma is. 

Love of the illumination of the Dharma is a gate to what 
the Dharma illumines, for then we attain the 
illumination of the Dharma. 

Seeking to hear much of the Dharma is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for this leads to the right 
understanding of how all thoughts and things 
appear. 

Right skillful means are a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for they go hand-in-hand with Right 
Actions. 

Knowing the true name and form of all thoughts and 
things is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
this clears away all manner of obstacles. 

Seeing how to eliminate causes is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for thereby we are able to free 
ourselves from suffering and delusion. 

Freeing our mind free of friend’ and ‘enemy’ is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for when we are in the 
midst of those who are hostile or friendly towards 
us, we treat them all with impartiality. 

Helping others with subtle provisional teachings is a gate 
to what the Dharma illumines, for we know what 
the suffering of others is. 

Treating all elements as equal is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for then it eradicates any need 
for having to harmonize everything. 

Our sense organs are gates to what the Dharma 
illumines, for therewith we practice the Authentic 
Path. 

Realizing that all things are beyond birth and death is a 
gate to what the Dharma illumines, for then we 
realize what ‘cessation of suffering’ really means. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1079 


Our body as an abode for our awareness is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for it brings all 
thoughts and things to a tranquil state. 

Our feelings as an abode for our awareness are gates to 
what the Dharma illumines, for they eradicate all 
entanglements with outer inducements. 

Our mind as an abode for our awareness is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for thereby we can see 
that our mind is like a phantom. 

The Dharma as an abode for our awareness is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for thereby our wise 
discernment is not blurred. 

The four kinds of Right Effort are gates to what the 
Dharma illumines, for they eradicate all evil and 
produce all manner of good . 5 

The four foundations of the marvelous spiritual abilities 
are gates to what the Dharma illumines, for they 
lighten both body and mind 6 

What lies at the root of our faith is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for by means of it we do not 
blindly follow the many words of others. 

What lies at the root of our right effort is a gate to what 
the Dharma illumines, for by means of it we easily 
attain many forms of wise discernment. 

What lies at the root of our mindfulness is a gate to what 
the Dharma illumines, for by means of it we easily 
perform various positive deeds. 

What lies at the root of our concentration is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for by means of it our 
heart and mind become immaculate. 

What lies at the root of our astuteness is a gate to what 
the Dharma illumines, for by means of it we see 
what all thoughts and things really are. 


5. The four kinds of right effort are to prevent faults from arising, to abandon faults when they 
have arisen, to produce merit, and to increase merit that has already arisen. 

6. The four foundations are concentration of the will, concentrated effort, concentration of 
thought, and concentrated investigation into the principle of Reality. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1080 


The power of faith is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for it surpasses the powers of demons. 

The power of right effort is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we will not regress or 
turn aside. 

The power of mindfulness is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we will not blindly 
follow others. 

The power of concentration is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we rid ourselves of all 
idle thoughts. 

The power of astuteness is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we free ourselves from 
the two extremes of dualistic thinking. 

Mindfulness, which is a characteristic of enlightenment, 
is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for it is 
like the wisdom inherent in all thoughts and things. 

The ability to distinguish between the true and the false, 
which is a characteristic of enlightenment, is a 
gate to what the Dharma illumines, for it illumines 
all thoughts and things. 

Right effort, which is a characteristic of enlightenment, is 
a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for by means 
of it we easily comprehend what enlightenment is. 

Joyfulness, which is a characteristic of enlightenment, is 
a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for by means 
of it we attain various types of concentration. 

Ridding ourselves of all evil, which is a characteristic of 
enlightenment, is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we are already 
managing what we do. 

Concentration, which is a characteristic of 
enlightenment, is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we recognize the 
equality of all thoughts and things. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1081 


Letting go of attachments, which is a characteristic of 
enlightenment, is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we weary of the world 
and can abandon all that arises. 

Right view is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for by 
means of it we can realize the Saintly Path and 
exhaust the stream of rebirths. 

Right thought is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
by means of it we eliminate all discriminatory 
judgments, as well as any lack of discernment. 

Right speech is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
by means of it we will recognize that all names, 
voicings, and words are simply like vibrations. 

Right livelihood is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, 
for by means of it we rid ourselves of all our evil 
ways. 

Right action is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
by means of it we arrive at the Other Shore. 

Right mindfulness is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we do not 
intellectualize all thoughts and things. 

Right concentration is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we can attain the 
meditative state that is beyond scattered thoughts. 

The mind that aspires to realize the Truth is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for it does not dismiss 
the Three Treasures of Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha. 

Reliance on the Three Treasures is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for by means of it we do not 
hanker after lesser courses. 

Right belief is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
by means of it we receive the Buddha’s supreme 
Dharma. 

Progressing is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
by means of it we fully perfect the practice of 
developing good roots. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1082 


The practice of charity is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we continue in every 
moment to perfect a pleasant countenance, to 
adorn the Buddha lands, and to teach and guide 
sentient beings who are stingy or greedy. 

The practice of moral conduct is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for by means of it we distance 
ourselves from the hardships of evil paths so that 
we may teach and guide sentient beings who are 
acting contrary to the Precepts. 

The practice of patience is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we give up all hate, 
arrogance, flattery, and foolishness so that we may 
teach and guide sentient beings who are plagued 
by such feelings. 

The practice of zealousness is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we acquire all manner 
of morally good thoughts and things so that we 
may teach and guide sentient beings who are lazy 
or inattentive. 

The practice of meditation is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of it we may perfect all 
manner of contemplative practices so that we may 
teach and guide sentient beings who are mentally 
scattered. 

The practice of wise discernment is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for by means of it we may 
eliminate the darkness of our ignorance and 
attachment to our opinions so that we may teach 
and guide sentient beings who are foolish or 
confused. 

Provisional teachings are gates to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of them we display 
ourselves in accordance with the everyday 
dignified behavior of a monk, so that we may teach 
and guide others and thereby fulfill the Dharma of 
all Buddhas. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1083 


The four exemplary acts are gates to what the Dharma 
illumines, for by means of them we are accepting 
of all sentient beings, and when we fully realize 
enlightenment, we give the Dharma as alms to all 

n 

sentient beings. 

Spiritually teaching and guiding sentient beings is a gate 
to what the Dharma illumines, for we neither seek 
self-gratification nor tire of teaching and guiding. 

Acceptance of the True Teaching is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for it eliminates the defiling 
passions of all sentient beings. 

Garnering good fortune is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for it profits all sentient beings. 

Doing meditative practices is a gate to what the Dharma 

o 

illumines, for it perfects the ten abilities. 

Being tranquil is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, 
for it perfects the meditative state of a Tathagata 
with which we are equipped. 

Being astute is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for 
by means of it our wise discernment is realized and 
perfected. 

Entering the realm of unimpeded eloquence is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for once having 
received the Eye of the True Teaching, one acts to 
fulfill It. 

Entering into all manner of spiritual actions is a gate to 
what the Dharma illumines, for once having 
received the Eye of a Buddha, one acts to fulfill It. 


7. The four are offering alms, using kindly speech, showing benevolence, and being in 
sympathy with. They are also called the Four Wisdoms. Dogen discusses these in more 
detail in Discourse 45: On the Four Exemplary Acts of a Bodhisattva (Bodaisatta Shis hobo). 

8. The ten are: ridding oneself of attachments, deepening one’s devotion, effectively teaching 
and guiding others, understanding what people are thinking, spiritually satisfying people, 
being unceasing in exerting oneself, being accepting of all true teachings while not 
abandoning the Mahayana, exuding one’s Buddha Nature through every pore of one’s being, 
helping turn all people toward the Dharma so that one may lead them to Its perfection, and 
spiritually satisfying all kinds of people with even a single phrase. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1084 


Fulfilling one s expressions of homage is a gate to what 
the Dharma illumines, for once such a one has 
heard the Dharma of any and all Buddhas, that 
person can accept and maintain It. 

Attaining unimpeded eloquence is a gate to what the 
Dharma illumines, for it creates delight in all 
sentient beings. 

Being a willing follower is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for one is acting in obedience to the 
Teaching of Buddhas. 

Realizing the Teaching of non-arising is a gate to what 
the Dharma illumines, for thereby we receive 
affirmation of It. 

Having realized the position of being beyond regression 
or turning aside is a gate to what the Dharma 
illumines, for it is possessed of the Dharma of all 
the Buddhas of the past. 

The wisdom that guides us from one spiritual position to 
another is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, 
for when the crown of our head is aspersed, we 
will have fulfilled all manner of wise discernment. 

The position of those who have had their head aspersed 
is a gate to what the Dharma illumines, for having 
been born and become monks, they have finally 
been able to realize supreme, fully perfected 
enlightenment 9 

At this time Gomyo Bodhisattva, having finished His 
instructions, addressed this whole celestial assembly, saying, “All you 
celestial beings, by all means keep in mind that these are the one 
hundred and eight gates to what the Dharma illumines, which I 
bequeath to you celestial beings. May you accept and keep to them, 
holding them always in your thoughts. I pray, do not forget them or 
lose sight of them.” 


9. The aspersing of the head marks the point when one goes from being a bodhisattva to 
becoming a Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: On the 108 Gates to What the Dharma Illumines 


1085 


These, therefore, are the one hundred and eight gates to what the Dharma 
illumines. When all bodhisattvas who are bound to be reborn one final time are 
about to descend from the Tushita Heaven to be bom in the land of Jambudvipa,* 
they invariably proclaim the one hundred and eight gates to what the Dharma 
illumines for the sake of the celestial multitudes in the Tushita Heaven, and thereby 
pass on the Teaching to those celestial ones, for this is the invariable method of 
Buddhas. 

Gomyo Bodhisattva was the name of Shakyamuni Buddha when He was in 
the fourth celestial heaven at the point of being reborn one more time. In the 
Chinese T’ien-sheng Era an imperial aide named Lee compiled the T’ien-sheng 
Era Record of the Far-reaching Torch , in which is recorded what he called ‘The 
One Hundred and Eight Gates to What the Dharma Illumines’. Those who have 
explored, clarified, and understood it are few, whereas those who do not know of it 
are as common as rice grains, flax stalks, bamboo canes, and river reeds. I have 
now brought them together for the sake of you people who are beginners, as well 
as for you old-timers. Those of you who aspire to ascend to the Lion’s Seat in order 
to be teachers of lofty persons and commoners should explore them in detail. 
Unless you have lived in the Tushita Heaven as one who is bound to only one life 
more, none of you is a Buddha yet, so, my practitioners, do not vainly indulge in 
pride. For bodhisattvas who have but one life more, there is no intermediary 
stage . 10 


10. This is the interval between death and rebirth. 



93 

On Life and Death 

(Shoji) 


Translator’s Introduction: In this text, Dogen plays with various nuances of the word shoji. As 
‘living and dying’, it refers to ever-flowing, ever-changing conditions that have no permanency, 
whereas ‘life and death’ refers to the delusion of static, unchanging conditions that are created by 
a judgmental mind. ‘Birth and death’ refers to specific moments within the flow of ‘living and 
dying’. 


“Because there is Buddha within living and dying, life and death do not 
exist.” And in response, the following was said, “Because the Buddha did not exist 
within life and death, He was not infatuated with living and dying.” These words 
are the very heart of what was said by the two Meditation Masters Kassan and 
Jozan. Since they are the words of persons who had realized the Way, we can 
certainly profit by them, and not in vain. 

Anyone who wishes to be freed from life and death should clarify this 
principle. Should you seek for Buddha outside of living and dying, you are like the 
one who pointed his cart north and drove off to the country of Etsu in the south, or 
like someone who faces south, hoping to see the North Star. It would be your piling 
up more and more causes of life and death while missing the path to liberation. 
Simply put, living and dying is what nirvana is, for there is nothing to despise in 
living and dying, nor anything to be wished for in nirvana. 

At this very time, there is a distinction that frees us, right off, from life and 
death. It is a mistake to think that we go from being alive to being dead. Being 
alive is a position at one moment in time: it already has its past and it will have its 
future. Therefore, within the Buddha Dharma, we say that life is beyond just the act 
of being bom. Death is also a position at one moment in time, and it too has its past 
and its future. Accordingly, we say that death is beyond the act of just dying. 

In the time we call ‘living’, there is nothing except life, and in the time we 
call ‘dying’, there is nothing except death. Thus, when life comes, it is simply life, 
and when death comes, it is simply death. When facing up to them, do not say that 
you want to cling to the one or push away the other. This living and dying is 
precisely what the treasured life of a Buddha is. If we hate life and want to throw it 
away, that is just our attempt to throw away the treasured life of Buddha. And if we 
go no farther than this and clutch onto life and death, this too is our throwing away 


1086 



Shobogenzo: On Life and Death 


1087 


the treasured life of Buddha by limiting ourselves to the superficial appearance of 
Buddha. When there is nothing we hate and nothing we cling to, then, for the first 
time, we enter the Heart of Buddha. 

However, do not use your mind to measure this and do not use your voice 
just to mouth it. When we simply let go of and forget all about ‘my body’ and ‘ my 
mind’, relinquishing them to the Life of Buddha and letting them be put into 
operation from the vantage point of Buddha, then, when we rely on this— 
following where It leads—without forcing the body or laboring the mind, we free 
ourselves from life and death, and become Buddha. 

And who would want to become stuck in their own mind? There is an 
extremely easy way to become Buddha. Simply, do not adhere to any evil 
whatsoever; do not become attached to life or death; have compassion for all 
sentient beings; respect those who are spiritually above you and have pity on those 
who are spiritually less advanced than you; rid yourself of the mental attitude that 
deplores the ten thousand things as they sprout up and the mental attitude that 
craves them; let your mind be free of judgmentalism and free of worry, for to do so 
is what we call being a Buddha. And do not seek after anything else. 



94 

On the Mind’s Search for Truth 

(Do shin) 


Translator’s Introduction: Some copies of this short, undated text bear the title of “On the 
Buddha’s Way” ( Butsudd ), but it is not a reworking of Discourse 51. 


In our pursuit of the Buddha’s Way, first off, we should consider our mind’s 
search for Truth to be foremost. Those who know what the mind’s search for Truth 
really is are rare indeed, so we need to inquire what it is from people who clearly 
know. 

Even though people in general are said to have a mind that is searching for 
the Truth, there are those people who truly do not have a searching mind. And there 
are some people who truly have a searching mind, though it is unrecognized by 
others. Thus, it is difficult to know who has or does not have such a mind. For the 
most part, we do not listen to what foolish or wicked people say, much less do we 
trust them. And we should not treat our own mind as foremost, but consider only 
what the Buddha expressed to be foremost. Constantly, day and night, we should 
hold in our mind our search for Truth, desiring and praying to realize what True 
Wisdom is in this world of ours. 

In these degenerate days of the Dharma, those who genuinely have a mind 
that searches for the Truth are not many. Even so, please keep impermanence in 
mind, and do not forget that the world is transient and human life is uncertain. And 
we need not consciously keep in mind the notion that, “I am thinking about the 
transiency of the world.” Just give emphasis to the Dharma and do not take ‘ my 
body’ or ‘my life’ too seriously. And, for the sake of the Dharma, do not be 
resentful towards your body or your life. 

Next, you should deeply revere the Three Treasures of Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha. Be desirous of making alms offerings to the Three Treasures, even if it 
means changing your life or reforming your very self. Whether asleep or awake, 
we should respectfully keep in mind the great spiritual benefits of the Three 
Treasures, and, whether asleep or awake, we should respectfully call upon the 
Three Treasures. For instance, during the interval between abandoning this life and 
not yet taking up the next life, there is what we call ‘the intermediate existence’. 
That existence lasts for seven days, during which we should keep in mind to 


1088 



Shobogenzo: On the Mind s Search for Truth 


1089 


respectfully call upon the Three Treasures, without our voice ever ceasing. When 
the seven days have passed, we are said to die within that intermediate world and 
then receive another body for seven days within that same world. However long 
this next existence may be, it does not surpass another seven days. At this time, one 
sees and hears absolutely everything perfectly, without restrictions, just as it is with 
our spiritual Eye. At such a time, we should diligently apply our mind and 
respectfully call upon the Three Treasures, mindfully and ceaselessly reciting: 

I take refuge in the Buddha, 

I take refuge in the Dharma, 

I take refuge in the Sangha. 

When we have passed beyond the intermediate world, we draw near to a 
father and mother, readying ourselves bit-by-bit through Right Knowledge to 
entrust ourselves to a womb. Even when we are within the Treasure House of the 
Womb , 1 we should reverently call upon the Three Treasures. Even while we are 
being born, we should not neglect to reverently call upon Them. It should be our 
most profound wish that, through our six senses, we may reverently make alms 
offerings to the Three Treasures, call upon Them, and take refuge in Them. 

Also, when this life of ours is coming to an end, our two eyes may suddenly 
become dark. At such a time, knowing that the end of our life has come, we should 
strive to recite the Refuges: “I take refuge in the Buddha...” and so forth. At this 
time, all the Buddhas in the ten quarters will have pity on us so that, due to 
contributing causes, even wrongdoings for which we should face being reborn in 
one of the three lower worlds of existence 2 are reversed, and we are instead reborn 
in some celestial world or reborn before the presence of the Buddha, where we may 
reverently pay homage to Him and hear Him give voice to the Dharma. 

After darkness has come before our eyes, we should, right off, strive to recite 
the Three Refuges, not shirking from this even during our entering the intermediate 
world or our next birth. In this way, we should thoroughly expend life after life 
and, in age after age, reverently recite Them. We should not let up even upon 
arriving at the Wisdom that is the fruition of Buddhahood. This is the Path that all 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas* pursue. We call this ‘the profound awakening to the 


1. The ‘Treasure House of the Womb’ is a translation of the Japanese term Nyoraizo, (S. 
Tathagata-garbha), which points to the inherent Buddha Nature in all living beings and, 
consequently, to their potential to realize Buddhahood. 

2. That is, the worlds of hellish beings, hungry ghosts, and beasts. 

* See Glossary. 



Shobogenzo: On the Mind s Search for Truth 


1090 


Law’ and ‘the Buddha’s Truth inherent in every being’. Further, you must pray that 
you do not dilute this with opinions held by others. 

Also, within your lifetime you should engage yourself in making yourself 
into a Buddha, and, in cultivating Buddhahood, you should offer the Buddha three 
sorts of alms. These three are a meditation cushion, a vessel for holding sweet 
water, and a light whereby to illumine one’s Original Nature. These are what you 
should make as your alms offering. 

Also, during your lifetime you should make a copy of the Lotus Scripture. 
You should reverently write It down and make a copy of It for you to retain. You 
should continually make It as if a crown upon your head and bow in reverence to 
It, worshipfully making offerings of flowers, incense, candles, food, and robes. 
With the crown of our head always cleansed, we should offer these alms upon the 
crown of our head. 1 

Also, continually put on your kesa* and sit in meditation. There are 
examples from the past of someone realizing the Truth in a third lifetime as the 
result of putting on a kesa. 3 4 It is already the garb of all Buddhas in the three 
temporal worlds. Its meritorious virtue is unfathomable. Doing seated meditation is 
not the method of those in the three worlds of desire, form, and beyond form; it is 
the method of the Buddhas and Ancestors. 


3. This is done by holding the offering with both hands and raising it above the crown of the 
head, not by literally placing it atop the head. 

4. Dogen gives an example of this in Discourse 84: On the Spiritual Merits of the Kesa (Kesa 
Kudoku), concerning a prostitute who once put on a kesa as a joke and, as a result, in a later 
life became a female monastic. 



95 

On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas’ 

(Yui Butsu Yo Butsu) 


Translator’s Introduction: The title of this text is a phrase that Dogen often employs. It is 
derived from a verse in the Lotus Scripture: “Each Buddha on His own, together with all 
Buddhas, is directly able to fully realize the real form of all thoughts and things.” 


The Buddha Dharma is something that ordinary people cannot recognize. 
For this reason, from olden times, worldly people did not awaken to the Buddha 
Dharma, nor did those of the two Lesser Courses* thoroughly explore It. Because 
It was realized by the Buddha all by Himself, He said that each Buddha on His 
own, together with all Buddhas, has been directly able to fully realize It. 

When you have thoroughly awakened in spite of yourself, it will be nothing 
like what you thought it would be before you had awakened. In whatever way you 
may have imagined it would be, what you awaken to will not at all resemble what 
you had imagined, for actual awakening bears no resemblance to what one may 
imagine it to be. Thus, it is useless to try to imagine what it is like beforehand. 

When you have your awakening, you will not know why it has come about 
as it has. Should you reflect upon this, you will see that, prior to your awakening, 
whatever you thought it would be like is neither here nor there when actually 
experiencing an awakening. And even though it will be different from all the 
various ways that you may have previously thought, this does not mean that those 
views are fundamentally wrong and have played no part in your awakening. Even 
your past views comprised an awakening of sorts. However, because your thinking 
has been topsy-turvy, you may think that such views have been useless, and you 
may speak of them as being so. Whenever you think that your views are useless, 
there is something that you need to recognize: namely, that you are afraid that an 
awakening will be overpowering. If your previous ideas about enlightenment could 
bring forth a true awakening, then you may feel that your realization is unreliable. 1 
Since genuine enlightenment does not depend on some special capability and goes 
far beyond the time prior to your realization, your awakening is assisted simply by 


* See Glossary. 

1. Because those ideas did not produce an awakening when you first had them. 


1091 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas ’ 


1092 


the innate power of realization. Keep in mind that delusion is something that has 
no physical existence, and keep in mind that enlightenment is also something that 
has no physical existence! 

Whenever there is a person of unsurpassed enlightenment, we call such a 
one ‘a Buddha’. When the unsurpassed enlightenment of a Buddha arises, we call 
this state ‘unsurpassed enlightenment’. Those who do not recognize how someone 
looks at the time of his or her being in such a state must surely be befuddled. This 
so-called Took’ is that of being untainted. ‘Being untainted’ does not mean being 
deliberately devoid of any purpose or refusing to make choices, nor is it being 
compulsively preoccupied with trying to be aimless or glossing over everything. 
How could there possibly be an untainted state in which someone is devoid of any 
purpose and refuses to make choices! For instance, upon meeting someone, the 
untainted person does not bring to mind judgmental thoughts concerning just how 
that other person looks. And with both flowers and the moon, such a one does not 
think of adding anything to their present brightness and color. Such a one does not 
attempt to evade the feelings that a spring day is spring just as it is, or that the 
beauty or dreariness of an autumn day is autumn just as it is, and he or she will be 
aware that this is not to be taken as being separate from himself, or even as being 
part and parcel of himself. But such a one may reflect upon the sounds of spring 
and autumn as being part of himself or as being separate from himself And there is 
nothing that such a one is adding to himself nor does he have any thought that even 
now he still has a self. This means that such a one will not see the four elements* 
and the five skandhas* of the present as himself, nor will he trace them back to 
someone else. Hence, we should not treat the images in the mind which are evoked 
by flowers and moon as being ourself, though we are prone to do so. If we consider 
that which is not ourself to be our self, well then, we do so, but when we illumine 
the condition where there is no color that repels us nor any that attracts us, then our 
everyday behavior as monks who have realized the Way conceals nothing, for this 
is what our original Buddha Nature is. 


A person of olden times, Meditation Master Chosa Keishin, once said the 
following: 

The whole of the great earth is our own Dharma Body, but we 

i 2 

may not be clear about the term ‘Dharma Body’. If you are not clear 


2. ‘The Dharma Body’ refers to our True Being. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas ’ 


1093 


about what the Dharma Body is, it will be impossible for you to turn 
yourself around even ever so slightly. 3 And still, there will be a way of 
extricating yourself. And what is the way whereby people extricate 
themselves? 4 

For those who may fail to express what this way of extricating themselves is, the 
very life of the Dharma Body will immediately cease to exist for them, and they 
will sink down into the sea of suffering for ever so long. Were the question raised 
like this, how would you respond so that you would keep your Dharma Body alive 
and not sink into the sea of suffering? At such a time you should say something to 
express that the whole of the great earth is your very Dharma Body. If what you 
offer is indeed this fundamental principle, then at the very moment when you 
would say, “The whole of the great earth is my very Dharma Body,” you would do 
well not to speak. And also, at the time when you would be silent, you may get to 
the heart of what goes beyond words. 

A monk of ancient times, who remarked that he did not say what went 
beyond saying, once commented, “In death there are occasions when one may be 
truly alive, and in life there are occasions when one may be truly dead; and there 
are those who are dead and are continually dead, and there are those who are alive 
and are continually alive.” This is not a case where an ordinary person is trying to 
force things to be a certain way; it is precisely what accords with the Dharma. 
Thus, on the occasion when the Buddha turned the Wheel of the Dharma, He had 
such a glow from It, and such a voice for It, that you could recognize that He came 
into bodily form in order to aid all sentient beings. We call this His wise 
discernment that sees beyond birth and decay. 

‘His coming into bodily form in order to aid all sentient beings’ means that 
His aiding all sentient beings is His manifesting what His Body is. When we focus 
on His giving aid, we do not call to mind His coming into bodily form, and when 
we see His coming into bodily form, we harbor no doubts as to His giving aid. You 
need to comprehend that the Buddha Dharma is being fully realized in His giving 
spiritual aid, and then you need to give expression to this and fully experience it. 
Pay attention and give expression to His act of manifesting and to His bodily form, 
for they are in no way different from His giving aid. All this stems from the fact 


3. ‘Turning oneself around’ translates a technical Buddhist tenn, which means ‘relinquishing 
one’s delusions and defiling passions, and thereby realizing enlightenment’. 

4. The last sentence can also be taken to be a declarative statement: “And the What is the Way 
whereby people extricate themselves.” 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas ’ 


1094 


that the Buddha manifested His bodily form in order to aid all sentient beings. In 
His fully actualizing this purpose from the dawning of His realization of the Truth 
to the evening of His entering parinirvana, His expressing the Truth would have 
been freely given, even if He had not spoken a word. 


The Old Buddha, Meditation Master Chosa, once said in verse: 

The whole of the great earth is the Body of a True Human 
Being, 

The whole of the great earth is the gateway to liberation, 

The whole of the great earth is the Solitary Eye of 
Vairochana, * 

The whole of the great earth is our own Dharma Body. 

In other words, what we are calling real is, in essence, our True Being. You need to 
realize that ‘the whole of the great earth’ is not some provisional term, for our 
being is its true form. If someone were to ask you, “Why have I never known this 
before?” say to that one, “Give me back my words, ‘The whole of the great earth is 
my own True Body.’” Or tell that person to say, “The whole of the great earth is the 
real Human Being,” even though this is something he already knows. 

Also, what is described as “The whole of the great earth is the gateway to 
liberation” means that there is nothing to get entangled with or to embrace. The 
phrase ‘the whole of the great earth’ is closely connected with the moment and 
with the years, with the mind and with its expressions, and so intimately are they 
related that there is not the slightest gap between any of them. 5 What is unbounded 
and extends far out beyond us is what we should call ‘the whole of the great earth’. 
Should you seek to enter this gateway to liberation or to come out on the other side 
of it, this would not be possible. And why is that so? We need to reflect on whence 
springs the question. However much we might desire to visit a place that does not 
exist, that would be impossible to do. 6 

Also, when it comes to “The whole of the great earth is the Solitary Eye of 
Vairochana,” we may speak of the One Eye of the Buddha, but do not think that It 
must be just like the eye of a human being. People have two eyes, so when we 
speak of eyes, we are just talking about human beings and we do not speak of their 
having two or three. What we are being taught here is spoken of as being the Eye 

5. That is, what physically exists is inseparable from time and mind. 

6. That is, enlightenment is not a place and, in that sense, is not something to be reached. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas ’ 


1095 


of Buddha, or the Eye of the Dharma, or the All-seeing Celestial Eye, and so forth. 
You are not learning about ordinary eyes. To understand It as being an ordinary eye 
is hopeless. What you need to learn now is that the Eye of the Buddha is solitary 
and that the whole of the great earth is contained within It. There may be a 
thousand eyes or myriad eyes, but first of all the whole of the great earth is the One 
among them. There is nothing wrong in saying that it is the One among so many, 
and at the same time, you would not be mistaken in realizing that a Buddha has just 
one, solitary Eye. Eyes may be of various kinds, so it should come as no surprise to 
our ears when we hear that there are occasions when there are three Eyes, and 
occasions when there are a thousand Eyes, and occasions when there are eighty- 
four thousand Eyes. 7 

Also, you need to hear that the whole of the great earth is your own Dharma 
Body. That which seeks to know what we truly are is the resolute heart of someone 
who is truly alive. Even so, those who see what their True Self is are few. Only a 
Buddha alone knows this Self. Others who are off the Path, such as non-Buddhists, 
vainly take their unreal, false self to be their True Self. The Self that Buddhas 
speak of is synonymous with the whole of the great earth. Thus, whether we know 
or do not know our True Self, in either case, there is no ‘whole of the great earth’ 
that is other than our True Self. 

But let us leave to those of other times what we are talking about at this 
moment. 

djb 

CX) 


Long ago, there was a novice monk who asked the Venerable 
Abbot Hoju Chinshu, “When a hundred thousand myriad conditions 
come at me all at one time, what should I do about them?” 

The Venerable One responded, “Do not try to control them.” 

The essence of what Chinshu is saying is “Let come what may. In any event, you 
cannot influence what comes.” This is on-the-spot Buddha Dharma. It is not about 
conditions. You should not understand these words as being a rebuke, but 
understand them as sheer Truth. Even if you were to consider how you might 
control conditions, they are beyond being controlled. 


7. The Three Eyes are an awakened person’s two conventional eyes plus the opened spiritual 
Third Eye. The Thousand Eyes are those associated with the Thousand-armed Kanzeon, who 
is the manifestation of the all-seeing, all-helping Compassion inherent in Buddha Nature. 
The Eighty-four Thousand Eyes are those that a Buddha has for seeing through the eighty- 
four thousand forms of delusion. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas ’ 


1096 


djb 

CX) 

An Old Buddha once said: 

The whole earth with its mountains and rivers has come into 
being in much the same way that we human beings have. The 
Buddhas of the three temporal worlds of past, present, and future have 
customarily done a practice that is the same as the practice that we 
ordinary human beings do. 

Thus, on the occasion of someone’s being bom, when we look at the whole earth 
with its mountains and rivers, what we do not see is that person’s being bom has 
now added another layer upon the whole earth of mountains and rivers that existed 
before he or she was born. Having said this does not mean that his words may not 
have a deeper meaning. So, how can it be understood? If you do not give up by 
saying, “I can’t understand this,” then by all means, you will be able to understand, 
for you will be able to ask about it. Since they are words that have already been 
voiced by a Buddha, you should listen to them, and by having listened, you may 
also come to understand them. 

One way that you may come to understand them is to inquire from the 
perspective of someone who has been born, “What is this ‘being alive?’” Who of 
us has clarified from beginning to end what it is? Though we do not know our end 
or our beginning, even so, we have come to be alive. Well, it is like our seeing the 
great earth with its mountain and rivers and treading upon it, even though we do 
not know its limits. Do not be argumentative, holding to the opinion that the great 
earth with its mountains and rivers is in no way like our life. You need to be clear 
about His having said that the great earth with its mountains and rivers is exactly 
the same as our being alive. 

Further, the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds have already done the 
practice, completed the Way, and fully awakened Themselves. How, then, are we to 
understand this notion of the Buddhas being the same as us? Well, first off, we 
need to understand what the practice of a Buddha is. The practice of a Buddha is 
done in the same manner as the practice of the whole earth, and it is done together 
with all sentient beings. If it were not so, all the practices of the Buddhas would not 
yet exist. Therefore, from the first arising of one’s intention up to the attainment of 
its realization, beyond any question, both the realizing and the practice are done 
together with the whole of the great earth and with every single sentient being. 

Doubts may arise concerning this, but keep in mind that when we attempt to 
clarify matters that appear to be all mixed up with issues that are unknowable, the 
voice of such doubts is heard, so do not be skeptical about the arising of doubts 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas ’ 


1097 


being the way it is with ordinary humans. This is a teaching you need to be aware 
of, for you need to know that when we give rise to the intention that the Buddhas 
of the three temporal worlds hold to, there is invariably the underlying principle 
that we do not exclude our own body and mind. 

However, to deliberately harbor doubts about this is already a defaming of 
the Buddhas of the three temporal worlds. When we tranquilly reflect upon this, 
the principle that our body and mind are behaving exactly like that of the Buddhas 
of the three temporal worlds, as well as the principle that we are giving rise to the 
intention to realize Buddhahood, will both be apparent. If, in reflecting, we shed 
light upon the before and after of this body and mind of ours, the One we will be 
searching for is beyond an T and beyond an ordinary, mundane person. So, do not 
be rigid in your thinking and do not believe that you have stagnated and are 
therefore separated from the three temporal worlds. Such thoughts, however, do 
not belong to you. When the Original Mind of the Buddhas of the three temporal 
worlds is practicing the Way, what could possibly come from left field to turn It 
aside? In short, the Way should be called, ‘That which goes beyond intellectual 
knowing and not knowing’. 

djb 

CX) 


One of old once said in verse: 

Even what we cast aside is nothing other than the Body 

o 

of the Dharma Lord; 

That It permeates the three temporal worlds is beyond 
dispute. 

The mountains and rivers, along with the great earth 
itself, 

Completely reveal the Dharma Body of the Awakened 
Lord. 

We people today should learn from what this person of old said. Since everything 
is already the Body of the Dharma Lord, there appeared a Lord of Dharma who 
understood that there is nothing different from the Body of the Dharma Lord. This 
Mind of His is like a mountain upon the earth and resembles the earth holding up 
mountains. 

Once you have arrived at the heart of the Matter,* the time when you did not 
understand will not have impeded your arrival. Further, getting to the heart of the 


8. ‘To cast aside’ is synonymous with Dogen’s ‘to drop offbody and mind’. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas ’ 


1098 


Matter has not changed the fact that, previously, you did not understand. Even so, 
in your getting to the heart of the Matter and in your previous non-understanding, 
there have been the times of spring and the sounds of autumn. The reason why you 
have not understood even these is because your ears have been wandering about 
within their voices, despite the fact that they have been giving expression to It ever 
so loudly. As a result, their voices have not entered your ears. Your getting to the 
heart of the Matter will occur when their voices have penetrated your ears and you 
have entered a meditative state. Do not fancy that your having arrived at the heart 
of the Matter is of little importance and that your non-understanding was 
something large. You need to realize that because you will be beyond what you 
conceived of as being ‘you’, you will not be different from the Lord of Dharma. 

As to the meaning of ‘the Body of the Dharma Lord’, the Eye is like the 
Heart of It, and the Heart of It will be like the Body. Not a single hair separates the 
Heart from the Body, for They will be fully revealed. You will understand that 
within the brightness of the Light and within giving expression to the Dharma, 
there exists the Body of the Dharma Lord as just described. 


There is a saying from olden days, “If you are not a fish, you do not know 
what is in the mind of a fish, and if you are not a bird, you do not know how to 
follow the traces of birds.” People who have been able to grasp the principle of this 
are rare indeed. Those who fancy that this simply means that humans do not know 
what the mind of a fish or the mind of a bird is have misunderstood it. The 
following is the way to understand this. A fish together with other fish invariably 
know what is on each other’s mind. Unlike humans, they are not ignorant of each 
other’s intentions, so that when they are about to swim upstream through the 
Dragon’s Gate, they all know this and they all alike make their intention as one. 9 
And when they are about to swim through the nine rapids of Chekiang, again they 
all know this and make their intention as one, but it is only the fish that know what 
this intention is. 

Also, when birds are flying through the sky, no beast on the ground, even in 
its wildest imaginings, knows what the traces of their tracks are, much less sees 
and follows them. Such a beast does not have even an inkling that such tracks 
exist. At the same time, a bird can see the various ways a swarm of hundreds of 


9. It is said that when a fish swims up through the rapids of the Dragon’s Gate at Chekiang, it 
is transformed into a dragon. This has been used in Zen Buddhist texts as a metaphor for 
someone like Prince Siddhartha becoming a Buddha, together with all other beings. 



Shobogenzo: On ‘Each Buddha on His Own, Together with All Buddhas ’ 


1099 


thousands of small birds have flown off, or see the traces of birds that have flown 
south or north. For birds, these traces are no more hidden than the tracks left on a 
path by a cart or than the hoofprints of horses seen on grass, since birds see the 
traces of birds. 

This principle also applies to Buddhas. It is apparent to Them how many 
eons a Buddha has spent in training, and They know who is a small Buddha and 
who a large Buddha, even among Those who have gone uncounted. This is 
something that cannot possibly be known when someone is not yet a Buddha. And 
there may be someone who asks, “And why, pray, can I not know it?” Well, since it 
is with the Eye of a Buddha that someone sees the traces of a Buddha, one who is 
not a Buddha is not yet in possession of the Eye of a Buddha. The number of those 
who can see are a number that only a Buddha can count. Without realizing it, They 
have all been able to follow the traces of the Buddha’s Path. If these traces are 
visible to your Eye, you are undoubtedly in the presence of Buddhas and will be 
able to compare Their footprints with those of others. In making that comparison, 
you will be able to recognize the traces of a Buddha, as well as the magnitude and 
depth of the traces that that Buddha has left, and, through consideration of that 
Buddha’s traces, your own traces will become clear to you. When we learn what 
these traces of a Buddha are, we call them the Buddha Dharma, that is, our True 
Self. 

Copied at the end of the last month of spring in the eleventh year of the Koan era (May 1, 1288), 

while staying in Shibi Manor, the Guestmaster s southern quarters at Eihei-ji Temple on 

Mount Kippo in the Yoshida district of Echizen Province. 



96 

On the Eight Realizations of a Great One 

(Hachi Dainingaku) 


Translator’s introduction: According to the postscript, this text was the last that Dogen 
prepared before his death. It consists mainly of passages from the Scripture of the Buddha s Last 
Teachings. 

The term ‘a Great One’ refers not only to a Buddha, but also to virtuous monks and 
bodhisattvas. The tenn ‘realization’ refers not only to an intellectual understanding, but also to 
the act of putting the Teachings into practice, that is, making Them real. 


All Buddhas are enlightened people, and because of this, we call what They 
discern ‘the eight realizations of a Great One’. When someone discerns what this 
Dharma of Theirs is, It brings about nirvana, which is freedom from suffering. On 
the night when our Shakyamuni Buddha entered nirvana, He gave these eight 
realizations as part of His final Teaching. 

The first is ‘having few desires’. What He called ‘having few desires’ means 
not chasing far and wide among those objects of the five senses which one has not 
yet experienced. As the Buddha said: 

O you monks, recognize the person who has many cravings. His 
misery and troubles are many because he seeks for many benefits, 
gains, and advantages. The person of few cravings is free from 
seeking after things or yearning for them. Hence, he is free of such 
sufferings. He desires little, only esteeming what is fitting for his 
spiritual training and practice. By desiring little, so much more is he 
able to bring forth fine merits and virtues. The person of few desires is 
free of flattery and fawning when searching out the intentions of 
others. The heart of someone who behaves with few desires is, as a 
consequence, even-tempered and free from gloom, anxiety, sorrow, or 
fear. When coming in contact with things, he finds a surplus, for he 
knows no insufficiency. The one who has few desires experiences 
nirvana, for this is the name for ‘having few desires’. 


1. One translation of this is found in Buddhist Writings on Meditation and Daily Practice, 
(Shasta Abbey Press, 1994), pp. 247-260. 


1100 



Shobogenzo: On the Eight Realizations of a Great One 


1101 


The second is ‘being content’. What He called ‘being content’ means 
limiting what you take to those things that you already have available to you. As 
the Buddha said: 

O you monks, if you wish to be free from miseries and woes, 
look into contentment, which is synonymous with knowing what is 
enough. The Teaching of contentment is none other than the location 
of true wealth, ease, security, and peace. The person who is contented, 
though he sleeps upon the bare ground, is still at ease and satisfied. 
Someone who is discontented, even if he were ensconced in a celestial 
palace would still not find this tallying with his ideas and tastes. The 
one who is discontented, though rich, is poor. The person who is 
contented, though poor, is rich. The one who is discontented always 
does what his five desires latch onto. He does that which causes grief 
to, and arouses the compassionate pity of, one who is contented. This 
is what I mean by ‘being content’. 

The third is ‘enjoying the tranquility of nirvana’. What He called ‘enjoying 
the tranquility of nirvana’ means leaving behind all the noise and hubbub for the 
solitude of the open country. As the Buddha said: 

O you monks, if you seek to be tranquil and quiet, liberated 
from the insistence of the defiling passions, at ease and content, then 
you should part company with confusion and bustle, and dwell at your 
ease in some solitary place. The person who dwells in quietude 
continually forsakes what those in the heavens esteem so highly 
amongst themselves. Therefore, withdraw from those about you, as 
well as from other crowds and, in a place of solitude apart from them, 
reflect on the source of the eradication of suffering at your leisure. If 
you are one who enjoys the company of others, then you will take on 
the woes of their company, just as with a flock of birds that gather in 
some huge tree, there is the lament of dead branches breaking off 
under their weight. When the world binds itself around us, we drown 
in the suffering of such company just as an old elephant, sunk down in 
mire, is unable to drag himself out. This is what I call ‘distancing 
yourself from those about you’. 

The fourth is ‘being devoted to progress’. He called this ‘being devoted to 
progress’ because of His ceaseless devotion to performing good acts—a devotion 
undiluted and a progression without regressing. As the Buddha said: 



Shobogenzo: On the Eight Realizations of a Great One 


1102 


O you monks, if you are diligent in your devotion to progress, 
training will not be difficult for you. Therefore, be diligent and devote 
yourselves to progress, just as a small stream, ever flowing, can bore 
holes in rocks. If the mind of the trainee is often inattentive and 
remiss, it will be just the same as making a fire by friction and 
blowing on it before it is hot enough to catch fire. Although your 
desire to train can blaze up, the fires of training are hard to arrive at. 

This is what I call ‘being devoted to progress’. 

The fifth is ‘not neglecting mindfulness’. He also called it ‘keeping to Right 
Mindfulness’. What He called ‘keeping to the Dharma without losing sight of If 
means keeping to Right Mindfulness. It is also called ‘not forgetting to be 
mindful’. As the Buddha said: 

O you monks, seek fine understanding, search out good 
assistance, and do not neglect mindfulness. If you are one who does 
not neglect mindfulness, the thieves of passional defilement will not 
be able to enter. Therefore, you monks, always keep your minds alert, 
for the one who loses his mindfulness loses his merits and virtues. 

When the strength of your mindfulness is constant and vigorous, 
though the five desires would break in to rob you, they will do you no 
harm. You will be as one who puts on armor before entering a battle 
and will have nothing to fear. This is what I call ‘not neglecting 
mindfulness’. 

The sixth is ‘doing meditation’. What He called ‘doing meditation’ means 
abiding in the Dharma undisturbed. As the Buddha said: 

O you monks, when your mind is kept alert, then you are in 
meditation. Because your mind is in meditation, you are able to know 
the world, birth and death, as well as the characteristics of all things. 
Therefore, you monks should always study and practice the ways of 
meditation with finest diligence. When you achieve meditation, your 
heart is not in turmoil or your mind scattered. Just as a household that 
would be frugal with water arranges dikes and pond banks carefully, 
so a trainee does similarly. Therefore, for the sake of the water of 
discriminate wisdom, practice meditation well that you may prevent 
the loss of that water through leaks caused by the defiling passions. 

This is what I call ‘doing meditation’. 



Shobogenzo: On the Eight Realizations of a Great One 


1103 


The seventh is employing ‘wise discernment’. What He called employing 
wise discernment means letting one’s hearing, thinking, and practice naturally arise 
from one’s realization of Truth. As the Buddha said: 

O you monks, when you have wise discernment, you will not be 
attached to desires. By constant self-reflection and watching what you 
do, you will not bring about any loss through the defding passions. 
Within My Teachings, this is what can bring you to liberation. If 
someone denies this, not only is he not a person of the Way, he is also 
not an ordinary, everyday person either. Indeed, there is no name for 
such a one. Genuine wise discernment is the sturdy craft that ferries 
others across the sea of old age, disease, and death. It is also a great, 
bright lamp for the darkness of ignorance, a wonderful curative for all 
disease and suffering. It is a sharp axe for felling the trees of defding 
passions. Therefore, you monks should improve yourselves by means 
of this wise discernment, which you attain through hearing, thinking 
about, and putting into practice My Teachings. When someone has the 
radiance of this wisdom then, though he be blind, he will clearly see 
what people are. This is what ‘wise discernment’ is. 

The eighth is ‘not playing around with theories and opinions’. What He 
called ‘not playing around with theories and opinions’ means letting go of dualities 
and judgmentalism that one may experience. Fully realizing the True Nature of all 
things is what ‘not playing around with theories and opinions’ means. As the 
Buddha said: 

O you monks, if your mind plays around with all kinds of 
theories and opinions, it will be confused and in disorder and, though 
you have left home to become a monk, you have still not realized 
liberation. Therefore, O monks, quickly abandon your disordered 
mind and your playing around with your theories and notions. If you 
wish to enjoy the pleasure that comes from calmness and the 
extinction of defiling passions, thoroughly eliminate the affliction of 
playing around in your head. This is what I mean by ‘not playing 
around with theories and opinions’. 

These are the eight realizations of a Great One. Each and every Great One is 
equipped with all eight. When extended, they are immeasurable; when abbreviated, 



Shobogenzo: On the Eight Realizations of a Great One 


1104 


2 

they are sixty-four. They are our Great Master Shakyamuni’s final voicing of the 
Dharma, His last instructions on the Great Course, His ultimate song in the middle 
of the night on the fifteenth of the second lunar month. After speaking the 
following, He did not give voice to the Dharma again, and at last, entered His 
parinirvana. 

O you monks, with wholehearted devotion always seek to get 
back on the path. Everything in all worlds, both the movable and the 
immovable, works to defeat and destroy all signs of uncertainty. Cease 
for a moment and do not ask Me to say more, for the time is nigh 
when I would pass and I wish for my parinirvana. These are My last 
Teachings and instructions. 

Therefore, disciples of the Tathagata, by all means, set yourself to study these 
instructions of His and do not neglect to study them, for if you do not know them, 
you are not a disciple of the Buddha. These are the very Treasure House of the Eye 
of the True Teaching, which is the Wondrous Heart of Nirvana. 

Even so, there are many today who do not know them, for there are few who 
have encountered or heard of them. That they do not know them is due to devilish 
disturbances. Those who have planted few good spiritual roots have also not heard 
or encountered them. During the long past days of the genuine Dharma and the 
superficial Dharma, disciples of the Buddha knew them, studied them, and 
explored them through their training with their Master. Nowadays only one or two 
among a thousand monks know the “Eight Realizations of a Great One”. Sad to 
say, there is nothing to compare to the degeneration of the Dharma in these 
decadent times of ours. While the Tathagata’s True Dharma is still circulating in the 
great-thousandfold world and His immaculate Dharma has not yet disappeared, 
you should hasten to leam It. Do not be slack and neglect It. 

To encounter the Buddha’s Dharma is difficult even in immeasurable eons. 
To obtain a human body is also difficult. And even if you do obtain a human body, 
to obtain a human body on one of the three continents is better. Among these 


2. These two sentences that begin Dogen’s commentary are interpolations in the manuscript. 
‘When extended’ means that there are innumerable ways in which these eight may be 
realized. ‘The sixty-four’ means that each of the eight may be coupled with each of the 
eight, that is, for example, one should keep to mindfulness when doing any of the eight, 
including keeping to mindfulness. 

3. A reference to three of the four continents said to lie around Mount Sumeru. Of these three, 
the southern continent of Jambudvipa is considered the most favorable, since those born 
there can more readily experience the transiency of human life. The fourth continent is a 



Shobogenzo: On the Eight Realizations of a Great One 


1105 


three, being a human on the southern continent is best, because there one can 
encounter Buddha, hear the Dharma, leave home life behind to become a monk, 
and realize the Way. Those who died prior to the Tathagata’s entering His 
parinirvana had not heard of the eight realizations of a Great One, much less 
studied them. That you now have encountered and heard of them, and are studying 
them, is due to the strength of the good roots you planted in the past. In your 
studying them now, in your developing them in life after life and thereby arriving, 
without fail, at the supreme awakening to Truth, and in your giving expression to 
them for the sake of sentient beings, you may well be the equal of Shakyamuni 
Buddha. May there be no difference between the two of you. 

Written at Eihei-ji Temple on the sixth day of the first lunar month in the fifth year of the Kencho 
era (February 5, 1253) 4 


Now, on the day before the end of the summer retreat in the seventh year of the Kencho era 
(August 3, 1255), I had my clerical officer Gien finish copying this text . At the same 
time, I have proofed his copy. 

This was our Master s last discourse, drafted when he was already ill. Among other things, I 
heard him say that he wanted to rework all of the Shobogenzo that had previously been 
written in Japanese script 6 and also to include some new manuscripts, so that he would 
be able to compile a work consisting altogether of one hundred discourses. 

This present discourse, which was a first draft, was to be the twelfth of the new ones. After this 
our Master s illness worsened. As a result, he stopped working on such things as the 
drafts. Therefore, this draft is our late Master s final teaching for us. Unfortunately, we 
will never see His full draft of the hundred chapters, which is something to be greatly 
regretted. Those who love and miss our late Master should, by all means, make copies of 
this twelfth chapter, and take care to preserve it. It contains the final instructions of our 
Venerable Shakyamuni and is the final legacy of our late Master s Teaching. 

I, Ejd, have given this final account. 


place where beings are enjoying too much bliss to be willing to listen to the Buddha’s 
Teaching. 

4. Dogen is said to have died on August 28, 1253. 

5. Gien began his training under Dogen. Upon the latter’s death, he trained with Koun Ejo, 
ultimately becoming one of his Dharma heirs and the Fourth Abbot of Eihei-ji. 

6. As distinct from his collection of three hundred koan stories, which were written in Chinese 
and are without any commentary. That collection is called Dogen’s Chinese Shinji 
Shobogenzo. 



Glossary 

Acharya: Sanskrit for ‘teacher’; in Zen monasteries, a polite form of address for a monk 
with at least five years of training; applied to a disciple advanced enough to teach 
monks and laity, but not yet deemed a Master. 

Arhat: In Zen, one whose heart is cleansed of all greed, hatred, and delusion but who has 
not yet fully realized wise discernment or compassion. 

Asura: An inhabitant of one of the six Worlds of Existence; before conversion, a heaven 
stormer, one who is so absorbed in attaining power that he cannot hear the 
Dharma, much less comprehend It; after conversion, he becomes a guardian of 
Buddhism. 

Avalokiteshvara (C. Kuan Yin, J. Kanzeon or Kannon): The Bodhisattva who 
hearkens to the cries of the world; the embodiment of compassion. 

Before ‘father’ and ‘mother’ were born: That is, the time before dualistic thinking 
arises in the mind. 

Bodhisattva: When not capitalized, it refers to one who is attempting to follow the 
Mahayana (Greater Course) as the Buddha Path; when capitalized, the 
personification of some aspect of Buddha Nature. 

A broken wooden ladle: A Zen metaphor describing someone’s mind which has become 
free of discriminatory thinking. 

A dragon elephant: Originally, a term for a particularly large elephant; used in Zen texts 
to describe a particularly brilliant and discerning Master. 

The five treacherous deeds: Murdering one’s father, murdering one’s mother, 
murdering an arhat, spilling the blood of someone who has realized Buddhahood, 
and causing disharmony in the Sangha, thereby creating a schism in the order. 

The four elements: Earth, water, fire, and wind. 

The four stages of arhathood: (1) Stream-enterer: someone who enters into the stream 
of Buddhist training by abandoning false views; (2) Once-retumer: someone 
having one more rebirth before realizing full enlightenment; (3) Non-returner: 
someone never returning to the realm of sensual desire; and (4) Arhat: someone 
who has reached a state of enlightenment and is therefore free from all defiling 
passions. 

Gassho: A gesture made by placing the palms of the hands together, with fingers 
pointing upwards, signifying the unity of body and mind. It is an expression of 
reverence often used during ceremonies, as well as a form of greeting when two 
Buddhists meet and a gesture of supplication. 

Greater Course (Greater Vehicle): A translation of the term ‘Mahayana’, used to 
designate the Buddhist traditions that place the awakening of all sentient beings 
above one’s personal awakening. 


1106 



Shobogenzo: Glossary 


1107 


Hossu: A scepter-like instrument in the form of a fly-whisk carried by a celebrant during 
ceremonies. It represents the flowing forth of the Water of the Spirit as an 
expression of the celebrant’s compassion. 

Hungry ghost (preta): One who resides in one of the three negative modes of existence, 
pictured as a being who is suffering from a hunger for the Dharma and has some 
metaphorical deformity, such as lacking a mouth, which makes it impossible to 
absorb It. 

Icchantika: Someone who is erroneously thought to be so amoral as to be completely 
devoid of Buddha Nature. In Zen, there is reference to the Great Icchantika, which 
is an epithet for Buddha Nature itself. 

Jambudvipa: In Buddhist spiritual cosmology, the Southern Continent where people are 
capable of doing Buddhist training. 

Kalpa: An endlessly long period of time, roughly equivalent to an eon. 

Karma: What results from any volitional action, according to the universal law of cause 
and effect. 

Kensho: The experience of seeing into one’s true nature, that is, one’s Buddha Nature. 

Kesa: A cloak-like robe traditionally worn by Buddhist monastics since the time of 
Shakyamuni Buddha. A similar type of robe is given to committed lay Buddhists. 

Koan: A statement or story used by a Zen Master as a teaching device to directly address 
a trainee’s spiritual question; also may be used to refer to that question itself. 

Lantern (stone or temple): A term often used metaphorically for a monk who stays in a 
monastery or temple, serving as a light to help guide a trainee. 

Lesser Course: Followers of the two ‘lesser’ courses, namely, the shravakas and the 
pratyekabuddhas. They are not ‘wrong’ practitioners of Buddhism, but by their 
following a ‘lesser’ course it will take a longer time for their spiritual seeds to 
germinate and grow into the realizing of Buddhahood, since they have not yet 
entered the Bodhisattva Path, which involves the doing of one’s practice for the 
sake of all sentient beings. See also the Greater Course and the Three Vehicles. 

Lion Throne (Lion’s Seat): The seat where a Master sits when giving a talk on some 
aspect of the Dharma. 

Lord of Emptiness: The first of the Seven Buddhas, the one who lived during the Age 
of Emptiness, that is, before duality had first arisen. 

Mahasattva: An outstanding bodhisattva. 

Mahayana: The Greater Vehicle. 

Maitreya: The Buddha Yet to Come. He is said to be waiting as a Bodhisattva in the 
Tushita Heaven. To realize one’s own Buddha Nature brings Maitreya forth. 

Manjushri: The Bodhisattva who personifies Great Wisdom. 



Shobogenzo: Glossary 


1108 


Matter (the One Great Matter): The goal of spiritual training, namely, the realization 
of the highest Truth. 

Monjin: The act of bowing from the waist with hands in gassho. 

A pillar of the temple: A monk whose training is so strong that it supports the spiritual 
function of the temple or monastery in which he trains. 

Pratyekabuddha: One who becomes enlightened as a result of his own efforts but does 
not share his understanding with others. 

Samantabhadra: The Bodhisattva who is the embodiment of patient, loving activity. 

Seal (Buddha seal, Buddha Mind seal, Dharma seal, and seal of certification): ‘The 
Buddha Mind Seal’ refers not only to the document written on plum blossom silk 
which certifies both the Master’s and the disciple’s Buddha Mind but also to the 
fact that the Minds of Master and disciple coincide and are not two separate minds. 
The Transmission of this seal is often referred to in Zen texts as ‘the Transmission 
of Mind to Mind’ as well as ‘the special Transmission that is apart from Scriptural 
texts and which does not depend on words’. 

The Seven Buddhas: The historical Buddha and the six Buddhas that preceded Him. 

The seven treasures (the seven jewels): The seven types of jewels from which Pure 
Lands are fashioned. 

Shashu: The way that the hands are held when doing walking meditation. There are 
various forms of shashu, but most involve one hand being wrapped around the fist 
of the other. 

Shravaka: One who, upon hearing the Dharma, affirms his allegiance to It but may not 
yet try to put It into practice, or may try to reduce It simply to a rigid code of 
‘right’ or ‘wrong’ behaviors. 

The six Worlds of Existence: Those of celestial beings, humans, asuras, hungry ghosts, 
beasts, and those in hellish states. 

Skandhas: The five skandhas comprising a living being’s physical form, sensory 
perceptions, mental concepts and ideas, volition, and consciousness. 

Skin bag: An allusion to a human as a sentient being having a physical body. Dogen 
often uses the term to characterize ineffectual trainees. 

Staff: The traveling staff carried by a monk when traveling to another temple. Hence the 
phrase ‘to hang up one’s traveling staff meaning ‘to have found the temple in 
which to permanently seek the Truth under the abbot’; metaphorically, a monk 
who is willing to go anywhere in order to spread the Dharma and help all sentient 
beings. 

Stupa: Literally, a reliquary for the ashes of a Buddhist, and metaphorically, the body of 
a Buddha. 



Shobogenzo: Glossary 


1109 


‘Such a one’ (‘such a person’): Someone who has realized the Truth and automatically 
shows the signs of having had such a realization. 

The Three Courses (the Three Vehicles): Namely, the way of training done by the 
shravakas, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas. 

The thrice wise and ten times saintly: Those who have attained the final stage of 
bodhisattvahood before fully awakening and becoming a Buddha. 

The tiles and stones of our walls and fences: The bits and pieces of our experiences, 
which we use to fashion our perception of the universe. 

Tripitaka: The three divisions of Buddhist Scriptures, namely, the Buddha’s Teachings 
(Sutras), the Precepts (Vinaya), and the commentaries on the Sutras (Abhi- 
dharmas); also, the whole of the Buddhist canon. 

Vairochana (the Cosmic Buddha): The Buddha who is the personification of spiritual 
Light and Truth, the one who represents the Pure Buddha Mind. 

Vimalaklrti: A wealthy lay Buddhist renowned for his profound understanding of 
Mahayana. 

A wheel-turning lord: A ruler who turns the Wheel of the Dharma in his country by 
governing according to Buddhist principles. 

Yojana: An Indian measure of distance, understood by some scholars as equivalent to 
twelve or sixteen miles. 



Appendix of Names 

Many of Dogen’s discourses in the Shobogenzo are based on accounts taken 
from various collections of koan stories. For the most part, these deal with notable Zen 
monastics who are customarily identified in the opening sentence of the story. 
However, since these stories have come from various sources, the name given for any 
of these monastics may not always be consistent. All the various names attributed to 
these monks would have been known to those in Dogen’s assembly but may not all be 
familiar to modern-day readers. To help in identifying who is who, I have taken the 
liberty of using the most familiar Japanese name by which these historic monks are 
known. For instance, Daikan Eno is referred to in the translations as Eno, whereas in 
some of the original texts he is referred to as Sokei. 

Also, monastic Japanese names that end in -san or -zan (Ch. -shari) may refer 
to the mountain on which a monastery is built, or to the monastery itself, or to the 
monk who was the first head of the monastery. Only context can clarify which is 
intended. 

The numbers in parentheses by each name indicate the chapters in which a koan 
story or other major reference to the person appears. 

Banzan Hoshaku, C. P’an-shan Pao-chi. Zen Master. (27, 43, 82) 

Barishiba, S. Parshva. (29) 

Baso Doitsu, C. Ma-tsu Tao-i. (11, 19, 26, 29, 53, 75) 

Bodhidharma, J. Bodaidaruma, C. P’u-t’i-ta-mo. (8, 19, 23, 29, 34, 41, 44, 47, 51, 

69) 

Bokushu Chin, C. Mu-chou Ch’en. A Dharma heir of Obaku. 

Bussho Hotai, C. Fo-hsing Fa-tai. Zen Master under Engo. (64) 

Bussho Tokko, C. Fa-shao Te-kuang. Zen Master under Daie Soko. 

Ch’ang Cho, J. Cho Setsu. Lay disciple of Sekiso Keisho. (44) 

Chimon Koso, C. Chih-men Kuang-tso. Zen Master. (27) 

Chiso, C. Chih-tsung. (51) 


1110 



Shobogenzo: Appendix of Names 


1111 


Chokei Daian, C. Chang-ch’ing Ta-an. Under Hyakujo. (29, 62) 

Chokei Eryo, C. Chang-ch’ing Hui-leng. Under Seppo. (29) 

Chord Shutaku, C. Chang-ling Shou-cho. Zen Master. (64) 

Chosa Keishin, C. Chang-sha Ching-ts’en. Zen Master. (8, 21, 35, 54, 58, 89, 95) 
Daibai Hojo, C. Ta-mei Fa-Ch’ang. Zen Master. (29) 

Daie Soko, C. Ta-hui Tsung-kao. Under Engo. (41, 72, 88) 

Daigu, J. Koan Daigu, C. Kao-an Ta-yii. Zen Master. 

Daii Doshin, C. Ta-i Tao-hsin. Zen Master. (21, 29) 

Daiji Kanchu, C. Ta-tz’u Huan-chung. Zen Master. (29) 

Daikan Eno, C. Ta-chien Hui-neng. Sixth Chinese Ancestor, often known by his 
posthumous name of Meditation Master Sokei. (10, 12, 15, 16, 19, 21, 28, 31, 
45,51,60, 72, 84) 

Daiman Konin, C. Ta-man Hung-jen. Zen Master. (21, 50) 

Daini, Tripitika Master, C. Ta-erh. (18, 78) 

Daitaka, S. Dhltika. (82) 

Daizui Shinsho, C. Ta-sui Shen-chao. Great Master. (20) 

Doan Dohi, C. Tung-an Tao-p’i. 

Dogo Enchi, C. Tao-wu Yuan-chih. Zen Master. (27, 32) 

Dorin, J. Choka Dorin, C. Niao-k’o Tao-lin. Zen Master. (9) 

Echu (National Teacher), J. Nan’yo Echu, C. Nan-yang Hui-chung. (6, 18, 36, 45, 
54, 67, 78) 

Egaku, C. Hui-chio. Monk. (8) 

Eka, J. Taiso Eka, C. Ta-tsu Elui-k’o. (29, 41, 47, 51, 60, 89) 



Shobogenzo: Appendix of Names 


1112 


Engo Kokugon, C. Yiian-wu K’o-ch’in. Zen Master. (22, 33, 36, 77, 88) 

Enkan Saian, C. Yen-kuan Ch’i-an. National Teacher. (29) 

Fuke, J. Chinshu Fuke, C. P’u-hua of Chen-chou. Zen Master. Under Ummon. (21) 
Fuyo Dokai, C. Fu-jung Tao-chieh. (29, 62) 

Fuyozan Reikun, C. Fu-jung Ling-hsim. Zen Master. (44) 

Gako, C. E-hu. Disciple of Seppo. (35) 

Ganto, J. Ganto Zenkatsu, C. Yen-t’ou Ch’iian-huo. 

Gensha Shibi, C. Hsuan-sha Shih-pei. Under Seppo. (4, 18, 19, 22, 23, 29, 31, 48, 
49, 60, 78) 

Genshi, C. Yuan-tzu. (15) 

Gensoku, C. Hsiian-tse. (1) 

Gichu, C. I-chung. Zen Master. 

Goso Hoen, C. Wu-tsu Fa-yen. Zen Master. (29) 

Gozu Hoyu, C. Niu-t’ou Fa-jung. Zen Master. (27) 

Gutei, C. Chii-chih. Zen Master. (60) 

Haku Rakuten, C. Po Chii-i. Poet of the T’ang Dynasty and a lay disciple of Zen 
Master Bukko Nyoman. (9) 

Hannyatara, S. Prajnatara. Bodhidharma’s Master. (20, 50) 

Haryo Kokan, C. Pa-ling Hao-chien. Zen Master. (23) 

Ho’on, C. P’ang-yun. Lay disciple of Baso. (24) 

Hofuku, C. Pao-fu. Disciple of Seppo. (35) 

Hogen, C. Fa-yen. (1, 59) 

Hoju Chinshu, C. Chen-chou Pao-shou. Venerable Abbot. (95) 



Shobogenzo: Appendix of Names 


1113 


Honei Jin’yu, C. Pao-ning Jen-yung. Zen Master. (59) 

Hotatsu, C. Fa-ta. (16, 20) 

Hyakujo Ekai, C. Pai-chang Huai-hai. (21, 24, 29, 33, 62, 73, 74, 76, 88) 

Iitsu, C. Wei-i. Retired Abbot. 

Isan Reiyu, C. Kuei-shan Ling-yu. Also known as Daii. (8, 21, 24, 29, 62) 

Jimyo Soen, C. Tz’u-ming Ch’u-yiian. Zen Master. 

Jinshu, C. Shen-hsiu. Chief disciple of Daiman Konin. 

Jizo Keichin, C. Ti-tsang Kuei-shen. (35, 48) 

Joshu Shinsai, C. Chao-chou Chen-chi. Great Master. (18, 20, 21, 29, 34, 38, 47, 
59, 62, 78, 79) 

Kaie Shutan, C. Hai-hui Tuan. Zen Master. (18, 78) 

Kanadaiba, S. Kaiadeva. (21) 

Kanchi Sosan, C. Chien-chih Seng-ts’an. Third Chinese Ancestor. 

Kasho Buddha, S. Kashyapa Buddha. (15, 86) 

Kayashata, S. Gayashata. (19, 28) 

Kazan Shujun, C. Ho-shan Shou-hsuen. Zen Master. (64) 

Kegon Kyujo, C. Hua-yen Hsu-ching. (25) 

Keicho Beiko, C. Ching-chao Mi-hu. (25) 

Kempo, C. Kan-feng. (58) 

Kinkazan Koto, C. Kung-tao. Zen Master. (19) 

Kisei, C. Kuei-hsing. Zen Master. (11) 

Kisu Shishin, C. Kuei-tsung Chih-chen. Zen Master. (44) 



Shobogenzo: Appendix of Names 


1114 


Koboku Hojo, C. Ku-mo Fa-cheng. Zen Master. (73) 

Koto, Vinaya Master, C. Kuang-t’ung. 

Kozan Chi’en, C. Ku-shan Chih-yuan. 

Kumorata, S. Kumaralabdha. (88, 89) 

Kyogen Chikan, C. Hsiang-yen Chih-hsien. (8, 24, 29, 63, 65, 79) 

Kyosei Dofu, C. Ching-ch’ing Tao-fu. 

Kyozan Ejaku, C. Yang-shan Hui-chi. Zen Master. Disciple of Isan. (18, 21, 24, 51, 

78) 

Makakasho, S. Mahakashyapa. First Indian Ancestor. (23, 29, 31, 52, 66, 74, 77, 
81,85) 

Massan Ryonen, C. Mo-shan. Master. (10) 

Mayoku Hotetsu, C. Ma-ku Pao-ch’e. Zen Master. (3, 32) 

Moggallana, S. Maudgalyayana. Disciple of the Buddha. 

Musai Ryoha, C. Wu-chi Liao-p’ai. 

Myoshin, C. Miao-hsin. Monk. (10) 

Nagarjuna, J. Nagyaarajuna, C. Lung-shu, Lung-sheng, or Lung-meng. Ancestral 
Master. (21, 82, 84, 86,91) 

Nangaku Ejo, C. Nan-yiieh Huai-jang. Under Daikan Eno. (7, 19, 22, 26, 60) 

Nansen Fugan, C. Nan-ch’uan P’u-yiian. Zen Master. Disciple of Baso. (21, 34, 59, 

79) 

Oan Donge, C. Ying-an Tan-hua. Zen Master. (49) 

Obaku Unshi, C. Huang-po Yiin-shih. Zen Master. (21, 27, 29, 50, 73) 

Oryu Enan, C. Huang-lung Hui-nan. Zen Master. 



Shobogenzo: Appendix of Names 


1115 


Oryu Shishin, C. Huang-lung Ssu-hsin. 

Reiun Shigon, C. Ling-yiin Chih-ch’in. Zen Master. (8) 

Rinzai Gigen, C. Lin-ch’i I-hsiian. (10, 21, 24, 25, 29, 32, 50, 51, 82) 

Roy a Ekaku, C. Lang-yeh Hui-chiieh. (61) 

Ryuge Kodon, C. Lung-ya Chii-tun. Master. 

Ryutan Soshin, C. Lung-t’an Ch’ung-hsin. Zen Master. (17) 

Sansho Enen, C. San-sheng Hui-jan. Zen Master. (19, 51) 

Seido Chizo, C. Hsi-t’ang Chih-tsang. Zen Master. (75) 

Seigen Gyoshi, C. Ch’ing-yiian Hsing-ssu. Zen Master. (11, 15, 23, 31, 51) 
Seiho, C. Ch’ing-feng. Zen Master. (1) 

Seizan, C. Seizan. (75) 

Sekiso Keisho, C. Shih-shuang Ch’ing-chu. Master. 

Sekito Risen, C. Shih-t’ou Hsi-ch’ien. (11, 23, 27, 28, 51, 62) 

Sempuku Joko, C. Chien-fu Cheng-ku. Zen Master. (74) 

Seppo Gison, C. Hsiieh-feng I-ts’un. (4, 19, 22, 29, 31, 35, 38, 45, 49, 60) 
Setcho Chikan, C. Hsiieh-tou Chih-chien. Great Master. (52) 

Setcho Juken, C. Hsiieh-tou Chung-hsien. (64, 65, 79) 

Shakkyo Ezo, C. Shih-kung Hui-tsang. Zen Master. (75) 

Shayata, S. Jayanta. Great Monk. (89) 

Shikan, J. Kankei Shikan, C. Kuan-hsi Chih-hsien. Zen Master. (10, 29) 
Shinzan Somitsu, C. Shen-shan Seng-mi. Zen Master. (41) 

Shishibodai, S. Sim&habodhi. Great Monk. 



Shobogenzo: Appendix of Names 


1116 


Shoju, C. Cheng-shou. (91) 

Shokaku Joso, C. Chao-chiieh Ch’ang-tsung. Zen Master. (8) 

Shonawashu, S. Sanavasa. Third Indian Ancestor. 

Shugetsu, C. Tsung-yiieh. Venerable Master. 

Sogyanandai, S. Sanghananda. Great Monk. (19, 28, 82) 

Soun, C. Sung-yiin. 

Sozan Honjaku, C. Ts’ao-shan Pen-chi. (27, 30, 63) 

Sozan Konin, C. Shu-shan Kuang-jen. Zen Master. (45) 

Sunakshatra, C. Zensho. Disciple of the Buddha who returned to lay life. (82) 
Tafuku, C. Ta-fu. One of Joshu’s Dharma heirs. 

Taigen Fu, C. Ta-yiian Fu. (57) 

Tando Bunjun, C. Chan-t’ang Wen-chun. Zen Master. (64, 72) 

Tanka Shijun, C. Tan-hsia Tzu-ch’un. Great Monk. (64) 

Tendo Nyojo, C. T’ien-t’ung Ju-ching. Zen Master. (2, 7, 20, 29, 49, 54, 57, 59, 60, 
62,66,71,76,77) 

Tenryu, C. T’ien-lung. Zen Master. 

To Impo, C. Teng Yin-feng. (79) 

Toba, C. Tung-p’o. Layman in Keisei Sanshoku. (8) 

Tokujo, J. Sensu Tokujo, C. Ch’uan-tzu Te-ch’ing. Under Yakusan Igen. 

Tokusan Senkan, C. Te-shan Hsuan-chien. Zen Master. Disciple of Sekito Kisen. 
(17,18) 

Tokusan Tokkai, C. Te-shan Te-hai. Disciple of Seppo. 

Tosu Daido, C. T’ou-tzu Ta-t’ung. (43, 54, 63) 



Shobogenzo: Appendix of Names 


1117 


Tosu Gisei, C. T’ou-tzu I-ch’ing. Great Monk. (62) 

Tozan Dobi, C. Tung-shan Tao-wei. 

Tozan Ryokai, C. Tung-shan Liang-chieh. (20, 24, 27, 41, 54, 61, 64) 
Ubakikuta, S. Upagupta. Great Monk. (82, 91) 

Ummon Bun’en, C. Yun-men Wen-yen. (35, 39, 74) 

Uncho Tokufu, C. Hsiieh-ting Te-fu. Zen Master. 

Ungan Donjo, C. Yiin-yen T’an-sheng. (24, 32, 54, 61) 

Ungo Doyo, C. Yiin-chu Tao-ying. (20, 27, 52) 

Utpalavarna, J. Upparage. (82, 84) 

Vasubandhu, J. Bashubanzu. 

Vimalakirti, J. Yuima. (31, 70) 

Wanshi Shogaku, C. Hung-chih Cheng-chiieh. A Dharma heir of Tanka Shijun. 
(26) 

Yafu Dosen, C. Yeh-fu Tao-ch’uan. Zen Master. 

Yakusan Igen, C. Yao-shan Wei-yen. Great Master. (11, 20, 26, 28, 70) 

Yoka Genkaku, C. Yung-chia Hsiian-chueh. (88) 

Zengen Chuko, C. Chien-yuan Chung-hsing. Great Master. (45) 



About the Translator 


After obtaining his doctorate in theatre criticism and the phenomenon 
of theatre from the University of Washington in 1972, Rev. Hubert Nearman 
(aka Mark J. Nearman) spent the following decade broadening his 
knowledge of classical Japanese and Chinese in order to devote himself to 
making annotated translations of the so-called ‘secret tradition’ writings 
(Japanese hiden ) by Zeami Motokiyo, one of the principal founders of the 
fourteenth-century Japanese Noh theatre tradition. In 1981, he was awarded 
a three-year National Endowment for the Humanities grant to make similar 
annotated translations of treatises by Zeami’s son-in-law, Komparu 
Zenchiku. His translations of these documents on Japanese aesthetics were 
published in Monumenta Nipponica. Also during this period he held faculty 
positions at the American University (in Washington, DC) and at the 
University of New South Wales. 

In 1988 he was ordained in the Order of Buddhist Contemplatives of 
the Soto Zen tradition by Rev. Master Jiyu-Kennett and in 1992 received 
Dharma Transmission from her. Since then, at her request, he has devoted 
himself to translating major Buddhist works, including Keizan Jokin’s 
“Record of the Transmission of the Light” ( Denkoroku ) and his “Instructions 
on How to Do Pure Meditation” ( Zazen Yojin Ki), as well as “The Scripture 
of Brahma’s Net” ( Bommo Kyd), the dharani from “The Scripture on 
Courageously Going On” {Shuraogama Sutra), Kanshi Sosan’s “That 
Which is Engraved upon the Heart That Trusts to the Eternal” {Hsin Hsin 
Ming), Yoka Genkaku’s “Song That Attests to the Way” {Cheng Tao Ko), 
“Bodhidharma’s Discourse on Pure Meditation” {Kuan Hsin Lun), “The 
Scripture of the Buddha’s Last Teachings”( Yuikyo Gyd), “The Scripture on 
Fully Perfected Enlightenment” {Engaku Kyd), along with the present work. 


1118 