THIS BOOK IS PRESENT 

IN OUR LIBRARY 

THROUGH THE 

GENEROUS 

CONTRIBUTIONS OF 

ST. MICHAEL'S ALUMNI 

TO THE VARSITY 

FUND 




TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH WITH ANALYSES 
AND INTRODUCTIONS 

BY 

BENJAMIN JOWETT, M.A. 

LATE MASTER OF BALLIOL COLLEGE 
WITH A PREFACE BY 

EDWARD CAIRO, M.A., D.C.L. 

MASTER OF BALLIOL COLLEGE 




OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 



PRINTED IN ENGLAND 
AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 



Impression of 1924 
first edition 



PREFACE 

THE four dialogues included in this volume have 
been selected as specially biographical. In them 
Plato has given us a consummate picture of the real, 
and also of what we may call the ideal Socrates. In 
the first three dialogues we cannot be sure that in any 
case he reports the very words of Socrates, but he un 
doubtedly seeks to bring before us Socrates as he was, 
the homely greatness of his character, his questioning 
and apparently negative method, his urbanity and irony, 
and his absorbing ethical aims. In the Phaedo, on the 
other hand, we see the historical Socrates as it were 
transfigured into the ideal philosopher, the typical re 
presentative of that idealistic or spiritualistic philosophy 
to which his own thought had developed in the mind 
of Plato. All these dialogues are very fully analysed 
in Jowett's Introductions, but it may be of some use to 
the reader to gather up in a few words their principal 
features. 

The Euthypbro, which comes first in order, exhibits 
Socrates to us as a teacher, who seeks by his dialectical 
art to awake men out of their confidence in their own 
untested opinions, and to stimulate them to inquire what 
they mean by their confident judgements on all ethical 
subjects. The search for a definition of piety leads to 
an exposure of the unsoundness of the basis of ethics 
provided by Polytheism, and it is discovered that that 



vi Preface 

alone can be regarded as a pious act with which all 
the gods are pleased. This, again, raises the question, 
whether an act is pious because the gods are pleased with 
it, or the gods are pleased with it because it is pious. If 
the latter, then piety must be defined as a part of justice or 
righteousness : but justice or righteousness is generally 
regarded as concerned only with our duties to men. We 
are therefore involved in a critical discussion of the 
question, whether the service of God imposes special 
duties, distinct from those involved in the service of 
man. The dialogue ends with the apparently negative 
conclusion that, if we exclude the absurd idea that men 
can help the gods, piety can only consist in doing what 
is pleasing to them the very definition which has al 
ready been rejected as unsatisfactory. But the attentive j 
reader will recognize that the discussion has brought us j 
to a point of view from which piety is seen to be not 
a special department of morality, but only the religious j 
aspect of it. 

In the dpology, which probably contains the sub 
stance of the defence actually made by Socrates, he is 
represented as explaining to his judges the nature of 
his peculiar mission. He is a gadfly sent to rouse the 
Athenians from their ' dogmatic slumbers,' and to make 
them reflect on the meaning and purpose of their lives. 
They are living in an ignorance which is the deeper that 
they think they know, and therefore are always ready 
to pronounce judgement on any ethical question. Seek 
ing to vindicate the oracle which has declared him to be 
the wisest of men, while he is himself conscious that 



Preface vii 

he knows nothing, Socrates has entered upon his dia 
lectical mission. But every step he has taken in ques 
tioning those men 'who seemed to be somewhat,' the 
great politicians, soldiers, &c, has shown them to be 
ignorant of that which they confidently claim to know. 
The poets, indeed, sometimes speak great words of wis 
dom, but it is by inspiration and not by knowledge : for 
they are quite unable to explain their own utterances. 
And the common tradesmen, who know something of 
their own special vocations know what they are aim 
ing at, and what are the means they have to use are 
found as ignorant as the rest, when the question is what 
end they are living for, and how they are to attain it. 

Throughout, the Apology it is assumed that there 
is some one ethical end, a summum bonum, for which all 
men would live, if they once knew its real nature. All 
men seek the good ; and wealth, honour, rank all the 
special so-called goods of life are prized only because 
they are supposed to be means to it. This one assump 
tion being made, Socrates looks at life with simple, 
practical common sense. He is a rationalist and a 
man of business, who weighs the comparative advan 
tages of living and dying as coolly as the comparative 
advantages of a public and a private life, and decides, on 
grounds of utility, that it is better to die than to make 
compromises with his duty. Death, indeed, is a great 
bugbear; but Socrates regards it with clear eyes and 
sees that it is not to be feared : for, either it means that 
we enter into a state of unconsciousness, or else that we 
join the ' choir invisible ' of the great and good of the 






viii Preface 

past. 'The hour of departure has arrived, and we 
go our ways I to die, and you to live. Which is 
better, God only knows.' 

The Crito presents another scene in the life of 
Socrates : he is in prison, waiting for the end, and 
Crito, one of his friends, urges him to take an oppor 
tunity of escaping before the sentence is executed. 
Socrates is ready as ever to discuss the demands of the 
situation. It being assumed that the end to be aimed 
at is not life but ' living well,' i. e. filling life with the 
right kind of contents, what, in this view of it, is the most 
expedient course to take ? Socrates contends that he is 
bound by a tacit contract with the State a contract im 
plied in the fact that he has spent a long life under its 
laws, and taken advantage of all its privileges not to do 
anything that tends to weaken its authority. Is he 
then by a signal act of disloyalty to purchase a few more 
years of useless and precarious existence and to desert 
his post for fear of death ? 

Plato probably designs in this dialogue not only to 
chronicle the refusal of Socrates to escape from prison, 
but also to vindicate him from the reproach of being a 
bad citizen. In the Apology Socrates had almost de 
fiantly asserted his resolution to carry on his philo 
sophical mission to the end, whatever the authorities of 
the State might think of it, and so to ' obey God rather 
than man.' But here he is made to show that this 
defiance was quite consistent with the highest loyalty 
to the State and its laws, wherever the question of a 
higher loyalty to truth did not come in. The attitude 



Preface ix 

of Socrates might be compared with that of the Chris 
tian martyrs, who were ready to die rather than to throw 
a few grains of incense upon the altar of the Emperor, 
but who in all secular things recognized the authority, 
and even the divine right, of the ' powers that be.' 

The last dialogue, the PhaeJo, lifts us into a new 
region, in which the image of Socrates is softened and 
exalted by the nearness of death, and the fertile germ 
of Socratic thought is developed into the systematic 
completeness of the Platonic Idealism. Socrates and 
his friends are supposed to spend his last hours in dis 
cussing the immortality of the soul, in proof of which 
Socrates brings forward a number of arguments, based 
mainly on the unity, universality, and permanence of the 
objects which it knows or is capable of knowing. As 
in thought the mind is not confined to the passing ap 
pearances of sense, but grasps the eternal laws or ideas 
which are manifested through them, it must have a 
nature kindred with such objects. It has therefore an 
existence which is above change and mortality, and 
death is rather to be regarded as its release from the 
weaknesses of the body that ' muddy vesture of decay ' 
that prevents it from seeing clearly the realities of the 
ideal or intelligible world. After answering some objec 
tions to this view, which are based upon the apparent 
dependence of the functions of the soul upon the life of the 
body, Socrates finally seeks to meet them by a comparison 
of the ideal theory with the physical theories of the earlier 
philosophers. Anaxagoras, indeed, had partly freed 
himself from those theories by setting up reason as the 



x Preface 

ultimate cause of all things, but he had not followed out 
this principle to what Socrates regards as its necessary 
consequences. He had not endeavoured to construct his 
system of the universe on the basis of final causes, or 
attempted to show that all things in it exist with a view 
to the realization of the good . He had, on the contrary, 
fallen back, in all his explanations of particular pheno 
mena, upon physical causes, similar to those recognized 
by his predecessors. Disappointed with this result, 
Socrates has recourse to his own less ambitious method 
of induction and definition, which is here regarded as 
involving the ideal theory. He proposes to begin with 
the definition of ideas which embrace special spheres of 
reality, then to follow out such definitions to all their 
consequences, and finally to work backwards and up 
wards to higher and more comprehensive ideas, till he 
attains some principle on which he can rest as adequate. 
This probably means that the Platonic Socrates hopes 
to reach the highest and most comprehensive idea, the 
principle of all knowing and being (as he afterwards 
did in the Republic), not by a direct intuition, such as 
might be attributed to Anaxagoras, but by a regressive 
process from less comprehensive principles, which held 
good within special spheres of science. Having thus 
set forth his general idealistic view of things, Socrates 
then, by aid of it, tries to show that the soul is im 
mortal because the idea of life is inseparable from it 
an argument which is very similar to that by which 
Descartes seeks to prove the existence of God, because 
the idea of perfection involves existence. Finally, 



Preface xi 

Socrates concludes his discourse with a mythic represen 
tation of the future state of rewards and punishments, 
explaining that he does not put forward this myth as 
literal truth, but only as a suggestion of the direction in 
which the truth must lie. * A man of sense ought not 
to say, nor will I be very confident, that the description 
I have given of the soul and its mansions is exactly 
true. But I do say that, inasmuch as the soul is shown 
to be immortal, we may venture to think that something 
of the kind is true. The venture is a glorious one, and 
we ought to comfort ourselves in it with thoughts like 

these.' 

As I have already indicated, we cannot regard this 

dialogue as historical. The doctrines are not the doc 
trines of Socrates, and the whole work has rather the 
appearance of a prose tragedy composed upon the theme 
of his death. At the same time, the personal charac 
teristics of Socrates are maintained, his playful earnest 
ness, his freedom of spirit, his calm and impartial survey 
of the facts of life and death : and it is probable that 
some of the actual details of his last hours are faithfully 
reproduced. The last utterance attributed to Socrates 
in which he asks Crito to sacrifice for him a cock to 
Asclepius, as an expression of gratitude for his re 
covery from the long disease of life does not express 
a Socratic sentiment, but it is quite in the spirit of the 
genuine Socratic humour. 



CONTENTS 



INTRODUCTION TO EUTHYPHRO 
EUTHYPHRO . 

INTRODUCTION TO APOLOGY . 
APOLOGY . 

INTRODUCTION TO CRITO 
CRITO .... 

INTRODUCTION TO PHAEDO . 
PHAEDO .... 



PACK 
I 

10 

37 
54 

93 
98 

118 
172 



INTRODUCTION TO 
EUTHYPHRO 

IN the Meno, Anytus had parted from Socrates 
with the significant words : ' That in any city, 
and particularly in the city of Athens, it is easier to 
do men harm than to do them good ' (94 E) ; and 
Socrates was anticipating another opportunity of talking 
with him (99 E). In the Euthyphro, Socrates is 
awaiting his trial for impiety. But before the trial 
begins, Plato would like to put the world on their trial, 
and convince them of ignorance in that very matter 
touching which Socrates is accused. An incident 
which may perhaps really have occurred in the family 
of Euthyphro, a learned Athenian diviner and sooth 
sayer, furnishes the occasion of the discussion. 

Analysis. 

This Euthyphro and Socrates are represented as Steph. 
meeting in the porch of the King Archon. (Cp. 
Theaet. sub fin.) Both have legal business in hand, a 
Socrates is defendant in a suit for impiety which 
Meletus has brought against him (it is remarked by the 3 
way that he is not a likely man himself to have brought 
a suit against another) ; and Euthyphro too is plaintiff 
in an action for murder, which he has brought against 
his own father. The latter has originated in the 4 
following manner : A poor dependant of the family 
had slain one of their domestic slaves in Naxos. The 



sso 



2 Eutbyphro 

guilty person was bound and thrown into a ditch by 
the command of Euthyphro' s father, who sent to the 
interpreters of religion at Athens to ask what should 
be done with him. Before the messenger came back 
the criminal had died from hunger and exposure. 

This is the origin of the charge of murder which 
Euthyphro brings against his father. Socrates is 
confident that before he could have undertaken the 

5 responsibility of such a prosecution, he must have been 
perfectly informed of the nature of piety and impiety; 
and as he is going to be tried for impiety himself, he 
thinks that he cannot do better than learn of Euthyphro 
(who will be admitted by everybody, including the 
judges, to be an unimpeachable authority) what piety is, 
and what is impiety. What then is piety ? 

Euthyphro, who, in the abundance of his knowledge, 
is very willing to undertake all the responsibility, replies : 
That piety is doing as I do, prosecuting your father (if 
he is guilty) on a charge of murder ; doing as the gods 
do as Zeus did to Cronos, and Cronos to Uranus. 

6 Socrates has a dislike to these tales of mythology, 
and he fancies that this dislike of his may be the 
reason why he is charged with impiety. ' Are they 
really true ? ' ' Yes, they are ; ' and Euthyphro will 
gladly tell Socrates some more of them. But Socrates 
would like first of all to have a more satisfactory 
answer to the question, ' What is piety ? ' ' Doing as 
I do, charging a father with murder,' may be a single 
instance of piety, but can hardly be regarded as a 
general definition. 

Piety is what is dear to the gods, and impiety is what is not dear to them, but 
may there not be differences of opinion, as among men, 
so also among the gods? Especially, about good and 
evil, which have no fixed rule ; and these are precisely 
the sort of differences which give rise to quarrels. 
And therefore what may be dear to one god may not 8 
be dear to another, and the same action may be both 
pious and impious ; e. g. your chastisement of your 
father, Euthyphro, may be dear or pleasing to Zeus 
(who inflicted a similar chastisement on his own father), 
but not equally pleasing to Cronos or Uranus (who 
suffered at the hands of their sons). 

Euthyphro answers that there is no difference of 
opinion, either among gods or men, as to the propriety 
of punishing a murderer. Yes, rejoins Socrates, when 
they know him to be a murderer ; but you are assuming 
the point at issue. If all the circumstances of the 
case are considered, are you able to show that your 9 
father was guilty of murder, or that all the gods are 
agreed in approving of our prosecution of him ? And 
must you not allow that what is hated by one god may 
be liked by another ? Waiving this last, however, 
Socrates proposes to amend the definition, and say that 
'what all the gods love is pious, and what they all | 
hate is impious.' To this Euthyphro agrees. 

Socrates proceeds to analyse the new form of the 10 
definition. He shows that in other cases the act 
precedes the state ; e. g. the act of being carried, 
loved, &c. precedes the state of being carried, loved, 
&c., and therefore that which is dear to the gods is 
dear to the gods because it is first loved of them, ) 
B 2 



4 Euthyphro 

tnot loved of them because it is dear to them. But 

' the pious or holy is loved by the gods because it is 

pious or holy, which is equivalent to saying, that it 

is loved by them because it is dear to them. Here 

11 then appears to be a contradiction, Euthyphro has 
been giving an attribute or accident of piety only, and 
not the essence. Euthyphro acknowledges himself 
that his explanations seem to walk away or go round 
in a circle, like the moving figures of Daedalus, the 
ancestor of Socrates, who has communicated his art 
to his descendants. 

12 Socrates, who is desirous of stimulating the indo 
lent intelligence of Euthyphro, raises the question in 
another manner : ' Is all the pious just ? ' ' Yes.' 
* Is all the just pious ? ' ' No.' ' Then what part of 
justice is piety ? ' Euthyphro replies that piety is 
that part of justice which ' attends ' to the gods, as 
there is another part of justice which ' attends* to men. 

But what is the meaning of 'attending ' to the gods? 
The word ' attending,' when applied to dogs, horses, 
and men, implies that in some way they are made 
better. But how do pious or holy acts make the 
gods any better ? Euthyphro explains that he means 
by pious acts, acts of service or ministration. Yes; 
but the ministrations of the husbandman, the physician, 
and the builder have an end. To what end do we serve the gods, and what do we help them to accom 
plish? Euthyphro replies, that all these difficult 
questions cannot be resolved in a short time ; and 
he would rather say simply that piety is knowing 
how to please the gods in word and deed, by prayers 



Analysis 1016 f 

and sacrifices. In others words, says Socrates, piety 
is ' a science of asking and giving ' asking what we 15 
want and giving what they want ; in short, a mode of 
doing business between gods and men. But although 
they are the givers of all good, how can we give them 
any good in return ? * Nay, but we give them honour.' 
Then we give them not what is beneficial, but what is 
pleasing or dear to them j and this is the point which 
has been already disproved. 

Socrates, although weary of the subterfuges and 
evasions of Euthyphro, remains unshaken in his 
conviction that he must know the nature of piety, or 
he would never have prosecuted his old father. He 
is still hoping that he will condescend to instruct him. 
But Euthyphro is in a hurry and cannot stay. And 16 
Socrates' last hope of knowing the nature of piety 
before he is prosecuted for impiety has disappeared. 
As in the Euthydemus the irony is carried on to the 
end. 

The Euthyphro is manifestly designed to contrast 
the real nature of piety and impiety with the popular 
conceptions of them. But when the popular concep 
tions of them have been overthrown, Socrates does 
not offer any definition of his own : as in the Laches 
and Lysis, he prepares the way for an answer to the 
question which he has raised ; but trye to his own 
character, refuses to answer himself. 

Euthyphro is a religionist, and is elsewhere spoken 
of, if he be the same person, as the author of a 
philosophy of names, by whose 'prancing steeds' 



Eutbypb 



ro 



Socrates in the Cratylus is carried away (p. 
He has the conceit and self-confidence of a Sophist ; 
no doubt that he is right in prosecuting his father 
has ever entered into his mind. Like a Sophist too, 
he is incapable either of framing a general definition 
or of following the course of an argument. His 
wrong-headedness, one-sidedness, narrowness, positive- 
ness, are characteristic of his priestly office. His 
failure to apprehend an argument may be compared 
to a similar defect which is observable in the rhapsode 
Ion. But he is not a bad man, and he is friendly 
to Socrates, whose familiar sign he recognizes with 
interest. Though unable to follow him he is very 
willing to be led by him, and eagerly catches at any 
suggestion which saves him from the trouble of 
thinking. Moreover he is the enemy of Meletus, 
who, as he says, is availing himself of the popular 
dislike to innovations in religion in order to injure 
Socrates ; at the same time he is amusingly confident 
that he has weapons in his own armoury which would be 
more than a match for him. He is quite sincere in 
his prosecution of his father, who has accidentally 
been guilty of homicide, and is not wholly free from 
blame. To purge away the crime appears to him in 
the light of a duty, whoever may be the criminal. 

Thus begins the contrast between the religion of the { 
letter, or of the narrow and unenlightened conscience, 
and the higher notion of religion which Socrates vainly 
endeavours to elicit from him. ' Piety is doing as I do *\ 
is the idea of religion which first occurs to him, and to 
many others who do not say what they think with 



The three definitions of Piety 7 

equal frankness. For men are not easily persuaded 
that any other religion is better than their own ; or 
that other nations, e. g. the Greeks in the time of 
Socrates, were equally serious in their religious beliefs 
and difficulties. The chief difference between us and 
them is, that they were slowly learning what we are in 
process of forgetting. Greek mythology hardly admitted 
of the distinction between accidental homicide and 
murder : that the pollution of blood was the same in 
both cases is also the feeling of the Athenian diviner. 
He had not as yet learned the lesson, which philosophy 
was teaching, that Homer and Hesiod, if not banished 
from the state, or whipped out of the assembly, as 
Heracleitus more rudely proposed, at any rate were 
not to be appealed to as authorities in religion ; and 
he is ready to defend his conduct by the examples 
of the gods. These are the very tales which Socrates 
cannot abide ; and his dislike of them, as he suspects, 
has branded him with the reputation of impiety. Here 
is one answer to the question, ' Why Socrates was put 
to death,' suggested by the way. Another is conveyed 
in the words, ' The Athenians do not care about any 
man being thought wise until he begins to make other 
men wise ; and then for some reason or other they are 
angry : ' which may be said to be the rule of popular 
toleration in most other countries, and not at Athens 
only. In the course of the argument (7 A, B) Socrates 
remarks that the controversial nature of morals and 
religion arises out of the difficulty of verifying them. 
There is no measure or standard to which they can be 
referred. 



8 Euthypbro 

The next definition, Piety is that which is loved 
of the gods,' is shipwrecked on a refined distinction 
between the state and the act, corresponding respectively 
to the adjective (0tXov) and the participle (^tXov/jej/oi 
or rather perhaps to the participle and the verb (^iXou/xf v 
and <j>i\firai). The act is prior to the state (as in 
Aristotle the (vepytia precedes the 8vvafj.is) ; and the 
state of being loved is preceded by the act of being 
loved. But piety or holiness is preceded by the act 
of being pious, not by the act of being loved ; and 
therefore piety and the state of being loved are different. 
Through such subtleties of dialectic Socrates is working 
his way into a deeper region of thought and feeling. 
He means to say that the words ' loved of the gods-' 
'"express an attribute onlv><ind not the essence of piety. 

*^ggy^^ J 77^ * 

Then follows the Ihird and last definition, ' Piety is 
a part of justice.' Thus far Socrates has proceeded in 
placing religion on a moral foundation. He is seeking 
to realize the harmony of religion and morality, which 
the great poets Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Pindar had 
unconsciously anticipated, and which is the universal 
want of all men. To this the soothsayer adds the 
ceremonial element, ' attending upon the gods.' When 
further interrogated by Socrates as to the nature of this 
* attention to the gods,' he replies, that piety is an affair 
of business, a science of giving and asking, and the 
like. Socrates points out the anthropomorphism of these 
notions. (Cp. Symp. loz E ; Rep. ii. 365 E ; Politics 
190 C, D.) But when we expect him to go on and 
show that the true service of the gods is the service 
of the spirit and the co-operation with them in all things 



Date of the Dialogue 9 

true and good, he stops short ; this was a lesson which 
the soothsayer could not have been made to understand, 
and which every one must learn for himself. 

There seem to be altogether three aims or interests 
in this little Dialogue : ( I ) the dialectical development 
of the idea of piety ; (2) the antithesis of true and false 
religion, which is carried to a certain extent only ; 
(3) the defence of Socrates. 

The subtle connection with the Apology and the 
Crito ; the holding back of the conclusion, as in the 
Charmides, Lysis, Laches, Protagoras, and other 
Dialogues ; the deep insight into the religious world ; 
the dramatic power and play of the two characters ; the 
inimitable irony, are reasons for believing that the 
Euthyphro is a genuine Platonic writing. The spirit 
in which the popular representations of mythology are 
denounced recalls Republic II (378 ff.). The virtue of 
piety has been already mentioned as one of five in the 
Protagoras, but is not reckoned among the four cardinal 
virtues of Republic IV (428 ff.). The figure of 
Daedalus (isC) has occurred in the Meno (970); 
that of Proteus (i5D) in the Euthydemus (288 B) 
and lo (54! E). The kingly science has already 
appeared in the Euthydemus, and will reappear in the 
Republic and Statesman. But neither from these nor 
any other indications of similarity or difference, and 
still less from arguments respecting the suitableness of 
this little work to aid Socrates at the time of his trial 
or the reverse, can any evidence of the date be obtained. 






EUTHYPHRO 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE 

SOCRATES. EUTHYPHRO. 

Scene: The Porch of the King Archon. 

have you left the Lyceum? What are you doing in the Porch of the King Archon? Surely you cannot 
be concerned in a suit before the King, like myself? 

Socrates. Not in a suit, Euthyphro ; impeachment is 
the word which the Athenians use. 

Euth. What! I suppose that some one has been 
prosecuting you, for I cannot believe that you are the 
prosecutor of another. 

Soc. Certainly not. 

Euth. Then some one else has been prosecuting you ? 

Soc. Yes. 

Euth. And who is he ? 

Soc . A young man who is little known, Euthyphro ; 
and I hardly know him : his name is Mcletus, and he 
is of the deme of Pitthis. Perhaps you may remember 
his appearance ; he has a beak, and long straight hair, 
and a beard which is ill grown. 

Euth. No, I do not remember him, Socrates. But 
what is the charge which he brings against you ? 

Soc. What is the charge? Well, a very serious charge, 
which shows a good deal of character in the young man, 
and for which he is certainly not to be despised. He 



: 



The charge against Socrates 1 1 

says he knows how the youth are corrupted and who 
are their corruptors. I fancy that he must be a wise 
man, and seeing that I am the reverse of a wise man, 
he has found me out, and is going to accuse me of 
corrupting his young friends. And of this our mother 
the state is to be the judge. Of all our political men 
he is the only one who seems to me to begin in the 
right way, with the cultivation of virtue in youth ; like 3 
a good husbandman, he makes the young shoots his first 
care, and clears away us who are the destroyers of them. ^ 
This is only the first step ; he will afterwards attend to 
the elder branches ; End if he goes on as he has begun, 
he will be a very great public beaefactorj 

Euth. [l hope that he may ; but I rather fear, Socrates, 
that the opposite will turn out to be the truthTj My 
opinion is that in attacking you he is simply aiming a 
blow at the foundation of the state. But in what way 
does he say that you corrupt the young ? 

Soc. He brings a wonderful accusation against me, 
which at first hearing excites surprise: he says that I 
am a poet or maker of gods, and that I invent new gods 
and deny the existence of old ones ; this is the ground 
of his indictment. 

Euth. I understand, Socrates; he means to attack 
you about the familiar sign which occasionally, as you 
say, comes to you. He thinks that you are a neologian, 
and he is going to have you up before the court for this. 
He knows that such a charge is readily received by the 
world, as I myself know too well ; for when I speak 
in the assembly about divine things, and foretell the 



12 



The ways of the Athenian people 



future to them, they laugh at me and think me a mad 
man. Yet every word that I say is true. n>ut they are 
jealous of us alljl and we must be brave and go at them. 

Soc. Their laughter, friend Euthyphro, is not a 
matter of much consequence. For a man may be 
thought wise; but the Athenians, I suspect, do not 
much trouble themselves about him until he begins to 
impart his wisdom to others ; and then for some reason 
or other, perhaps, as you say, from jealousy, they are 
angry. 

Euth. I am never likely to try their temper in this 
way. 

Soc. I dare say not, for you are reserved in your 
behaviour, and seldom impart your wisdom. But I 
have a benevolent habit of pouring out myself to 
everybody, and would even pay for a listener, and I am 
afraid that the Athenians may think me too talkative. 
Now if, as I was saying, they would only laugh at me, 
as you say that they laugh at you, the time might pass 
gaily enough in the court ; but perhaps they may be in 
earnest, and then what the end will be you soothsayers 
only can predict. 

Euth. I dare say that the affair will end in nothing, 
Socrates, and that you will win your cause ; and I think 
that I shall win my own. 

Soc. And what is your suit, Euthyphro ? are you the 
pursuer or the defendant ? 

Euth. I am the pursuer. 

Soc. Of whom ? 
4 Euth. You will think me mad when I tell you. 



Eutbypbffs charge against his father 13 

Soc. Why, has the fugitive wings ? 

Euth. Nay, he is not very volatile at his time of life. 

Soc. Who is he ? 

Euth. My father. 

Soc. Your father ! my good man ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. And of what is he accused ? 

Euth. Of murder, Socrates. 

Soc. By the powers, Euthyphro ! how little does the 
common herd know of the nature of right and truth. 
A man must be an extraordinary man, and have made 
great strides in wisdom, before he could have seen his 
way to bring such an action. 

Euth. Indeed, Socrates, he must. 

Soc. I suppose that the man whom your father 
murdered was one of your relatives clearly he was ; 
for if he had been a stranger you would never have 
thought of prosecuting him. 

Euth. I am amused, Socrates, at your making a 
distinction between one who is a relation and one who 
is not a relation ; for surely the pollution is the same 
in either case, if you knowingly associate with the 
murderer when you ought to clear yourself and him 
by proceeding against him. The real question is 
whether tfce murdered man has been justly slain. If 
justly, then your duty is to let the matter alone ; but if 
unjustly, then even if the murderer lives under the 
same roof with you and eats at the same table, proceed 
against him. Now the man who is dead was a poor 
dependant of mine who worked for us as a field 



14 If such a charge impious? 

labourer on our farm in Naxos, and one day in a fit of 
drunken passion he got into a quarrel with one of our 
domestic servants and slew him. My father bound 
him hand and foot and threw him into a ditch, and 
then sent to Athens to ask of a diviner what he should 
do with him. Meanwhile he never attended to him 
and took no care about him, for he regarded him as 
a murderer; and thought that no great harm would 
be done even if he did die. Now this was just what 
happened. For such was the effect of cold and 
hunger and chains upon him, that before the messenger 
returned from the diviner, he was dead. And my 
father and family are angry with me for taking the part 
of the murderer and prosecuting my father. They say 
that he did not kill him, and that if he did, the dead 
man was but a murderer, and I ought not to take any 
notice, for that a son is impious who prosecutes a 
father. Which shows, Socrates, how little they know 
what the gods think about piety and impiety. 

Soc. Good heavens, Euthyphro ! and is your know 
ledge of religion and of things pious and impious so 
very exact, that, supposing the circumstances to be as 
you state them, you are not afraid lest you too may be 

I doing an impious thing in bringing an action against 
your father ? 

Euth. The best of Euthyphro, and that which dis- 
5 tinguishes him, Socrates, from other men, is his exact 
knowledge of all such matters. What should I be 
good for without it ? 

Soc. Rare friend ! I think that I cannot do better 



Euthyphro as a "Theologian i f 

than be your disciple. Then before the trial with 
Meletus comes on I shall challenge him, and say that 
I have always had a great interest in religious questions, 
and now, as he charges me with rash imaginations and 
innovations in religion, I have become your disciple. 
You, Meletus, as I shall say to him, acknowledge 
Euthyphro to be a great theologian, and sound in his 
opinions ; and if you approve of him you ought to 
approve of me, and not have me into court ; but if you 
disapprove, you should begin by indicting him who is 
my teacher, and who will be the ruin, not of the 
young, but of the old ; that is to say, of myself whom 
he instructs, and of his old father whom he admonishes 
and chastises. And if Meletus refuses to listen to me, 
but will go on, and will not shift the indictment from 
me to you, I cannot do better than repeat this challenge 
in the court. 

Euth. Yes jndeed, Socrates ; and if he attempts to 
indict me I am mistaken if I do not find a flaw in him ; 
the court shall have a great deal more to say to him 
than to me. 

What is Piety? 

Soc. And I, my dear friend, knowing this, am 
desirous of becoming your disciple. For I observe 
that no one appears to notice you not even this 
Meletus; but his sharp eyes have found me out at 
once, and he has indicted me for impiety. And 
therefore, I adjure you to tell me the nature of piety 
and impiety! Which you said that you knew so well, 
and of murder, and of other offences against the gods. 
What are they? Is not piety in every action always the same? 
Impiety, again is it not always the opposite 
of piety, and also the same with itself, having, as 
impiety, one notion which includes whatever is 
impious? 

Euth. To be sure, Socrates. 

Soc. And what is piety, and what is impiety ? 
/ Eutb. Piety is doing as I am doing ; that is to say, 
1 prosecuting any one who is guilty of murder, sacrilege, 
or of any similar crime whether he be your father or 
mother, or whoever he may be that makes no differ 
ence; and not to prosecute them is impiety. And 
please to consider, Socrates, what a notable proof I 
will give you of the truth of my words, a proof which 
I have already given to others : of the principle, I 
mean, that the impious, whoever he may be, ought not 
6 to go unpunished. For do not men regard Zeus as 
the best and most righteous of the gods ? and yet 
they admit that he bound his father (Cronos) because 
he wickedly devoured his sons, and that he too had 
punished his own father (Uranus) for a similar reason, 
in a nameless manner. And yet when I proceed against 
my father, they are angry with me. So inconsistent 
are they in their way of talking when the gods are 
concerned, and when I am concerned. 

Soc. May not this be the reason, Euthyphro, why 
I am charged with impiety that I cannot away with 
these stories about the gods ? and therefore I suppose 
that people think me wrong. But, as you who are 
well informed about them approve of them, I cannot do 
better than assent to your superior wisdom. What 



Piety is what pleases the gods 1 7 

else can I say, confessing as I do, that I know nothing 
about them ? Tell me, for the love of Zeus, whether 
you really believe that they are true. 

Euth. Yes, Socrates; and things more wonderful 
still, of which the world is in ignorance. 

Soc. And do you really believe that the gods fought 
with one another, and had dire quarrels, battles, and 
the like, as the poets say, and as you may see 
represented in the works of great artists ? The temples 
are full of them ; and notably the robe of Athene, 
which is carried up to the Acropolis at the great 
Panathenaea, is embroidered with them. Are all 
these tales of the gods true, Euthyphro ? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates ; and, as I was saying, I can 
tell you, if you would like to hear them, many other 
things about the gods which would quite amaze you. 

Soc. I dare say ; and you shall tell me them at some 
other time when I have leisure. But just at present 
[ would rather hear from you a more precise answer, 
which you have not as yet given, my friend, to the 
question, What is ' piety ' ? When asked, you only 
replied, Doing as you do, charging your father with 
murder. 

Euth. And what I said was true, Socrates. 

Soc. No doubt, Euthyphro ; but you would admit 
that there are many other pious acts? 

Euth. There are. 

Soc. Remember that I did not ask you to give me 
two or three examples of piety, but to explain the 
general idea which makes all pious things to be pious. 



But what if the gods disagree ? 

Do you not recollect that there was one idea which 
made the impious impious, and the pious pious ? 

Euth. I remember. 

Soc . Tell me what is the nature of this idea, and then 
I shall have a standard to which I may look, and by 
which I may measure actions, whether yours or those 
of any one else, and then I shall be able to say that 
such and such an action is pious, such another impious. 

Euth. I will tell you, if you like. 
, Soc. I should very much like. 

/ Euth. Piety, then, is that which is dear to the gods, 

t and impiety is that which is not dear to them. 

7 Soc. Very good, Euthyphro ; you have now given 

me the sort of answer which I wanted. But whether 

what you say is true or not I cannot as yet tell, although 

T make no doubt that you will prove the truth of your] 

words. 

Euth. Of course. 

Soc. Come, then, and let us examine what we are) 
saying. That thing or person which is dear to 
gods is pious, and that thing or person which is hatefu 
to the gods is impious, these two being the extrer 
opposites of one another. Was not that said ? 

Euth. It was. 

Soc. And well said ? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates, I thought so ; it was certair 
said. 

Soc. And further, Euthyphro, the gods were admittej 
to have enmities and hatreds and differences ? 

Euth. Yes, that was also said. 



We need another definition 19 

Soe. And what sort of difference creates enmity and 
anger ? Suppose for example that you and I, my good 
friend, differ about a number ; do differences of this sort 
make us enemies and set us at variance with one another ? 
Do we not go at once to arithmetic, and put an end to 
them by a sum ? 

Euth. True. 

Soc. Or suppose that we differ about magnitudes, do 
we not quickly end the difference by measuring ? 

Euth. Very true. 

Soc. And we end a controversy about heavy and 
light by resorting to a weighing machine ? 

Euth. To be sure. 

Soc. But what differences are there which cannot be 
thus decided, and which therefore make us angry and 
set us at enmity with one another? I dare say the 
answer does not occur to you at the moment, and 
therefore I will suggest that these enmities arise when 
the matters of difference are the just and unjust, good 
and evil, honourable and dishonourable. Are not these 
the points about which men differ, and about which 
when we are unable satisfactorily to decide our differ 
ences, you and I and all of us quarrel, when we do 
quarrel ' ? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates, the nature of the differences 
about which we quarrel is such as you describe. 

Soc. And the quarrels of the gods, noble Euthyphro, 
when they occur, are of a like nature ? 

Euth. Certainly they are. 

1 Cp. I Alcib. 1 1 1 foil. 
C 2 



20 We need another definition 

Soc. They have differences of opinion, as you say, 
about good and evil, just and unjust, honourable and 
dishonourable: there would have been no quarrels 
among them, if there had been no such differences 
would there now ? 

Euth. You are quite right. 

Soc. Does not every man love that which he deems 
noble and just and good, and bate the opposite of them ? 

Euth. Very true. 

Soc. But, as you say, people regard the same things, 

some as just and others as unjust, about these they dis- 

8 pute ; and so there arise wars and fightings among them. 

Euth. Very true. 

Soc. Then the same things are hated by the gods and 
loved by the gods, and are both hateful and dear to them ? 

Euth. True. 

Soc. And upon this view the same things, Euthyphro, 
will be pious and also impious ? 

Euth. So I should suppose. 

Soc. Then, my friend, I remark with surprise that 
you have not answered the question which I asked. 
For I certainly did not ask you to tell me what 
action is both pious and impious : but now it would 
seem that what is loved by the gods is also hated by 
them. And therefore, Euthyphro, in thus chastising 
your father you may very likely be doing what is 
agreeable to Zeus but disagreeable to Cronos or Uranus, 
and what is acceptable to Hephaestus but unacceptable 
to Herd, and there may be other gods who have similar 
differences of opinion. 



The basis of agreement 2 1 

Euth. But I believe, Socrates, that all the gods 
would be agreed as to the propriety of punishing a 
murderer: there would be no difference of opinion about 
that. 

Soc. Well, but speaking of men, Euthyphro, did you 
ever hear any one arguing that a murderer or any sort 
of evil-doer ought to be let off? 

Euth. I should rather say that these are the questions 
which they are always arguing, especially in courts of law : 
they commit all sorts of crimes, and there is nothing 
which they will not do or say in their own defence. 

Soc. But do they admit their guilt, Euthyphro, and 
yet say that they ought not to be punished ? 

Euth. No ; they do not. 

Soc. Then there are some things which they do not 
venture to say and do : for they do not venture to argue 
that the guilty are to be unpunished, but they deny their 
guilt, do they not ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc . Then they do not argue that the evil-doer should 
not be punished, but they argue about the fact of who 
the evil-doer is, and what he did and when ? 

Euth. True. 

Soc. And the gods are in the same case, if as you 
assert they quarrel about just and unjust, and some 
of them say while others deny that injustice is done 
among them. For surely neither God nor man will 
ever venture to say that the doer of injustice is not to 
be punished ? 

Euth. That is true, Socrates, in the main. 



22 The universal and the particular 

Soc. But they join issue about the particulars gods 
and men alike ; and, if they dispute at all, they dispute 
about some act which is called in question, and which 
by some is affirmed to be just, by others to be unjust. 
Is not that true ? 

Euth. Quite true. 

9 Soc. Well then, my dear friend Euthyphro, do tell 
me, for my better instruction and information, what 
proof have you that in the opinion of all the gods 
a servant who is guilty of murder, and is put in chains 
by the master of the dead man, and dies because he is 
put in chains before he who bound him can learn from 
the interpreters of the gods what he ought to do with 
him, dies unjustly ; and that on behalf of such an one 
a son ought to proceed against his father and accuse 
him of murder. How would you show that all the 
gods absolutely agree in approving of his act ? Prove to 
me that they do, and I will applaud your wisdom as 
long as I live. 

Euth. It will be a difficult task ; but I could make 
the matter very clear indeed to you. 

Soc. I understand ; you mean to say that I am not 
so quick of apprehension as the judges : for to them 
you will be sure to prove that the act is unjust, and 
hateful to the gods. 

Euth. Yes indeed, Socrates ; at least if they will 
listen to me. 

Soc. But they will be sure to listen if they find that 
you are a good speaker. There was a notion that came 
into my mind while you were speaking; I said to myself:
'Well, and what if Euthyphro does prove to me that 
all the gods regarded the death of the serf as unjust, 
how do I know anything more of the nature of piety 
and impiety ? for granting that this action may be hate 
ful to the gods, still piety and impiety are not adequately 
defined by these distinctions, for that which is hateful 
to the gods has been shown to be also pleasing and 
dear to them.' And therefore, Euthyphro, I do not 
ask you to prove this ; I will suppose, if you like, that 
all the gods condemn and abominate such an action. 
But I will amend the definition so far as to say that 
what all the gods hate is impious, and what they love 
pious or holy ; and what some of them love and others 
hate is both or neither. Shall this be our definition of 
piety and impiety ? 

Euth. Why not, Socrates ? 

Soc . Why not ! certainly, as far as I am concerned, 
Euthyphro, there is no reason why not. But whether 
this admission will greatly assist you in the task of 
instructing me as you promised, is a matter for you to 
consider. 

Euth. Yes, I should say that what all the gods 
love is pious and holy, and the opposite which they all 
hate, impious. 

Soc. Ought we to enquire into the truth of this, 
Euthyphro, or simply to accept the mere statement 
on our own authority and that of others? What do 
you say ? 

Euth. We should enquire; and I believe that the 
statement will stand the test of enquiry. 



24 Piety the reason of love 

Soc. We shall know better, my good friend, in 

a little while. The point which I should first wish to 

re understand is whether the pious or holy is beloved by 

the gods because it is holy, or holy because it is 

beloved of the gods. 

Euth. I do not understand your meaning, Socrates. 

Soc . I will endeavour to explain : we speak of carry 
ing and we speak of being carried, of leading and being 
led, seeing and being seen. You know that in all such 
cases there is a difference, and you know also in what 
the difference lies ? 

Euth. I think that I understand. 

Soc. And is not that which is beloved distinct from 
that which loves ? 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. Well ; and now tell me, is that which is carried 
in this state of carrying because it is carried, or for 
some other reason ? 

Euth. No ; that is the reason. 

Soc. And the same is true of what is led and of what 
is seen ? 

Euth. True. 

Soc And a thing is not seen because it is visible, 
but conversely, visible because it is seen ; nor is a thing 
led because it is in the state of being led, or carried 
because it is in the state of being carried, but the con 
verse of this. And now I think, Euthyphro, that my 
, meaning will be intelligible; and my meaning is, that 
any state of action or passion implies previous action or 
1 passion. It does not become because it is becoming, 



Not love the reason of piety 2? 

but it is in a state of becoming because it becomes ; 
neither does it suffer because it is in a state of suffering, 
but it is in a state of suffering because it suffers. Do 
you not agree ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. Is not that which is loved in some state either 
of becoming or suffering ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. And the same holds as in the previous instances ; 
the state of being loved follows the act of being loved, i 
and not the act the state. 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. And what do you say of piety, Euthyphro ; is 
not piety, according to your definition, loved by all the 
gods? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. Because it is pious or holy, or for some other 
reason ? 

Euth. No, that is the reason. 

Soc. It is loved because it is holy, not holy because 
it is loved ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc . And that which is dear to the gods is loved by them, and is in a state to be loved of them because it is 
loved of them ? 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. Then that which is dear to the gods, Euthyphro, 
is not holy, nor is that which is holy loved of God, as 
you affirm ; but they are two different things. 

Euth. How do you mean, Socrates ? 



2(5 Necessity of another definition 

Soc. I mean to say that the holy has been acknow 
ledged by us to be loved of God because it is holy, not 
to be holy because it is loved. 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. But that which is dear to the gods is dear to 
them because it is loved by them, not loved by them 
because it is dear to them. 

Euth. True. 

Soc. But, friend Euthyphro, if that which is holy is 
the same with that which is dear to God, and is loved 
ii because it is holy, then that which is dear to God 
would have been loved as being dear to God ; but if 
that which is dear to God is dear to him because loved 
by him, then that which is holy would have been holy 
because loved by him. But now you see that the reverse 
is the case, and that they are quite different from one 
another. For one (dco^uXc's) is of a kind to be loved 
because it is loved, and the other (orioi>) is loved 
because it is of a kind to be loved. Thus you appear 
to me, Euthyphro, when I ask you what is the essence 
of holiness, to offer an attribute only, and not the 
essence the attribute of being loved by all the gods. 
But you still refuse to explain to me the nature of 
holiness. And therefore, if you please, I will ask you 
not to hide your treasure, but to tell me once more 
what holiness or piety really is, whether dear to the 
gods or not (for that is a matter about which we will 
not quarrel) ; and what is impiety ? 

Euth. I really do not know, Socrates, how to express 
what I mean. For somehow or other our arguments, 



The dialectic art of Socrates 27 

on whatever ground we rest them, seem to turn round 
and walk away from us. 

Soc. Your words, Euthyphro, are like the handiwork 
of my ancestor Daedalus ; and if I were the sayer or 
propounder of them, you might say that my arguments 
walk away and will not remain fixed where they are 
placed because I am a descendant of his. But now, 
since these notions are your own, you must find some 
other gibe, for they certainly, as you yourself allow, 
show an inclination to be on the move. 

Euth. Nay, Socrates, I shall still say that you are 
the Daedalus who sets arguments in motion ; not I, 
certainly, but you make them move or go round, for 
they would never have stirred, as far as 1 am concerned. 

Soc. Then I must be a greater than Daedalus : for 
whereas he only made his own inventions to move, I 
move those of other people as well. And the beauty 
of it is, that I would rather not. For I would give the 
wisdom of Daedalus, and the wealth of Tantalus, to be 
able to detain them and keep them fixed. But enough 
of this. As I perceive that you are lazy, I will myself 
endeavour to show you how you might instruct me in 
the nature of piety ; and I hope that you will not grudge 
your labour. Tell me, then, Is not that which is 
pious necessarily just ? 

Eutb. Yes. 

Soc. And is, then, all which is just pious? or, is 
that which is pious all just, but that which is just, only la 
in part and not all, pious ? 

Eutb. I do not understand you, Socrates. 



28 Are justice and piety one? 

Soc. And yet I know that you are as much wiser 
than I am, as you are younger. But, as I was saying, 
revered friend, the abundance of your wisdom makes 
you lazy. Please to exert yourself, for there is no real 
difficulty in understanding me. What I mean I may 
explain by an illustration of what I do not mean. The 
poet (Stasinus) sings 

* Of Zeus, the author and creator of all these things, 
You will not tell: for where there is fear there is 
also reverence.' 

Now I disagree with this poet. Shall I tell you in 
what respect? 

Euth. By all means. 

Soc. I should not say that where there is fear there 
is also reverence ; for I am sure that many persons fear 
poverty and disease, and the like evils, but I do not 
perceive that they reverence the objects of their fear. 

Euth. Very true. 

Soc. But where reverence is, there is fear; for he 
who has a feeling of reverence and shame about the 
commission of any action, fears and is afraid of an ill 
reputation. 

Euth. No doubt. 

Soc . Then we are wrong in saying that where there is 
fear there is also reverence ; and we should say, where 
there is reverence there is also fear. But there is not 
always reverence where there is fear ; for fear is a more 
extended notion, and reverence is a part of fear, just as the 
odd is a part of number, and number is a more extended 
notion than the odd. I suppose that you follow me now ? 



Or is piety a part of justice ? 29 

Euth. Quite well. 

Soc. That was the sort of question which I meant 
to raise when I asked whether the just is always the 
pious, or the pious always the just ; and whether there 
may not be justice where there is not piety ; for justice 
is the more extended notion of which piety is only a 
part. Do you dissent ? 

Euth. No, I think that you are quite right. 

Soc. Then, if piety is a part of justice, I suppose 
that we should enquire what part ? If you had pursued 
the enquiry in the previous cases ; for instance, if you 
had asked me what is an even number, and what part 
of number the even is, I should have had no difficulty 
in replying, a number which represents a figure having 
two equal sides. Do you not agree ? 

Euth. Yes, I quite agree. 

Soc. In like manner, I want you to tell me what part 
of justice is piety or holiness, that I may be able to tell 
Meletus not to do me injustice, or indict me for impiety, 
as I am now adequately instructed by you in the nature 
of piety or holiness, and their opposites. 

Euth. Piety or holiness, Socrates, appears to me to 
be that part of justice which attends to the gods, as 
there is the other part of justice which attends to men. 

Soc. That is good, Euthyphro ; yet still there is a 13 
little point about which I should like to have further in 
formation, What is the meaning of 'attention'? For 
attention can hardly be used in the same sense when 
applied to the gods as when applied to other things. 
For instance, horses are said to require attention, and 



3 o What is justice to the gods f 

not every person is able to attend to them, but only a 
person skilled in horsemanship. Is it not so ? 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. I should suppose that the art of horsemanship 
is the art of attending to horses ? -^ 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. Nor is every one qualified to attend to dogs, but 
only the huntsman ? 

Euth. True. 

Soc. And I should also conceive that the art of the 
huntsman is the art of attending to dogs ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. As the art of the oxherd is the art of attending 
to oxen ? 

Euth. Very true. 

Soc. In like manner holiness or piety is the art of 
attending to the gods ? that would be your meaning, 
Euthyphro ? 

Euth. Yes. 

Soc. And is not attention always designed for the 
good or benefit of that to which the attention is given ? 
As in the case of horses, you may observe that when 
attended to by the horseman's art they are benefited and 
improved, are they not ? 

Euth. True. 

Soc. As the dogs are benefited by the huntsman's art, 
and the oxen by the art of the oxherd, and all other 
things are tended or attended for their good and not for 
their hurt ? 

Euth. Certainly, not for their hurt. 



Can men minister to the gods ? 31 

Soc. But for their good ? 

Euth. Of course. 

Soc. And does piety or holiness, which has been de 
fined to be the art of attending to the gods, benefit or 
improve them ? Would you say that when you do a 
holy act you make any of the gods better ? 

Euth. No, no ; that was certainly not what I meant. 

Soc. And I, Euthyphro, never supposed that you 
did. I asked you the question about the nature of the 
attention, because I thought that you did not. 

Euth. You do me justice, Socrates ; that is not the 
sort of attention which I mean. 

Soc . Good : but I must still ask what is this atten 
tion to the gods which is called piety ? 

Eutb. It is such, Socrates, as servants show to their 
masters. 

Soc. I understand a sort of ministration to the gods. 

Euth. Exactly. 

Soc . Medicine is also a sort of ministration or service, 
having in view the attainment of some object would 
you not say of health ? 

Euth. I should. 

Soc. Again, there is an art which ministers to the 
ship-builder with a view to the attainment of some 
result? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates, with a view to the building of 
a ship. 

Soc. As there is an art which ministers to the house- 
builder with a view to the building of a house ? 

Euth. Yes. 



32 The argument returns upon itself 

Soc. And now tell me, my good friend, about the art 
which ministers to the gods : what work does that help 
to accomplish ? For you must surely know if, as you 
say, you are of all men living the one who is best 
instructed in religion. 

Euth. And I speak the truth, Socrates. 

Soc. Tell me then, oh tell me what is that fair 
work which the gods do by the help of our ministra 
tions ? 

Euth. Many and fair, Socrates, are the works which 
they do. 

14 Soc . Why, my friend, and so are those of a general. 
But the chief of them is easily told. Would you not 
say that victory in war is the chief of them ? 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. Many and fair, too, are the works of the hus 
bandman, if I am not mistaken ; but his chief work is 
the production of food from the earth ? 

Euth. Exactly. 

Soc. And of the many and fair things done by the 
gods, which is the chief or principal one ? 

Euth. I have told you already, Socrates, that to learn 
, all these things accurately will be very tiresome. Let 
me simply say that piety or holiness is learning how to 
please the gods in word and deed, by prayers and sacri 
fices. Such piety is the salvation of families and states, 
just as the impious, which is unpleasing to the gods, is 
their ruin and destruction. 

Soc. I think that you could have answered in much 
fewer words the chief question which I asked, Euthy. 

Is piety giving and asking? 33 

phro, if you had chosen. But I see plainly that you 
are not disposed to instruct me clearly not : else why, 
when we reached the point, did you turn aside ? Had 
you only answered me I should have truly learned of 
you by this time the nature of piety. Now, as the asker 
of a question is necessarily dependent on the answerer, 
whither he leads I must follow ; and can only ask again, 
what is the pious, and what is piety ? Do you mean that 
they are a sort of science of praying and sacrificing ? 

Euth. Yes, I do. 

Soc. And sacrificing is giving to the gods, and prayer 
is asking of the gods ? 

Euth. Yes, Socrates. 

Soc. Upon this view, then, piety is a science of 
asking and giving ? 

Euth. You understand me capitally, Socrates, 

Soc. Yes, my friend ; the reason is that I am a votary 
of your science, and give my mind to it, and therefore 
nothing which you say will be thrown away upon me. 
Please then to tell me, what is the nature of this service to 
the gods ? Do you mean that we prefer requests and 
give gifts to them ? 

Euth. Yes, I do. 

Soc. Is not the right way of asking to ask of them 
what we want? 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. And the right way of giving is to give to them 
in return what they want of us. There would be no 
meaning in an art which gives to any one that which he 
does not want. 



34 But rvbat can we give them? 

Euth. Very true, Socrates. 

Soc. Then piety, Euthyphro, is an art which gods 
and men have of doing business with one another ? 

Euth. That is an expression which you may use, if 
you like. 

Soc. But I have no particular liking for anything but 
the truth. I wish, however, that you would tell me 
what benefit accrues to the gods from our gifts. There 
15 is no doubt about what they give to us ; for there is no 
good thing which they do not give ; but how we can 
give any good thing to them in return is far from being 
equally clear. If they give everything and we give 
nothing, that must be an affair of business in which we 
have very greatly the advantage of them. 

Euth. And do you imagine, Socrates, that any benefit 
accrues to the gods from our gifts ? 

Soc. But if not, Euthyphro, what is the meaning of 
gifts which are conferred by us upon the gods ? 

Euth. What else, but tributes of honour ; and, as I 
was just now saying, what pleases them ? 

Soc. Piety, then, is pleasing to the gods, but not 
beneficial or dear to them ? 

Euth. I should say that nothing could be dearer. 

Soc. Then once more the assertion is repeated that 
piety is dear to the gods ? 

Euth. Certainly. 

Soc. And when you say this, can you wonder at 
your words not standing firm, but walking away ? Will 
you accuse me of being the Daedalus who makes them 
walk away, not perceiving that there is another and far 



Collapse of the arguments 35- 

greater artist than Daedalus who makes them go round 
in a circle, and he is yourself; for the argument, as you 
will perceive, comes round to the same point. Were we 
not saying that the holy or pious was not the same with 
that which is loved of the gods ? Have you forgotten ? 

Euth. I quite remember. 

Soc. And are you not saying that what is loved of 
the gods is holy ; and is not this the same as what is 
dear to them do you see ? 

Euth. True. 

Soc. Then either we were wrong in our former 
assertion ; or if we were right then, we are wrong now. 

Euth. One of the two must be true. 

Then we must begin again and ask, What is piety? I That is an enquiry which I shall never be 
weary of pursuing as far as in me lies ; and I entreat 
you not to scorn me, but to apply your mind to the 
utmost, and tell me the truth. For, if any man knows, 
you are he ; and therefore I must detain you, like 
Proteus, until you tell. If you had not certainly known 
the nature of piety and impiety, I am confident that you 
would never, on behalf of a serf, have charged your 
aged father with murder. You would not have run 
such a risk of doing wrong in the sight of the gods, 
and you would have had too much respect for the 
opinions of men. I am sure, therefore, that you know 
the nature of piety and impiety. Speak out then, my 
dear Euthyphro, and do not hide your knowledge. 

Euth. Another time, Socrates ; for I am in a hurry, 
and must go DOW, 

D 2 



3 6 Despair of Socrates 

Soc. Alas ! my companion, and will you leave me in 
despair ? I was hoping that you would instruct me in 
the nature of piety and impiety ; and then I might have 
cleared myself of Meletus and his indictment. I would 
t6 have told him that I had been enlightened by Euthyphro, 
and had given up rash innovations and speculations, in 
which I indulged only through ignorance, and that now 
I am about to lead a better life. 



INTRODUCTION TO 
APOLOGY 

IN what relation the Apology of Plato stands to the 
real defence of Socrates, there are no means of deter 
mining. It certainly agrees in tone and character with 
the description of Xenophon, who says in the Memora 
bilia (iv. 4, 4) that Socmtes might have been acquitted 
' if in any moderate degree he would have conciliated' 
tne favour of the dicasts ; * and who informs us 
in aiiuiheT passage (iv. 8, 4), on the testimony of 
Hermogenes, the friend of Socrates, that he had no 
wish to live ; and that the divine sign refused to allow 
him to prepare a defence, and also that Socrates him 
self declared this to be unnecessary, on the ground that 
all his life long he had been preparing against that hour. 
[For the speech breathes throughout a spirit of defiance, 
' ut non supplex aut reus sed magister aut dominus 
Ivideretur esse iudicum* (Cic. de Orat. i. 54); and the 
/loose and desultory style is an imitation of the ' accus- 
/ tomed manner ' in which Socrates spoke in ' the agora 
\ and among the tables of the money-changers/ The 
j allusion in the Crito (45 B) may, perhaps, be adduced 
\as a further evidence of the literal accuracy of some 
parts (37 C, D). But in the main it must be regarded 
as the ideal of Socrates, according to Plato's conception 
of him, appearing in the greatest and most public scene 
of his life, and in the height of his triumph, when he is 
weakest, and yet his mastery over mankind is greatest, 



3 8 Apology 

and his habitual irony acquires a new meaning and a 
sort of tragic pathos in the face of death. The facts 
of his life are summed up, and the features of his 
character are brought out as if by accident in the 
course of the defence. The conversational manner, 
the seeming want of arrangement, the ironical sim 
plicity, are found to result in a perfect work of art, 
which is the portrait of Socrates. 

Yet some of the topics may have been actually used 
by Socrates; and the recollection of his very words 
may have rung in the ears of his disciple. The 
Apology of Plato maybe compared generally with those 
speeches of Thucydides in which he has embodied his 
conception of the lofty character and policy of the great 
Pericles, and which at the same time furnish a com 
mentary on the situation of affairs from the point of 
view of the historian. So in the Apology there is _an 
ideal rather than a literal truth ; much is said which 
was not said, and is only Plato's view of the situation. 
Plato was not, like Xenophon, a chronicler of facts ; 
he does not appear in any of his writings to have aimed 
at literal accuracy. He is not therefore to be supple 
mented from the Memorabilia and Symposium of 
Xenophon, who belongs to an entirely different class 
/ of writers. ^_The Apology of Plato is not the report 

of what Socrates said, but an elaborate composition^ 

' quite as much so in fact as one of the Dialogues. \ 
And we may perhaps even indulge in the fancy that 
the actual defence of Socrates was as much greater^ 
han the Platnnir Hpfgpce as the master was greater 
than the disciple. But in any case, some of the words 



The Platonic defence of Socrates 39 

used by him must have been remembered, and some of 
the facts recorded must have actually occurred. It is 
significant that Plato is said to have been present at the 
defence (Apol. 38 B), as he is also said to have been 
absent at the last scene in the Phaedo (59 B). Is it 
fanciful to suppose that he meant to give the stamp of 
authenticity to the one and not to the other ? especially 
when we consider that these two passages are the only 
ones in which Plato makes mention of himself. The 
circumstance that Plato was to be one of his sureties for 
the payment of the fine which he proposed has the 
appearance of truth. More suspicious is the statement 
that Socrates received the first impulse to his favourite 
calling of cross-examining the world from the Oracle 
of Delphi ; for he must already have been famous 
before Chaerephon went to consult the Oracle (Riddell, 
i. p. xvi), and the story is of a kind which is very likely 
to have been invented^ On the whole we arrive at the 
conclusion that the Apology is true to the character of A 
Socrates, but we cannot show that any single sentence 
in it was actually spoken by him. It breathes the spirit 

of Socrates, but has been cast anew in the mould of Plato. * 

There is not much in the other Dialogues which can 
be compared with the Apology. The same recollection 
of his master may have been present to the mind of 
Plato when depicting the sufferings of the Just in the 
Republic (ii. 361 foil., vi. 500 A). The Crito may 
also be regarded as a sort of appendage to the Apology, 
in which Socrates, who has defied the judges, is never 
theless represented as scrupulously obedient to the laws. 
The idealization of the sufferer is carried still further 



4 

in the Gorgias (476 foil.), in which the thesis is main- 
taiued, that ' to suffer is better than to do evil ; ' and 
the art of rhetoric is described as only useful for the 
purpose of self-accusation. The parallelisms which 
occur in the so-called Apology of Xenophon are not 
worth noticing, because the writing in which they are 
contained is manifestly spurious. The statements of 
the Memorabilia (i. 2 ; iv. 8) respecting the trial and 
death of Socrates agree generally with Plato ; but they 
have lost the flavour of Socratic irony in the narrative 
of Xenophon. 

The Apology or Platonic defence of Socrates is 
livided into three parts: 1st. The defence properly 
so called ; 2nd. The shorter address in mitigation of 
the penalty ; jrd. The last words of prophetic rebuke 
ind exhortation. 



42 Apology 

a i mission which he had taken upon himself. The 
enthusiastic Chaerephon (probably in anticipation of 
the answer which he received) had gone to Delphi 
and asked the oracle if there was any man wiser 
than Socrates ; and the answer was, that there was 
no man wiser. What could be the meaning of this 
that he who knew nothing, and knew that he knew 
nothing, should be declared by the oracle to be the 
wisest of men? Reflecting upon the answer, he deter 
mined to refute it by finding ' a wiser ' ; and first he 

a a went to the politicians, and then to the poets, and then 
to the craftsmen, but always with the same result he 
found that they knew nothing, or hardly anything more 
than himself; and that the little advantage which in 
some cases they possessed was more than counter 
balanced by their conceit of knowledge. He knew 
nothing, and knew that he knew nothing : they knew 
little or nothing, and imagined that they knew all 

33 things. \Thus he had jassed his_ life as a sort of 
jnissionary in^detectlng^ the^ jyetended wisdom jgf m^n-^ 
king ; imd this occupation had quite absorbed him jind 

^""^^"""J^"" 1 ^"""'^"" ^"'^T'^"*'^'" 8 ^^"" 

taken nim ayay both fromj^uplic and private affairs. 
Young men of trTF richer sort had made a pastime of 
the same pursuit, 'which was not unarausing.' And 
hejice Jbjtte^nnTJties had arisen.; the_ professor^ of 
revenged themselves^ by calling ,him, a. 
ajod by repeajingthe cqm-^ 



rnonplaces ^bput jitheisjn arid niatexialis 
34 wj^cHj[ffiil>e^^ck=aaLusatipr^ against Jill phjlosophers, 

tjjem. 



The second accusation he meets by interrogating 






Analysis 2128 43 

Meletus, who is present and can be interrogated. * If 
he is the corrupter, who is the improver of the citizens ? ' 
(Cp. Meno 91 C.) ' All men everywhere.' But how as 
absurd, how contrary to analogy is this ! How incon- 
ceivable too, that he should make the citizens worse 
when he has to live with them. This surely cannot be 
intentional ; and if unintentional, he ought to have been 26 
instructed by Meletus, and not accused in the court. 

But there is another part of the indictment which 
says that he teaches men not to receive the gods whom 
the city receives, and has other new gods. * Is that 
the way in which he is supposed to corrupt the youth ? ' 

* Yes, it is.' ' Has he only new gods, or none at all ? ' 

* None at all.' ' What, not even the sun and moon ? ' 
' No ; why, he says that the sun is a stone, and the 
moon earth.' That, replies Socrates, is the old con 
fusion about Anaxagoras ; the Athenian people are not 
so ignorant as to attribute to the influence of Socrates 
notions which have found their way into the drama, 
and may be learned at the theatre. Socrates under 
takes to show that Meletus (rather unjustifiably) has a 7 
been compounding a riddle in this part of the indict 
ment : ' There are no gods, but Socrates believes in 
the existence of the sons of gods, which is absurd.' 

Leaving Meletus, who has had enough words spent 28 
upon him, he returns to the original accusation. The 
question may be asked, Why will he persist in following 
a profession which leads him to dtfath" ? Why ? 
because he must remain at his post where the god has 
placed him, as he must remain at Potidaea, and Am- 
phipolis, and Delium, where the generals placed him. 



44 Afology 

29 Besides, he is not so overwise as to imagine that he 
knows whether death is a good or an evil ; and he is 
certain that desertion of his duty is an evil. Anytus is 

30 quite right in saying that they should never have indicted 
him if they meant to let him go. For he will certainly 
obey God rather than man ; and will continue to preach 
to all men of all ages the necessity of virtue and 
improvement ; and if they refuse to listen to him he 

, will still persevere and reprove them. This is his way 
[of corrupting the youth, which he will not cease to follow 

n obedience to the god, even if a thousand deaths 

await him. 

He is desirous that they should let him live, not 
for his own sake, but for theirs; because he is their heaven-sent friend (and they will never have such 
another), or, as he maybe ludicrously described, he 
is the gadfly who stirs the generous steed into. 
Why then has he never taken part in public affairs? 
Because the familiar divine voice has hindered him ; 
if he had been a public man, and had fought for the 
right, as he would certainly have fought against the 
many, he would not have lived, and could therefore 

32 have done no good. Twice in. public matters he has 
risked his life for the sake of justice once at the trial 
of the generals ; and again in resistance to the tyrannical 
commands of the Thirty. 

But, though not a public man, he has passed his days 
in instructing the citizens without fee or reward this 
was his mission. Whether his disciples have turned 
out well or Ul f he cannot justly be charged with the 

33 result, for he never promised to teach them anything. 



Analysis 2936 45- 

They might come if they liked, and they might stay 
away if they liked : and they did come, because they 
found an amusement in hearing the pretenders to 
wisdom detected. If they have been corrupted, their^-N 
elder relatives (if not themselves) might surely come 
into court and witness against him, and there is an 
opportunity still for them to appear. But their fathers 34 
and brothers all appear in court (including ' this ' Plato), 
to witness on his behalf; and if their relatives are 
corrupted, at least they are uncorrupted : * and they are 
my witnesses. For they know that I am speaking the 
truth, and that Meletus is lying.' ^ 

This is about all that he has to say. He will not 
entreat the judges to spare his life; neither will he 
present a spectacle of weeping children, although he, 
too, is not made of ' rock or oak.* Some of the 35 
judges themselves may have complied with this practice 
on similar occasions, and he trusts that they will not be 
angry with him for not following their example. But 
he feels that such conduct brings discredit on the name 
of Athens : he feels, too, that the judge has sworn not 
to give away justice ; and he cannot be guilty of the 
impiety of asking the judge to break his oath, when he 
is himself being tried for impiety. 

As he expected, and probably intended, he is con- 36 
victed. And now the tone of the speech, instead 
of being more conciliatory, becomes more lofty and 
commanding. Anytus proposes death as the penalty; 
and what counter-proposition shall he make ? He, the 
benefactor of the Athenian people, whose whole life 
has been spent in doing them good, should at least 



4 rf Apology 

have the Olympic victor's reward of maintenance in 

37 the Prytaneum. Or why should he propose any, 
counter-penalty when he does not k""Y trfr*** 1 ** HatK. 
Is it a good or an evil? and he 
is certain that imprisonment is an evil, exile is an evil. 
Loss of money might be no evil, but then he has none 

38 to give ; perhaps he can make up a mina. Let that be 
the penalty, or, if his friends wish, thirty minae ; for 
which they will be excellent securities. 

\_He is condemned to death.] 

He is an old man already, and the Athenians will 
gain nothing but disgrace by depriving him of a few 
years of life. Perhaps he could have escaped, if he 
had chosen to throw down his arms and entreat for his 
life. But he does not at all repent of the manner oH 
his defence ; he would rather die in his ownjfashion 

39 than live in theirs. For the penalty of unrighteousness 
is swifter than death ; that penalty has already over 
taken his accusers as death will soon overtake him. 

And now, as one who is about to die, he will 
prophesy to them. They have put him to death in 
order to escape the necessity of giving an account of 
their lives. But his death ' will be the seed ' of many 
disciples who will convince them of their evil ways, 
and will come forth to reprove them in harsher terms, 
because they are younger and more inconsiderate. 

40 He would like to say a few words, while there is 
time, to those who would have acquitted him. He 
wishes them to know that the divine sign never 
interrupted him in the course of his defence j the reason 



Analysis 3742 47 

of which, as he conjectures, is that the death to which 
he is going is a good and not an evil. For either 
death is a long sleep, the best of sleeps, or a journey 
to another world in which the souls of the dead are 
gathered together, and in which there may be a hope 
of seeing the heroes of old in which, too, there are 41 
just judges ; and as all are immortal, there can be no 
fear of any one suffering death for his opinions. 

Nothing evil can happen to the good man either in 
life or death, and his own death has been permitted by 
the gods, because it was better for him to depart ; and 
therefore he forgives his judges because they have done 
him no harm, although they never meant to do him 
any good. 

He has a last request to make to them that they 43 
will trouble his sons as he has troubled them, if they 
appear to prefer riches to virtue, or to think themselves 
something when they are nothing. 



* Few persons will be found to wish that Socrates 
should have defended himself otherwise,' if, as we 
must add, his defence was that with w'hich Plato has 
provided him. But leaving this question, which does 
not admit of a precise solution, we may go on to ask 
what was the impression which Plato in the Apology 
intended to give of the character and conduct of his 
master in the last great scene ? Did he intend to 
represent him as employing sophistries; as 
designedly irritating the judges? Or are these sophistries 
to be regarded as belonging to the age in which he 
lived and to his personal character, and this apparent 
haughtiness as flowing from the natural elevation of his 
position? 

For example, when he says that it is absurd to 
suppose that one man is the corrupter and all the rest 
of the world the improvers of the youth ; or, when he 
argues that he never could have corrupted the men with 
whom he had to live; or, when he proves his belief in 
the gods because he believes in the sons of gods, is he 
serious or jesting? It may be observed that these 
sophisms all occur in his cross-examination of Meletus, 
who is easily foiled and mastered in the hands of the 
great dialectician. Perhaps he regarded these answers 
as good enough for his accuser, of whom he makes 
very light. Also there is a touch of irony in them, 
which takes them out of the category of sophistry. 
(Cp. Euthyph. z.) 

That the manner in which he defends himself about 
-the lives of his disciples is not satisfactory, can hardly 
be denied. Fresh in the memory of the Athenians, 
and detestable as they deserved to be to the newly 
restored democracy, were the names of Alcibiades, 
Critias, Charmides. It is obviously not a sufficient 
answer that Socrates had never professed to teach 
them anything, and is therefore not justly chargeable 
with their crimes. Yet the defence, when taken out 
of this ironical form, is doubtless sound : that his 
teaching had nothing to do with their evil lives. 
Here, then, the sophistry is rather in form than in 
substance, though we might desire that to such a 
serious charge Socrates had given a more serious 
answer. 



Character of the Platonic defence 49 

Truly characteristic of Socrates is another point in 
his answer, which may also be regarded as sophistical. 
He says that ' if he has corrupted the youth, he must 
have corrupted them involuntarily.' But if, as Socrates 
argues, all evil is involuntary, then all criminals ought 
to be admonished and not punished. In these words 
the Socratic doctrine of the involuntariness of evil is 
clearly intended td be conveyed. Here again, as in 
the former instance, the defence of Socrates is untrue 
practically, but may be true in some ideal or trans 
cendental sense. The commonplace reply, that if he 
had been guilty of corrupting the youth their relations 
would surely have witnessed against him, with which 
he concludes this part of his defence, is more satis 
factory. 

V Again, when Socrates argues that he must believe 
in the gods because he believes in the sons of gods, we 
must remember that this is a refutation not of the 
original indictment, which is consistent enough 

* Socrates does not receive the gods whom the city 
receives, and has other new divinities' but of the 
interpretation put upon the words by Meletus, who has 
affirmed that he is a downright atheist. To this 
Socrates fairly answers, in accordance with the ideas 
of the time, that a downright atheist cannot believe in 
the sons of gods or in divine things. The notion that 
demons or lesser divinities are the sons of gods is not 
to be regarded as ironical or sceptical. He is arguing 

* ad bominem ' according to the notions of mythology 
current in his age. Yet he abstains from saying that 
he believed in the gods whom the State approved. 



Apology 



He does not defend b' mself - as Xenophon has defended 
"Him, by appealing to his practice of religion. Probably 
he neither wholly believed, nor disbelieved, in the 
existence of the popular gods ; he had no means of 
knowing about them. According to Plato (cp. Phaedo 
1 1 8 B ; Symp. 220 D), as well as Xenophon (Memor. 
i. I, 30), he was punctual in the performance of the 
least religious duties ; and he must have believed in his 
own oracular sign, of which he seemed to have an 
internal witness. But the existence of Apollo or Zeus, 
or the other gods whom the State approves, would 
have appeared to him both uncertain and unimportant 
in comparison of the duty of self-examination, and of 
those principles of truth and right which he deemed to 
be the foundation of religion. (Cp. Phaedr. 230; 
Euthyph. 6, 7; Rep. ii. 373 ff.) 

The second question, whether Plato meant to repre 
sent Socrates as braving or irritating his judges, must 
also be answered in the negative. His irony, his 
superiority, his audacity, * regarding not the person of 
man,' necessarily flow out of the loftiness of his 
situation. He is not acting a part upon a great 
occasion, but he is what he has been all his life long, 
' a king of men.' He would rather not appear insolent, 
if he could avoid it (ov-% u>s av6aRi(6fjL(vos TOVTO Aeya>). 
Neither is he desirous of hastening his own end, for 
life and death are simply indifferent to him. But such 
a defence as would be acceptable to his judges and 
might procure an acquittal, it is not in his nature to 
make. He will not say or do anything that might 
pervert the course of justice ; he cannot have his tongue 



The attitude of Socrates f i 

bound even ' in the throat of death.' With his accusers 
he will only fence and play, as he had fenced with 
other ' improvers of youth,' answering the Sophist 
according to his sophistry all his life long. He is 
serious when he is speaking of his own mission, which 
seems to distinguish him from all other reformers of 
mankind, and originates in an accident. The dedication 
of himself to the improvement of his fellow-citizens is 
not so remarkable as the ironical spirit in which he 
goes about doing good only in vindication of the credit 
of the oracle, and in the vain hope of finding a wiser 
man than himself. Yet this singular and almost acci 
dental character of his mission agrees with the divine 
sign which, according to our notions, is equally 
accidental and irrational, and is nevertheless accepted 
by him as the guiding principle of his life. Socrates 
is nowhere represented to us as a freethinker or sceptic. 
There is -no reason to doubt his sincerity when he 
speculates on the possibility of seeing and knowing the 
heroes of the Trojan war in another world. On the 
other hand, his hope of immortality is uncertain ; he 
also conceives of death as a long sleep (in this respect 
differing from the Phaedo), and at last falls back on 
resignation to the divine will, and the certainty that no 
evil can happen to the good man either in life or death. 
His absolute truthfulness seems to hinder him from 
asserting positively more than this ; and he makes no 
attempt to veil his ignorance in mythology and figures 
of speech. The gentleness of the first part of the 
speech contrasts with the aggravated, almost threat 
ening, tone of the conclusion. He characteristically 

E 2 



j-2 Apology 

remarks that he will not speak as a rhetorician, that is 
to say, he will not make a regular defence such as 
Lysias or one of the orators might have composed for 
him, or, according to some accounts, did compose 
for him. But he first procures himself a hearing by 
conciliatory words. He does not attack the Sophists ; 
for they were open to the same charges as himself; 
they were equally ridiculed by the Comic poets, and 
almost equally hateful to Anytus and Meletus. Yet 
incidentally the antagonism between Socrates and the 
Sophists is allowed to appear. He is poor and they 
are rich ; his profession that he teaches nothing is 
opposed to their readiness to teach all things ; his 
talking in the market-place to their private instructions ; 
his tarry-at-home life to their wandering from city to 
city. The tone which he assumes towards them is 
one of real friendliness, but also of concealed irony. 
Towards Anaxagoras, who had disappointed him in 
his hopes of learning about mind and nature, he shows 
a less kindly feeling, which is also the feeling of Plato 
in other passages (Laws xii. 967 B). But Anaxagoras 
had been dead thirty years, and was beyond the reach 
of persecution. 

It has been remarked that the prophecy of a new 
generation of teachers who would rebuke and exhort 
the Athenian people in harsher and more violent terms 
was, as far as we know, never fulfilled. No inference 
can be drawn from this circumstance as to the pro 
bability of the words attributed to him having been 
actually uttered. They express the aspiration of the 
first martyr of philosophy, that he would leave behind 



Genuineness of the Apology 5-3 

him many followers, accompanied by the not unnatural 
feeling that they would be fiercer and more incon 
siderate in their words when emancipated from his 
control. 

The above remarks must be understood as applying 
with any degree of certainty to the Platonic Socrates 
only. For, although these or similar words may have 
been spoken by Socrates himself, we cannot exclude 
the possibility, that like so much else, e. g. the wisdom 
of Critias, the poem of Solon, the virtues of Charmides, 
they may have been due only to the imagination of 
Plato. The arguments of those who maintain that 
the Apology was composed during the process, resting 
on no evidence, do not require a serious refutation. 
Nor are the reasonings of Schleiermacher, who argues 
that the Platonic defence is an exact or nearly exact 
reproduction of the words of Socrates, partly because 
Plato would not have been guilty of the impiety of 
altering them, and also because many points of the 
defence might have been improved and strengthened, 
at all more conclusive. (See English Translation, 
p. 137.) What effect the death of Socrates produced 
on the mind of Plato, we cannot certainly determine; 
nor can we say how he would or must have written 
under the circumstances. We observe that the enmity 
of Aristophanes to Socrates does not prevent Plato 
from introducing them together in the Symposium 
engaged in friendly intercourse. Nor is there any trace 
in the Dialogues of an attempt to make Anytus or 
Meletus personally odious in the eyes of the Athenian 
public. 



APOLOGY 

You, O Athenians, have been affected by ray 
 accusers, I cannot tell ; but I know that they 

almost made me forget who I was so persuasively did 

they speak ; and yet they have hardly uttered a word 

of truth. But of the many falsehoods told by them, 

j there was one which quite amazed me; I mean when 

Ithey said that you should be upon your guard and not 

tallow yourselves to be deceived by the force of my 

/eloquence. To say this, when they were certain to be 

\detected as soon as I opened my lips and proved myself 

jto be anything but a great speaker, did indeed appear to 

/me most shameless unless by the force of eloquence 

/ they mean the force of truth ; for if such is'their mean- 

/ ing, I admit that I am eloquent. But in how different 

a way from theirs ! Well, as I was saying, they have 

scarcely spoken the truth at all ; but from me you shall 

hear the whole truth : not, however, delivered after 

their manner in a set oration duly ornamented with 

words and phrases. No, by heaven ! but I shall use 

the words and arguments which occur to me at the 

moment; for T am confident in trip jncn^ pf rpy ^"~ * 

at my time of life I ought not to be appearing before 
you, O men of Athens, in the character of a juvenile 
orator let no one expect it of me. And I must beg 
of you to grant me a favour : If I defend myself in 
my accustomed manner, and you hear me using the words 
* Or, I am certain that I am right in taking this course. 



The accusers of Socrates f f 

which I have been in the habit of using in the agora, at the 
tables of the money-changers, or anywhere else, I would 
ask you not to be surprised, and not to interrupt me on 
this account. For I am more than seventy years of 
age, and appearing now for the first time in a court of 
law, I am quite a stranger to the language of the place ; 
and therefore I would have you regard me as if I were 
really a stranger, whom you would excuse if he spoke 18 
in his native tongue, and after the fashion of his country : 
Am I making an unfair request of you? Never 
mind the manner, which may or may not be good ; but 
think only of the truth of my words, and give heed 
to that: let the speaker speak truly and the judge 
decide justly. 

And first, I have to reply to the older charges and 
to my first accusers, and then I .will go on to the 
later ones. For of old I have had many accusers, 
who have accused me falsely to you during many years ; 
and I am more afraid of them than of Anytus and his 
associates, who are dangerous, too, in their own way. 
But far more dangerous are the others, who began 
when you were children, and took possession of your 
minds with their falsehoods, telling of one Socrates, 
a wise man, who speculated about the heaven above, 
and searched into the earth beneath, and made the 
worse appear the better cause. The disseminators of 
this tale are the accusers whom I dread ; for their 
hearers are apt to fancy that such enquirers do not 
believe in the existence of the gods. And they are 
many, and their charges against me are of ancient date, 



f 6 The Clouds of Aristophanes 

and they were made by them in the days when you were 
more impressible than you are now in childhood, or it 
may have been in youth and the cause when heard 
went by default, for there was none to answer. And 
hardest of all, I do not know and cannot tell the names 
of my accusers ; unless in the chance case of a Comic 
poet. All who from envy and malice have persuaded 
you some of them having first convinced themselves 
all this class of men are most difficult to deal with ; 
for I cannot have them up here, and cross-examine 
them, and therefore I must simply fight with shadows 
inmy own defencej^and argue when there is no one 

1 who answers. Iwill ask you then to assume with me, 
as I was saying, that my opponents are of two kinds ; ^ 
one recent^the other ancient : and I hope that you will <3~ 
see the propriety of my answering the latter first, for _ 
these accusations you heard long before the others, and 
much oftener. 

19 Well, then, I must make my defence, and endeavour 
to clear away in a short time, a slander which has lasted 
a long time. May I succeed, if to succeed be for my" ^ 
good and yours, or likely to avail me in my cause ! 
The task is not an easy one ; I quite understand the Ji- 
nature of it. And so leaving the event with God, in "? 
obedience to the law I will now make my defence. 

I will begin at the beginning, and ask what is the 
accusation which has given rise to the slander of me, 
and in fact has encouraged Meletus to prefer this charge 
against me. Well, what do the slanderers say ? They 
shall be my prosecutors, and I will sum up their words 



Its misrepresentations 5-7 

in an affidavit : ' Socrates is an evil-doer, and a curious 
person, who searches into things under the earth and in ; 
heaven, and he makes the worse appear the better 
cause ; and he teaches the aforesaid doctrines to others.' i 
Such is the nature of the accusation : it is just what 
you have yourselves seen in the comedy of Aristo 
phanes % who has introduced a man whom he calls 
Socrates, going about and saying that he walks in 
air, and talking a deal of nonsense concerning matters 
of which I do not pretend to know either much or little 
not that I mean to speak disparagingly of any one 
who is a student of natural philosophy. I should be very 
sorry if Meletus could bring so grave a charge against 
me. But the simple truth is, O Athenians, that I have / 
nothing to do with physical speculations. Very many [ 
of those here present are witnesses to the truth of this, \ 
and to them I appeal. Speak then, you who have ) 
heard me, and tell your neighbours whether any of you / 
have ever known me hold forth in few words or in \ 
many upon such matters. . . . You hear their answer. I 
And from what they say of this part of the charge you \ 
will be able to judge of the truth of the rest. 

As little foundation is there for the report that I am 
a teacher, and take money ; this accusation has no more 
truth in it than the other. Although, if a man were really 
able to instruct mankind, to receive money for giving 
instruction would, in my opinion, be an honour to him. 
There is Gorgias of Leontium, and Prodicus of Ceos, 
and Hippias of Elis, who go the round of the cities, and 
1 Aristoph., Clouds, 225 ff. 



y 8 Socrates not a paid teacbet 

are able to persuade the young men to leave their own 
ao citizens by whom they might be taught for nothing, 
and come to them whom they not only pay, but are thank 
ful if they may be allowed to pay them. There is at 
this time a Parian philosopher residing in Athens, of 
whom I have heard ; and I came to hear of him in this 
way : I came across a man who has spent a world of 
money on the Sophists, Callias, the son of Hipponicus, 
and knowing that he had sons, I asked him : ' Callias,' 
I said, ' if your two sons were foals or calves, there 
would be no difficulty in finding some one to put over 
them ; we should hire a trainer of horses, or a farmer 
probably, who would improve and perfect them in their 
own proper virtue and excellence ; but as they are 
human beings, whom are you thinking of placing over 
them ? Is there any one who understands human and 
political virtue ? You must have thought about the 
matter, for you have sons ; is there any one ? ' ' There 
is,' he said. * Who is he ? ' said I ; ' and of what 
country ? and what does he charge ? ' ' Evenus the 
Parian,' he replied ; ' he is the man, and his charge is 
five minae.' Happy is Evenus, I said to myself, if he 
really has this wisdom, and teaches at such a moderate 
charge. Had I the same, I should have been very 
proud and conceited ; but the truth is that I have no 
knowledge of the kind. I dare say, Athenians, that some one among you will 
reply, ' Yes, Socrates. What is the origin of these 
accusations which are brought against you; there must 
have been something strange which you have been doing? All these rumours and this talk about you 
would never have arisen if you had been like other 
men : tell us, then, what is the cause of them, for we 
should be sorry to judge hastily of you.' Now I 
regard this as a fair challenge, and I will endeavour 
to explain to you the reason why I am called wise and 
have such an evil fame. Please to attend then. And 
although some of you may think that I am joking, I de 
clare that I will tell you the entire truth. Men of Athens, 
this reputation of mine has come of a certain sort of 
wisdom which I possess. If you ask me what kind ot 
wisdom, I reply, wisdom such as may perhaps be 
attained by man, for to that extent I am inclined to 
believe that I am wise ; whereas the persons of whom 
I was speaking have a superhuman wisdom, which I 
may fail to describe, because I have it not myself; and 
he who says that I have, speaks falsely, and is taking 
away my character. And here, O men of Athens, 
I must beg you not to interrupt me, even if I seem to say 
something extravagant. For the word which I will 
speak is not mine. I will refer you to a witness who 
is worthy of credit ; that witness shall be_thejGod_Q_f 
Delphi^^Jbe will tell you about my wisdom, if I have 
any, and of what sort it is. You must have known Chaere- 
phon ; he was early a friend of mine, and also a friend ai 
of yours, for he shared in the recent exile of the people, 
and returned with you. Well, Chaerephon, as you 
know, was very impetuous in all his doings, and he went 
to Delphi and boldly asked the oracle to tell him 
whether as I was saying, I must beg you not to 



60 Search for the wise man 

interrupt he asked the oracle to tell him whether any 
one was wiser than I was, and the Pythian prophetess 
answered, that there was no man wiser. Chaerephon is 
dead himself; but his brother, who is in court, will 
confirm the truth of what I am saying. 

Why do I mention this? Because I am going to 
explain to you why I have such an evil name. When 
I heard the answer, I said to myself, What can the 
god mean? and what is the interpretation of his riddle ? 
for I know that I have no wisdom, small or great. 
What then can he mean when he says that I am the 
wisest of men ? And yet he is a god, and cannot lie ; 
that would be against his nature. After long considera 
tion, I thought of a method of trying the question. 
I reflected that if I could only find a man wiser than 
myself, then I might go to the god with a refutation in 
my hand. I should say to him, ' Here is a man who 
is wiser than I am ; but you said that I was the wisest.' 
Accordingly I went to one who had the reputation of 
wisdom, and observed him his name I need not 
mention; he was a politician whom I selected for 
examination and the result was as follows : When I 
began to talk with him, I could not help thinking that 
he was not really wise, although he was thought wise 
by many, and still wiser by himself; and thereupon 
1 I tried to explain to him that he thought himself 
wise, but was not really wise ; and the consequence was 
that he hated me, and his enmity was shared by several 
who were present and heard me. So I left him, 
saying to myself, as I went away : Well, although 



Its failure 61 

I do not suppose that either of us knows anything 
really beautiful and good, I am better off than he is, 
for he knows nothing, and thinks that he knows; 
I neither know nor think that I know. In this latter 
particular, then, I seem to have slightly the advantage 
of him. Then I went to another who had still higher 
pretensions to wisdom, and my conclusion was exactly 
the same. Whereupon I made another enemy of him, 
and of many others besides him. 

Then I went to one man after another, being not 
unconscious of the enmity which I provoked, and I 
lamented and feared this : but necessity was laid upon 
me, the word of God, I thought, ought to be con 
sidered first. And I said to myself, Go I must to all 
who appear to know, and find out the meaning of the 
oracle. And I swear to you, Athenians, by the dog a a 
I swear! for I must tell you the truth the result of 
my mission was just this : I found that the men most 
in repute were all but the most foolish ; and that others 
less esteemed were really wiser and better. I will tell 
you the tale of my wanderings and of the ' Herculean' 
labours, as I may call them, which I endured only to 
find at last the oracle irrefutable. After the politicians, 
I went to the poets ; tragic, dithyi ambic, and all sorts. 
And there, I said to myself, you will be instantly 
detected ; now you will find out that you are more 
ignorant than they are. Accordingly, I took them 
some of the most elaborate passages in their own 
writings, and asked what was the meaning of them 
thinking that they would teach me something. Will you believe me? I am almost ashamed to confess the truth, 
but I must say that there is hardly a person present 
who would not have talked better about their poetry 
than they did themselves. Then I knew that not by 
wisdom do poets write poetry, but by a sort of genius 
/and inspiration ; they are like diviners or soothsayers who 
also say many fine things, but do not understand the 
meaning of them. The poets appeared to me to be much 
in the same case ; and I further observed that upon the 
strength of their poetry they believed themselves to be 
the wisest of men in other things in which they were 
not wise. So I departed, conceiving myself to be 
superior to them for the same reason that I was 
superior to the politicians. 

i At last I went to the artisans, for I was conscious 
that I knew nothing at all, as I may say, and I was 
sure that they knew many fine things ; and here I was 
not mistaken, for they did know many things of which 
I was ignorant, and in this they certainly were wiser than 
I was. But I observed that even the good artisans 
fell into the same error as the poets ; because they 
were good workmen they thought that they also knew 
all sorts of high matters, and this defect in them over 
shadowed their wisdom ; and therefore I asked myself 
on behalf of the oracJe, whether I would like to be as 
I was, neither having their knowledge nor their ignor 
ance, or like them in both ; and I made answer to 
myself and to the oracle that I was better off as I was. 
This inquisition has led to my having many enemies 
33 of the worst and most dangerous kind, and has given 



The offence of Socrates 6$ 

occasion also to many calumnies. And I am called 
wise, for my hearers always imagine that I myself 
possess the wisdom which I find wanting in others : 
but the truth is, O men of Athens, that God only is 
wise ; and by his answer he intends to show that the 
wisdom of men is worth little or nothing ; he is not 
speaking of Socrates, he is only using my name by way 
of illustration, as if he said, He, O men, is the wisest, 
who, like Socrates, knows that his wisdom is in truth 
worth nothing. And so I go about the world, obedient 
to the god, and search and make enquiry into the wisdom 
of any one, whether citizen or stranger, who appears to 
be wise ; and if he is not wise, then in vindication of 
the oracle I show him that he is not wise ; and my \ 
occupation quite absorbs me, and I have no time to give 
either to any public matter of interest or to any concern 
of my own, but I am in utter poverty by reason of my 
devotion to the god. 

There is another thing : young men of the richer 
classes, who have not much to do, come about me of 
their own accord; they like to hear the pretenders 
examined, and they often imitate me, and proceed to 
examine others ; there are plenty of persons, as they 
quickly discover, who think that they know something, 
but really know little or nothing ; and then those who 
are examined by them instead of being angry with 
themselves are angry with me : \This confounded 
Socrates, they say; this villainous misleader of youth ! 
and then if somebody asks them, Why, what evil does 
he practise or teach? they do not know, and cannot 



^4 His challenge to his accusers 

tell ; but in order that they may not appear to be at a 
loss, they repeat the ready-made charges which are used 
against all philosophers about teaching things up in the 
clouds and under the earth, and having no gods, and 
making the worse appear the better cause ; for they do 
not like to confess that their pretence of knowledge 
has been detectecEfr-which is the truths) and as they are 
numerous and ambitious and energetic, and are drawn 
up in battle array and have persuasive tongues, they 
have filled your ears with their loud and inveterate 
calumnies. And this is the reason why my three 
accusers, Meletus and Anytus and Lycon, have set 
upon me ; Meletus, who has a quarrel with me on behalf 
of the poets ; Anytus, on behalf of the craftsmen and 
2 politicians ; Lycon, on behalf of the rhetoricians: and 
as I said at the beginning, I cannot expect to get rid of 
such a mass of calumny all in a moment And this, 

men of Athens, is the truth and the whole truth ; 

1 have concealed nothing, I have dissembled nothing. 
And yet, I know that my plainness of speech makes 
them hate me, and what is their hatred but a proof that 
I am speaking the truth ? Hence has arisen the pre*- 
judice against me ; and this is the reason of it, as you 
will find out either in this or in any future^ enquiry. 

I have said enough in my defence against the first 
class of my accusers ; I turn to the second class. They 
are headed by Meletus, that good man and true lover of 
his country, as he calls himself. Against these, too, 
I must try to make a defence : Let their affidavit be 
read : it contains something of this kind : It says that 



The charge of corrupting the youth 6f 

Socrates is a doer of evil, who corrupts the youth ; and ' 
who does not believe in the gods of the state, but has 
other new divinities of his own. Such is >the charge; 
and now let us examine the particular counts. He says 
that I am a doer of evil, and corrupt the youth ; but 
I say, O men of Athens, that Meletus is a doer of evil, 
in that he pretends to be in earnest when he is only in 
jest, and is so eager to bring men to trial from a pre 
tended zeal and interest about matters in which he really 
never had the smallest interest. And the truth of this 
I will endeavour to prove to you. 

Come hither, Meletus, and let me ask a question of you. 
You think a great deal about the improvement of youth ? 

Yes, I do. 

Tell the judges, then, who is their improver; for 
you must know, as you have taken the pains to dis 
cover their corrupter, and are citing and accusing me 
before them. Speak, then, and tell the judges who 
their improver is. Observe, Meletus, that you are 
silent, and have nothing to say. But is not this rather 
disgraceful, and a very considerable proof of what 
I was saying, that you have no interest in the matter. 
Speak up, friend, and tell us who their improver is. 

The laws. 

But that, my good sir, is not my meaning. I want 
to know who the person is, who, in the first place, 
knows the laws. 

The judges, Socrates, who are present in court. 

What, do you mean to say, Meletus, that they are 
able to instruct and improve youth ? 
Who are the improvers of the youth ? 

Certainly they are. 

What, all of them, or some only and not others ? 

All of them. 

By the goddess Her&, that is good news ! There 
are plenty of improvers, then. And what do you say 
35 of the audience, do they improve them I 

Yes, they do. 

And the senators ? 

Yes, the senators improve them. 

But perhaps the members of the assembly corrupt 
them ? or do they too improve them ? 

They improve them. 

Then every Athenian improves and elevates them ; 
all with the exception of myself; and I alone am their 
corrupter ? Is that what you affirm ? 

That is what I stoutly affirm. 

I am very unfortunate if you are right. But suppose 
I ask you a question : How about horses ? Does one 
man do them harm and all the world good ? Is not 
the exact opposite the truth ? One man is able to do 
them good, or at least not many ; the trainer of horses, 
that is to say, does them good, and others who have to 
do with them rather injure them ? Is not that true, Meletus, of horses, or of any other animals? Most 
assuredly it is; whether you and Anytus say yes or 
no. Happy indeed would be the condition of youth 
if they had one corrupter only, and all the rest of 
the world were their improvers. But you, Meletus, 
have sufficiently shown that you never had a thought 
about the young: your carelessness is seen in your 



Absurdity of the charge 6j 

not caring about the very things which you bring 
against me. 

And now, Meletus, I will ask you another question 
by Zeus I will : Which is better, to live among bad 
citizens, or among good ones ? Answer, friend, I say ; 
the question is one which may be easily answered. Do 
not the good do their neighbours good, and the bad do 
them evil ? 

Certainly. 

And is there any one who would rather be injured 
than benefited by those who live with him ? Answer, 
my good friend, the law requires you to answer does 
any one like to be injured ? 

Certainly not. 

And when you accuse me of corrupting and deteriorating the youth, do you allege that I corrupt them 
intentionally or unintentionally ? 

Intentionally, I say. 

But you have just admitted that the good do their 
neighbours good, and the evil do them evilTj Now, is 
that a truth which your superior wisdom has recognized 
thus early in life, and am I, at my age, in such darkness 
and ignorance as not to know that if a man with whom 
I have to live is corrupted by me, I am very likely to 
be harmed by him ; and yet I corrupt him, and inten 
tionally, too so you say, although neither I nor any 
other human being is ever likely to be convinced by 
you. |J}ut"either I do not corrupt them, or I corrupt 3 6 
them unintentionally; and on either view of the case 
you liej If my offence is unintentional, the law has no 

F 2 



68 Absurdity of the charge 

cognizance of unintentional offences : you ought to have 
taken me privately, and warned and admonished me; 
for if I had been better advised, I should have left 
off doing what I only did unintentionally no doubt 
I should ; but you would have nothing to say to me 
and refused to teach me. And now you bring me up 
in this court, which is a place not of instruction, but of 
punishment 

It will be very clear to you, Athenians, as I was 
saying, that Meletus has no care at all, great or small, 
about the matter. But still I should like to know, 
Meletus, in what I am affirmed to corrupt the young. 
I suppose you mean, as I infer from your indictment, 
that I teach them not to acknowledge the gods which 
the state acknowledges, but some other new divinities 
or spiritual agencies in their stead. These *are the 
lessons by which I corrupt the youth, as you say. 

Yes, that I say emphatically. 

Then, by the gods, Meletus, of whom we are speaking, 
tell me and the court, in somewhat plainer terms, what 
you mean! for I do not as yet understand whether 
you affirm that I teach other men to acknowledge some 
gods, and therefore that I do believe in gods, and am 
not an entire atheist this you do not lay to my charge, 
but only you say that they are not the same gods 
which the city recognizes the charge is that they are 
different gods. Or, do you mean that I am an atheist 
simply, and a teacher of atheism ? 

I mean the latter that you are a complete atheist. 

What an extraordinary statement! Why do you think so, Meletus ? Do you mean that I do not believe 
in the godhead of the sun or moon, like other men ? 

I assure you, judges, that he does not : for he says 
that the sun is stone, and the moon earth. 

Friend Meletus, you think that you are accusing 
Anaxagoras : and you have but a bad opinion of the 
judges, if you fancy them illiterate to such a degree as 
not to know that these doctrines are found in the books 
of Anaxagoras the Clazomenian, which are full of them. 
And so, forsooth, the youth are said to be taught them 
by Socrates, when there are not unfrequently exhibitions 
of them at the theatre 1 (price of admission one drachma 
at the most) ; and they might pay their money, and 
laugh at Socrates if he pretends to father these extra 
ordinary views. And so, Meletus, you really think that 
I do not believe in any god ? 

I swear by Zeus that you believe absolutely in none 
at all. 

Nobody will believe you, Meletus, and I am pretty 
sure that you do not believe yourself. I cannot help 
thinking, men of Athens, that Meletus is reckless and 
impudent, and that he has written this indictment in a 
spirit of mere wantonness and youthful bravado. Has 27 
he not compounded a riddle, thinking to try me ? He 
said to himself : I shall see whether the wise Socrates 
will discover my facetious contradiction, or whether I 
shall be able to deceive him and the rest of them. For 

1 Probably in allusion to Aristophanes who caricatured, and to 
Euripides who borrowed the notions of Anaxagoras, as well as to 
other dramatic poets. 



7O Inconfistency of Meletus 

he certainly does appear to me to contradict himself in 
the indictment as much as if he said that Socrates is 
guilty of not believing in the gods, and yet of believing 
in them but this is not like a person who is in earnest. 

I should like you, O men of Athens, to join me in 
examining what I conceive to be his inconsistency ; and 
do you, Meletus, answer. And I must remind the 
audience of my request that they would not make a 
disturbance if I speak in my accustomed manner : 

Did ever man, Meletus, believe in the existence of 
human things, and not of human beings ? . . . I wish, 
men of Athens, that he would answer, and not be 
always trying to get up an interruption. Did ever any 
man believe in horsemanship, and not in horses ? or in 
flute-playing, and not in flute-players ? No, my friend ; 
I will answer to you and to the court, as you refuse to 
answer for yourself. There is no man who ever did. 
But now please to answer the next question : Can a 
man believe in spiritual and divine agencies, and not in 
spirits or demigods ? 

He cannot. 

How lucky I am to have extracted that answer, by 
the assistance of the court ! But then you swear in the 
indictment that I teach and believe in divine or spiritual 
agencies (new or old, no matter for that) ; at any rate, 
I believe in spiritual agencies, so you say and swear in 
the affidavit ; and yet if I believe in divine beings, how 
can I help believing in spirits or demigods ; must I 
not ? To be sure I must j and therefore I may assume 
that your silence gives consent. Now what are spirits 



Meletus checkmated 71 

or demigods ? are they not either gods or the sons of 
gods ? 

Certainly they are. 

But this is what I call the facetious riddle invented 
by you : the demigods or spirits are gods, and you say 
first that I do not believe in gods, and then again that I 
do believe in gods ; that is, if I believe in demigods. 
For if the demigods are the illegitimate sons of gods, 
whether by the nymphs or by any other mothers, of 
whom they are said to be the sons what human being 
will ever believe that there are no gods if they are the 
sons of gods ? You might as well affirm the existence 
of mules, and deny that of horses and asses. Such 
nonsense, Meletus, could only have been intended by 
you to make trial of me. You have put this into the 
indictment because you had nothing real of which to.. 
accuse me. But no one who has a particle of under 
standing will ever be convinced by you that the same 
men can believe in divine and superhuman things, and 
yet not believe that there are gods and demigods and a 8 
heroes. 

I have said enough in answer to the charge of 
Meletus : any elaborate defence is unnecessary ; but I 
know only too well how many are the enmities which 
I have incurred, and this is what will be my destruction 
if I am destroyed ; not Meletus, nor yet Anytus, but 
the envy and detraction of the world, which has been 
the death of many good men, and will probably be the 
death of many more ; there is no danger of my being 
the last of them. 



Not death but disgrace to be feared 

Some one will say : And are you not ashamed, 
Socrates, of a course of life which is likely to bring you 
to an untimely end ? To him I may fairly answer : 
There you are mistaken : a man who is good for any- 
' thing ought not to calculate the chance of living or 
dying; he ought only to consider whether in doing 
anything he is doing right or wrong acting the part of 
a good man or of a bad. Whereas, upon your view, 
the heroes who fell at Troy were not good for much, 
and the son of Thetis above all, who altogether de 
spised danger in comparison with disgrace ; and when 
he was so eager to slay Hector, his goddess mother 
said to him, that if he avenged his companion Patroclus, 
and slew Hector, he would die himself * Fate,' she 
said, in these or the like words, ' waits for you next 
after Hector ; ' he, receiving this warning, utterly de 
spised danger and death, and instead of fearing them, 
feared rather to live in dishonour, and not to avenge 
his friend. * Let me die forthwith,' he replies, 'and be 
avenged of my enemy, rather than abide here by the 
beaked ships, a laughing-stock and a burden of the 
earth.' Had Achilles any thought of death and danger ? 
For wherever a man's place is, whether the place which 
he has chosen or that in which he has been placed by a 
commander, there he ought to remain in the hour of 
danger ; he should not think of death or of anything 
but of disgrace. And this, O men of Athens, is a true 
saying. 

Strange, indeed, would be my conduct, O men of 
Athens, if I who, when I was ordered by the generals 



Who knows that death is an evil? 73 

whom you chose to command me at Potidaea and 
Amphipolis and Delium, remained where they placed 
me, like any other man, facing death if now, when, 
as I conceive and imagine, God orders me to fulfil 
the philosopher's mission of searching into myself and 
other men, I were to desert my post through fear of 39 
death, or any other fear ; that would indeed be strange, 
and I might justly be arraigned in court for denying the 
existence of the gods, if I disobeyed the oracle because 
I was afraid of death, fancying that I was wise when I 
was not wise. For the fear of death is indeed the 
pretence of wisdom, and not real wisdom, being a pre 
tence of knowing the unknown; and no one knows 
whether death, which men in their fear apprehend to be 
the greatest evil, may not be the greatest good. Is not this 
ignorance of a disgraceful sort, the ignorance which is 
the conceit that a man knows what he does not know ? 
And in this respect only I believe myself to differ from 
men in general, and may perhaps claim to be wiser than 
they are : that whereas I know but little of the world 
below, I do not suppose that I know : but I do know 
that injustice and disobedience to a better, whether God 
or man, is evil and dishonourable, and I will never fear 
or avoid a possible good rather than a certain evil. 
And therefore if you let me go now, and are not con 
vinced by Anytus, who said that since I had been 
prosecuted I must be put to death : (or if not that I 
ought never to have been prosecuted at all) ; and that if 
I escape now, your sons will all be utterly ruined by 
listening to my words if you say to me, Socrates, this 



74 The mission of Socrates 

time we will not mind Anytus, and you shall be let off, 
but upon one condition, that you are not to enquire and 
speculate in this way any more, and that if you are 
caught doing so again you shall die ; if this was the 
condition on which you let me go, I should reply : 
Men of Athens, I honour and love you ; but I shall 
obey God rather than you, and while I have life and 
strength I shall never cease from the practice and 
teaching of philosophy, exhorting any one whom I meet 
and saying to him after my manner : You, my friend, 
a citizen of the great and mighty and wise city of 
Athens, are you not ashamed of heaping up the great 
est amount of money and honour and reputation, and 
caring so little about wisdom and truth and the greatest 
improvement of the soul, which you never regard or 
heed at all ? And if the person with whom I am 
arguing, says : Yes, but I do care ; then I do not 
leave him or let him go at once ; but I proceed to 
interrogate and examine and cross-examine him, and if 
I think that he has no virtue in him, but only says that 
he has, I reproach him with undervaluing the greater, 
30 and overvaluing the less. And I shall repeat the same 
words to every one whom I meet, young and old, 
citizen and alien, but especially to the citizens inasmuch 
as they are my brethren. For know that this is the 
command of God ; and I believe that no greater good 
has ever happened in the state than my service to the 
God. For I do nothing but go about persuading you 
all, old and young alike, not to take thought for your 
persons or your properties, but first and chiefly to care 



Hit rejection of compromise 7? 

about the greatest improvement of the soul. I tell you 
that virtue is not given by money, but that from virtue 
comes money and every other good of man, public as 
well as private. This is my teaching, and if this is the 
doctrine which corrupts the youth, I am a mischievous 
person. But if any one says that this is not ray teach 
ing, he is speaking an untruth.f^Wherefore, O men of 
Athens, I say to you, do as Anytus bids or not as 
Anytus bids, and either acquit me or not ; but which 
ever you do, understand that I shall never alter my 
ways, not even if I have to die many timesT"*l 

Men of Athens, do not interrupt, but hear me ; there 
was an understanding between us that you should hear 
me to the end : I have something more to say, at which 
you may be inclined to cry out ; but I believe that to 
hear me will be good for you, and therefore I beg that 
you will not cry out. I would have you know, that if 
you kill such an one as I am, you will injure yourselves 
more than you will injure me. Nothing will injure me, 
not Meletus nor yet Anytus they cannot, for a bad 
man is not permitted to injure a better than himself. I 
do not deny that Anytus may, perhaps, kill him, or 
drive him into exile, or deprive him of civil rights ; and 
he may imagine, and others may imagine, that he is in 
flicting a great injury upon him : but there I do not 
agree. For the evil of doing as he is doing the evil of 
unjustly taking away the life of another is greater far. 
.ifif\.nd now, Athenians, I am not going to argue for 
my own sake, as you may think, but for yours, that you 
may not sin against the God by condemning me, who 



76 The gadfly of Athens 

am his gift to you. For if you kill me you will not 
easily find a successor to me, who, if I may use such a 
ludicrous figure of speech, am a sort of gadfly, given to 
the state by God ; and the state is a great and noble 
steed who is tardy in his motions owing to his very 
size, and requires to be stirred into life. I am that 
31 gadfly which God has attached to the state, and all day 
long and in all places am always fastening upon you, 
arousing and persuading and reproaching you. You will 
not easily find another like me, and therefore I would 
advise you to spare me. I dare say that you may feel 
out of temper (like a person who is suddenly awakened 
from sleep), and you think that you might easily strike 
me dead as Anytus advises, and then you would sleep 
on for the remainder of your lives, unless God in his 
care of you sent you another gadfly. When I say that 
I am given to you by God, the proof of my mission is 
this : if I had been like other men, I should not have 
neglected all my own concerns or patiently seen the 
neglect of them during all these years, and have been 
doing yours, coming to you individually like a father or 
elder brother, exhorting you to regard virtue ; such 
conduct, I say, would be unlike human nature. If I 
had gained anything, or if my exhortations had been 
paid, there would have been some sense in my doing so , 
but now, as you will perceive, not even the impudence 
of my accusers dares to say that I have ever exacted or 
sought pay of any one ; of that they have no witness. 
And I have a sufficient witness to the truth of what I 
say my poverty. 






The inward voice 77 

Some one may wonder why I go about in private 
giving advice and busying myself with the concerns 
of others, but do not venture to come forward in public 
and advise the state. I will tell you why. You have 
heard me speak at sundry times and in divers places of 
an oracle or sign which comes to me, and is the divinity 
which Meletus ridicules in the indictment. This sign, 
which is a kind of voice, first began to come to me when 
I was a child ; it always forbids but never commands 
me to do anything which I am going to do. This is 
what deters me from being a politician. And rightly, 
as I think. For I am certain, O men of Athens, that 
if I had engaged in politics, I should have perished long 
ago, and done no good either to you or to myself. 
And do not be offended at my telling you the truth : 
for the truth is, that no man who goes to war with you 
or any other multitude, honestly striving against the 
many lawless and unrighteous deeds which are done in 
a state, will save his life ; he who will fight for the 32 
right, if he would live even for a brief space, must have 
a private station and not a public one. 

I can give you convincing evidence of what I say, 
not words only, but what you value far more actions. 
Let me relate to you a passage of my own life which 
will prove to you that I should never have yielded to 
injustice from any fear of death, and that * as I should 
have refused to yield' I must have died at once. I 
will tell you a tale of the courts, not very interesting 
perhaps, but nevertheless true. The only office of 
state which I ever held, O men of Athens, was that 



78 Political actions of Socrates 

of senator : the tribe Antiochis, which is my tribe, had 
the presidency at the trial of the generals who had not 
taken up the bodies of the slain after the battle of 
Arginusae ; and you proposed to try them in a body, 
contrary to law, as you all thought afterwards ; but at 
the time I was the only one of the Prytanes who was 
opposed to the illegality, and I gave my vote against 
you ; and when the orators threatened to impeach and 
arrest me, and you called and shouted, I made up my 
mind that I would run the risk, having law and justice 
with me, rather than take part in your injustice because 
I feared imprisonment and death. This happened in 
the days of the democracy. But when the oligarchy 
of the Thirty was in power, they sent for me and four 
others into the rotunda, and bade us bring Leon the 
Salaminian from Salamis, as they wanted to put him to 
death. This was a specimen of the sort of commands 
which they were always giving with the view of 
implicating as many as possible in their crimes ; and 
then I showed, not in word only but in deed, that, if I 
may be allowed to use such an expression, I cared not 
a straw for death, and that my great and only care was 
lest I should do an unrighteous or unholy thing. For 
the strong arm of that oppressive power did not 
frighten me into doing wrong ; and when we came out 
of the rotunda the other four went to Salamis and 
fetched Leon, but I went quietly home. For which 
I might have lost my life, had not the power of the 
Thirty shortly afterwards come to an end. And many 
will witness to my words. 



His cross-examination of pretenders 79 

Now do you really imagine that I could have 
survived all these years, if I had led a public life, 
supposing that like a good man I had always maintained 
the right and had made justice, as I ought, the first 
thing ? No indeed, men of Athens, neither I nor any 
other man. But I have been always the same in all 33 
my actions, public as well as private, and never have 
I yielded any base compliance to those who are 
slanderously termed my disciples, or to any other. 
Not that I have any regular disciples. But if any one 
likes to come and hear me while I am pursuing my 
mission, whether he be young or old, he is not 
excluded. Nor do I converse only with those who 
pay ; but any one, whether he be rich or poor, may ask 
and answer me and listen to my words ; and whether 
he turns out to be a bad man or a good one, neither 
result can be justly imputed to me ; for I never taught 
or professed to teach him anything. And if any one 
says that he has ever learned or heard anything from 
me in private which all the world has not heard, let me 
tell you that he is lying. 

But I shall be asked, Why do people delight in 
continually conversing with you ? I have told you 
already, Athenians, the whole truth about this matter : 
they like to hear the cross-examination of the pretenders 
to wisdom ; there is amusement in it. Now this duty 
of cross-examining other men has been imposed upon 
me by God ; and has been signified to me by oracles, 
visions, and in every way in which the will of divine 
power was ever intimated to any one. This is true, O 



80 His pupils support him 



or, if not true, would be soon refuted. 

fc-Jf I am or have been corrupting the youth, those of 
them who are now grown up and have become sensible 
that I gave them bad advice in the days of their youth 
should come forward as accusers, and take their 
revenge ; or if they do not like to come themselves, 
some of their relatives, fathers, brothers, or other 
kinsmen, should say what evil their families have 
suffered at my hands. Now is their time.J Many of 
them I see in the court. There is Crito, who is of 
the same age and of the same deme with myself, and 
there is Critobulus his son, whom I also see. Then 
again there is Lysanias of Sphettus, who is the father 
of Aeschines he is present ; and also there is Anti- 
phon of Cephisus, who is the father of Epigenes ; and 
there are the brothers of several who have associated 
with me. There is Nicostratus the son of Theos- 
dotides, and the brother of Theodotus (now Theodotus 
himself is dead, and therefore he, at any rate, will not 
seek to stop him) ; and there is Paralus the son of 
Demodocus, who had a brother Theages ; and Adei- 

34 mantus the son of Ariston, whose brother Plato is 
present; and Aeantodorus, who is the brother of 
Apollodorus, whom I also see. (JL might mention a 
great many others, some of whom Meletus should have 
produced as witnesses in the course of his speech ; and 
let him still produce them, if he has forgotten I will 
make way for him. And let him say, if he has any 
testimony of the sort which he can producefj Nay, 
Athenians, the very opposite is the truth.i For all 



Who are his accusers ? 8 r 

these are ready to witness on behalf of the corrupter, 
of the injurer of their kindred, as Meletus and Anytus 
call me ; not the corrupted youth only there might 
have been a motive for that but their uncorrupted 
elder relatives. Why should they too support me 
with their testimony? Why, indeed, except for the 
sake of truth and justice, and because they know that 
I am speaking the truth, and that Meletus is a liar. 

Well, Athenians, this and the like of this is all the 
defence which I have to offer. Yet a word more. 
Perhaps there may be some one who is offended at me, 
when he calls to mind how he himself on a similar, 
or even a less serious occasion, prayed and entreated 
the judges with many tears, and how he produced his 
children in court, which was a moving spectacle, 
together with a host of relations and friends ; whereas 
I, who am probably in danger of my life, will do none 
of these things. The contrast may occur to his mind, 
and he may be set against me, and vote in anger 
because he is displeased at me on this account. Now 
if there be such a person among you, mind, I do not 
say that there is, to him I may fairly reply: My 
friend, I am a man, and like other men, a creature of 
flesh and blood, and not ' of wood or stone,' as Homer 
says ; and I have a family, yes, and sons, O Athenians, 
three in number, one almost a man, and two others 
who are still young ; and yet I will not bring any of 
them hither in order to petition you for an acquittal. 
And why not ? Not from any self-assertion or want 
of respect for you. Whether I am or am not afraid of 



8 2 He mill not beg for justice 

death is another question, of which I will not now 
speak. But, having regard to public opinion, I feel 
that such conduct would be discreditable to myself, and 
to you, and to the whole state. One who has reached 
my years, and who has a name for wisdom, ought not 
to demean himself. Whether this opinion of me be 
deserved or not, at any rate the world has decided that 
35 Socrates is in some way superior to other men. And 
if those among you who are said to be superior in 
wisdom and courage, and any other virtue, demean 
themselves in this way, how shameful is their conduct ! 
I have seen men of reputation, when they have been 
condemned, behaving in the strangest manner: they 
seemed to fancy that they were going to suffer 
something dreadful if they died, and that they could 
be immortal if you only allowed them to live ; and 
I think that such are a dishonour to the state, and that 
any stranger coming in would have said of them that 
the most eminent men of Athens, to whom the 
Athenians themselves give honour and command, are 
no better than women. And I say that these things 
ought not to be done by those of us who have a 
reputation ; and if they are done, you ought not to 
permit them ; you ought rather to show that you are 
far more disposed to condemn the man who gets up 
a doleful scene and makes the city ridiculous, than 
him who holds his peace. 

But, setting aside the question of public opinion, 
there seems to be something wrong in asking a favour 
of a judge, and thus procuring an acquittal, instead of 



Practical Atheism 83 

informing and convincing him. For his duty is, not 
to make a present of justice, but to give judgment ; and 
he has sworn that he will judge according to the laws, 
and not according to his own good pleasure ; and we 
ought not to encourage you, nor should you allow 
yourselves to be encouraged, in this habit of perjury 
there can be no piety in that. Do not then require 
me to do what I consider dishonourable and impious 
and wrong, especially now, when I am being tried for 
impiety on the indictment of Meletus. For if, O men 
of Athens, by force of persuasion and entreaty I could 
overpower your oaths, then I should be teaching you 
to believe that there are no gods, and in defending 
should simply convict myself of the charge of not 
believing in them. But that is not so far otherwise. 
For I do believe that there are gods, and in a 
sense higher than that in which any of my accusers 
believe in them. And to you and to God I commit 
my cause, to be determined by you as is best for you 
and me. 



There are many reasons why I am not grieved, O 
men of Athens, at the vote of condemnation. I ex- 36 
pected it, and am only surprised that the votes are 
so nearly equal ; for I had thought that the majority 
against me would have been far larger ; but now, had 
thirty votes gone over to the other side, I should have 
been acquitted. And I may say, I think, that I have 
escaped Meletus. I may say more ; for without the 
assistance of Anytus and Lycon, any one may see that 
6 2 



84 Penalty or reward? 

he would not have had a fifth part of the votes, as the 
law requires, in which case he would have incurred a 



fine of a thousand drachmae. 

And so he proposes death as' the penalty. And 

what shall I propose on my part, O men of Athens ? 

Clearly that which is my due. And what is my due ? 

What return shall be made to the man who has never 

had the wit to be idle during his whole life ; but has 

s been careless of what the many care for wealth, and 

\^G family interests, and military offices, and speaking in 

' -' the assembly, and magistracies, and plots, and parties, p , 

?Vv .Reflecting that I was really too honest a man to be a> 

oVxpolitician and live, I did not go where I could do no 

good to you or to myself; but where I could do the /, - 
greatest good privately to every one of you, thither (^ 

I went,,and sought to persuade every man amoW you 
,_^ .1.1 \ .11. i if _ i . i *n^t ^ / 

wisdom before he looks to his 
look to the^state Jjefore he looks to the interests of the 
state ; and that this should be the order which he 
observes in all his actions. What shall be done to 
such an one ? Doubtless some good thing, O men of 
Athens, if he has his reward ; and the good should be 
of a kind suitable to him. What would be a reward 
suitable to a poor man who is your benefactor, and who desires leisure that he may instruct you ? There 
can be no reward so fitting as maintenance in the 
Prytaneum, O men of Athens, a reward which he 
jV deserves far more than the citizen who has won the 
prize at Olympia in the horse or chariot race, whether 

- fylPt 

\ w/n 











What shall be the penalty ? 87 

the chariots were drawn by two horses or by many. 
For I am in want, and he has enough ; and he only 
gives you the appearance of happiness, and I give you 
the reality. And if I am to estimate the penalty fairly, 37 
I should say that maintenance in the Prytaneum is the 
just return. 

Perhaps you think that I am braving you in what 1 
am saying now, as in what I said before about the 
tears and prayers. But this is not so. I speak rather 
because I am convinced that I never intentionally 
wronged any one, although I cannot convince you the 
, time has been too short ; if there were a law at 
Athens, as there is in other cities, that a capital cause 
should not be decided in one day, then I believe that I 
should have convinced you. But I cannot in a mnjm 
^efute reat slanders; and, as I am convinced that 
I never wronged another^ I will assuredly flfl| wrp"g - 
myself. I will not say of myself that I deserve any 
evil, or propose any penalty. Why should I ? Because 
I am afraid of the penalty of death which Meletus 
proposes ? When I do not know whether death is a 
good or an evil, why should I propose a penalty which 
would certainly be an evil ? Shall I say imprisonment ? 
And why should I live in prison, and be the clave of 
the magistrates of the year of the Eleven ? Or shall 
the penalty be a fine, and imprisonment until the fine is 
paid ? There is the same objection. I should have 
to lie in prison, for money I have none, and cannot 
pay. And if I say exile (and this may possibly be 

the penalty which you will affix), I must indeed be 

' 






%6 Socrates accepts his fate 

blinded by the love of life, if I am so irrational as 
to expect that when you, who are my own citizens, 
cannot endure my discourses and words, and have 
found them so grievous and odious that you will have 
no more of them, others are likely to endure me. No 
indeed, men of Athens, that is not very likely. And 
what a life should I lead, at my age, wandering from 
city to city, ever changing my place of exile, and 
always being driven out! For I am quite sure that 
wherever I go, there, as here, the young men will 
flock to me; and if I drive them away, their elders 
will drive me out at their request ; and if I let them 
come, their fathers and friends will drive me out for 
their sakes. 

Some one will say: Yes, Socrates, but cannot you 
hold your tongue, and then you may go into a foreign 
city, and no one will interfere with you ? Now I have 
great difficulty in making you understand my answer 
to this. For if I tell you that to do as you say would 
be a disobedience to the God, and therefore that I 
cannot hold my tongue, you will not believe that I am 
38 serious ; and if I say again that daily to discourse 
about virtue, and of those other things about which 
you hear me examining myself and others, is the 
greatest good of man, and that the unexamined life is 
not worth living, you are still less likely to believe me. 
Yet I say what is true, although a thing of which it is 
hard for me to persuade you. Also, I have never 
been accustomed to think that I deserve to suffer any 
harm. Had I money I might have estimated the 



The penalty death 87 

offence at what I was able to pay, and not have been 
much the worse. But 1 have none, and therefore 
I must ask you to proportion the fine to my means. 
Well, perhaps I could afford a mina, and therefore 
I propose that penalty: Plato, Crito, Critobulus, and 
Apollodorus, my friends here, bid me say thirty 
minae, and they will be the sureties. Let thirty 
minae be the penalty; for which sum they will be 
ample security to you. 



Not much time will be gained, O Athenians, In 
return for the evil name which you will get from the 
detractors of the city, who will say that you killed 
Socrates, a wise man ; for they will call me wise, even 
although I am not wise, when they want to reproach 
you. If you had waited a little while, your desire 
would have been fulfilled in the course of nature. For 
I am far advanced in years, as you may perceive, and 
not far from death. I am speaking now not to all of 
you, but only to those who have condemned me to death. 
And I have another thing to say to them : You think 
that I was convicted because I had no words of the 
sort which would have procured my acquittal I mean 
if I had thought fit to leave nothing undone or unsaid. 
Not so ; the deficiency which led to my conviction 
was not of words certainly not.TBut I had not the 
boldness or impudence or inclination to address you as 
you would have liked me to do, weeping and wailing 
and lamenting, and saying and doing many things which 
you have been accustomed to hear from others, and 



88 // death a penalty ? 

which, as I maintain, are unworthy of me. / 
thought at the time that I ought not to do anything 
common or mean when in danger : nor do -I now 
repent of the style of my defence ; I would rather 
die having spoken after my manner, than speak in your 
manner and live. For neither in war nor yet at law 
39 ought I or any man to use every way of escaping death. 
Often in battle there can be no doubt that if a man will 
throw away his arms, and fall on his knees before his 
pursuers, he may escape death; and in other dangers 
there are other ways of escaping death, if a man is 
willing to say and do anything. The difficulty, my 
friends, is not to avoid death, but to avoid unrighteous 
ness ; for that runs faster than death. I am old and 
move slowly, and the slower runner has overtaken me, 
and my accusers are keen and quick, and the faster 
runner, who is unrighteousness, has overtaken them. 
And now I depart hence condemned by you to suffer 
the penalty of death, they too go their ways con 
demned by the truth to suffer the penalty of villainy 
and wrong ; and I must abide by my reward let them 
abide by theirs. I suppose that these things may be 
regarded as fated, and I think that they are well. 

And now, O men who have condemned me, I would 
fain prophesy to you ; for I am about to die, and in the 
hour of death men are gifted with prophetic power. 
And I prophesy to you who are my murderers, that 
immediately after my departure punishment far heavier 
than you have inflicted on me will surely await you. 
Me you have killed because you wanted to escape the 



The silence of the inner voice 89 

accuser, and not to give an account of your lives. 
But that will not be as you suppose: far otherwise. 
For I say that there will be more accusers of you than 
there are now; accusers whom hitherto I have restrained: 
and as they are younger they will be more inconsiderate 
with you, and you will be more offended at them. If you 
think that by killing men you can prevent some one 
from censuring your evil lives, you are mistaken ; that 
is not a way of escape which is either possible or honour 
able; the easiest and the noblest way is not to be disabling 
others, but to be improving yourselves. This is the 
prophecy which I utter before my departure to the 
judges who have condemned me. 

Friends, who would have acquitted me, I would like 
also to talk with you about the thing which has come 
to pass, while the magistrates are busy, and before I go 
to the place at which I must die. Stay then a little, for 
we may as well talk with one another while there is time. 
You are my friends, and I should like to show you the 40 
meaning of this event which has happened to me. 
O my judges for you I may truly call judges I 
should like to tell you of a wonderful circumstance. 
Hitherto the divine faculty of which the internal oracle 
is the source has constantly been in the habit of oppos 
ing me even about trifles, if I was going to make a slip 
or error in any matter ; and now as you see there has 
come upon me that which may be thought, and is 
generally believed to be, the last and worst evil. But 
the oracle made no sign of opposition, either when I was 
leaving my bouse in the morning, or when I was on 



90 The two alternatives 

my way to the court, or while I was speaking, at any 
thing which I was going to say ; and yet I have often 
been stopped in the middle of a speech, but now in 
nothing I either said or did touching the matter in 
hand has the oracle opposed me. What do I take to 
be the explanation of this silence? I will tell you. 
It is an intimation that what has happened to me is 
a good, and that those of us who think that death is 
an evil are in error. For the customary sign would 
surely have opposed me had I been going to evil and 
not to good. 

Let us reflect in another way, and we shall see that 
there is great reason to hope that death is a good ; for 
one of two things either death is a state of nothing 
ness and utter unconsciousness, or, as men say, there 
is a change and migration of the soul from this world 
to another. Now if you suppose that there is no con 
sciousness, but a sleep like the sleep of him who is 
undisturbed even by dreams, death will be an unspeak 
able gain. For if a person were to select the night in 
which his sleep was undisturbed even by dreams, and 
were to compare with this the other days and nights 
of his life, and then were to tell us how many days and 
nights he had passed in the course of his life better and 
more pleasantly than this one, I think that any man, 
I will not say a private man, but even the great king 
will not find many such days or nights, when com 
pared with the others. Now if death be of such a nature, 
I say that to die is gain ; for eternity is then only 
a single night. But if death is the journey to another 



The hope of immortality 91 

place, and there, as men say, all the dead abide, what 
good, O my friends and judges, can be greater than 
this ? If indeed when the pilgrim arrives in the world 41 
below, he is delivered from the professors of justice in 
this world, and finds the true judges who are said to 
give judgment there, Minos and Rhadamanthus and 
Aeacus and Triptolemus, and other sons of God who 
were righteous in their own life, that pilgrimage will be 
worth making. What would not a man give if he 
might converse with Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod 
and Homer ? Nay, if this be true, let me die again 
and again. I myself, too, shall have a wonderful 
interest in there meeting and conversing with Palamedes, 
and Ajax the son of Telamon, and any other ancient 
hero who has suffered death through an unjust judg 
ment ; and there will be no small pleasure, as I think, 
in comparing my own sufferings with theirs. Above 
all, I shall then be able to continue my search into true 
and false knowledge ; as in this world, so also in the 
next ; and I shall find out who is wise, and who pre 
tends to be wise, and is not. What would not a man give, 
O judges, to be able to examine the leader of the great 
Trojan expedition ; or Odysseus or Sisyphus, or num 
berless others, men and women too ! What infinite 
delight would there be in conversing with them and 
asking them questions ! In another world they do not 
put a man to death for asking questions: assuredly not. 
For besides being happier than we are, they will be 
immortal, if what is said is true. 

Wherefore, O judges, be of good cheer about death, 



and know of a certainty, that no evil can happen toll 
a good man, either in life orjifter death. He and his ' ' 
are not neglected by the gods; nor has my own 
approaching end happened by mere chance. But I see 
clearly that the time had arrived when it was better for 
me to die and be released from trouble ; wherefore the 
oracle gave no sign. For which reason, also, I am not 
angry with my condemners, or with my accusers ; they 
have done me no harm, although they did not mean to 
do me any good ; and for this I may gently blame them. 
Still I have a favour to ask of them. When my 
sons are grown up, I would ask you, O my friends, to 
punish them ; and I would have you trouble them, 
as I have troubled you, if they seem to care about riches, 
or anything, more than about virtue ; or if they pretend 
to be something when they are really nothing, then 
reprove them, as I have reproved you, for not caring 
about that for which they ought to care, and thinking 
that they are something when they are really nothing. 
43 And if you do this, both I and my Mfl^wifl have 
received justice at your hands. > ~ i . 

^nJenoor of departure has arrived, and we go our 
ways I to die, and you to live. Which is better God 
only knows. 

yj ' O(^ ' ca 






Q.c.b . 

G> *OY>vO ** *-tO*V< , c ^^ C. 

/*) / 



INTRODUCTION TO 
CRITO 

THE Crito seems intended to exhibit the character 
of Socrates in one light only, not as the philo 
sopher, fulfilling a divine mission and trusting in the will 
of heaven, but simply as the good citizen, who having 
been unjustly condemned is willing to give up his life 
in obedience to the laws of the state 

Analysis, 

The days of Socrates are drawing to a close; the Stepb. 
fatal ship has been seen off Sunium, as he is informed 43 
by his aged friend and contemporary Crito, who visits 
him before the dawn has broken ; he himself has been 
warned in a dream that on the third day he must depart. 
Time is precious, and Crito has come early in order to 44 
gain his consent to a plan of escape. This can be 
easily accomplished by his friends, who will incur no 
danger in making the attempt to save him, but will be 45 
disgraced for ever if they allow him to perish. He 
should think of his duty to his children, and not play 
into the hands of his enemies. Money is already 
provided by Crito as well as by Sim mi as and others, 
and he will have no difficulty in finding friends in 46 
Thessaly and other places. 

Socrates is afraid that Crito is but pressing upon him 
the opinions of the many : whereas, all his life long he 
has followed the dictates of reason only and the opinion 
of the one wise or skilled man. There was a time when 



94 

Crito himself had allowed the propriety of this. And 
although some one will say ' the many can kill us/ that 
makes no difference ; but a good life, in other words, a 
just and honourable life, is alone to be valued. All 
considerations of loss of reputation or injury to his 
children should be dismissed: the only question is 
whether he would be right in attempting to escape. 

47 Crito, who is a disinterested person not having the 
fear of death before his eyes, shall answer this for him. 
Before he was condemned they had often held dis- 

48 cussions, in which they agreed that no man should 
either do evil, or return evil for evil, or betray the 
right. Are these principles to be altered because the 
circumstances of Socrates are altered? Crito admits 

49 that they remain the same. Then is his escape con 
sistent with the maintenance of them ? To this Crito 
is unable or unwilling to reply. 

50 Socrates proceeds: Suppose the Laws of Athens 
to come and remonstrate with him : they will ask ' Why 
does he seek to overturn them?' and if he replies, 
'they have injured him/ will not the Laws answer, 

51 'Yes, but was that the agreement ? Has he any 
objection to make to them which would justify him in 
overturning them ? Was he not brought into the 
world and educated by their help, and are they not 

52 his parents ? He might have left Athens and gone 
where he pleased, but he has lived there for seventy 
years more constantly than any other citizen.' Thus 
he has clearly shown that he acknowledged the agree 
ment, which he cannot now break without dishonour 
to himself and danger to his friends. Even in the 



Analysis 46-5*4 95* 

course of the trial he might have proposed exile as the 
penalty, but then he declared that he preferred death 
to exile. And whither will he direct his footsteps ? 
In any well-ordered state the Laws will consider him 53 
as an enemy. Possibly in a land of misrule like 
Thessaly he may be welcomed at first, and the 
unseemly narrative of his escape will be regarded by 
the inhabitants as an amusing tale. But if he offends 
them he will have to learn another sort of lesson. 
Will he continue to give lectures in virtue? That 
would hardly be decent. And how will his children 
be the gainers if he takes them into Thessaly, and deprives 54 
them of Athenian citizenship ? Or if he leaves them 
behind, does he expect that they will be better taken 
care of by his friends because he is in Thessaly ? 
Will not true friends care for them equally whether 
he is alive or dead. 

Finally, they exhort him to think of justice first, and 
of life and children afterwards. He may now depart 
in peace and innocence, a sufferer and not a doer of evil. 
But if he breaks agreements, and returns evil for evil, 
they will be angry with him while he lives ; and their 
brethren the Laws of the world below will receive him 
as an enemy. Such is the mystic voice which is always 
murmuring in his ears. 

That Socrates was not a good citizen was a charge 
made against him during his lifetime, which has been 
often repeated in later ages. The crimes of Alcibiades, 
Critias, and Charmides, who had been his pupils, 
were still recent in the memory of the now restored 



9 6 Crito 

democracy. The fact that he had been neutral in the 
death-struggle of Athens was not likely to conciliate 
popular good-will. Plato, writing probably in the next 
generation, undertakes the defence of his friend and 
master in this particular, not to the Athenians of his 
day, but to posterity and the world at large. 

Whether such an incident ever really occurred as 
the visit of Crito and the proposal of escape is 
uncertain : Plato could easily have invented far more 
than that (Phaedr. 275 B); and in the selection of 
Crito, the aged friend, as the fittest person to make 
the proposal to Socrates, we seem to recognize the 
hand of the artist. Whether any one who has been 
subjected by the laws of his country to an unjust 
judgment is right in attempting to escape, is a thesis 
about which casuists might disagree. Shelley (Prose 
Works, p. 78) is of opinion that Socrates 'did well to 
die,' but not for the ' sophistical ' reasons which Plato 
has put into his mouth. And there would be no diffi 
culty in arguing that Socrates should have lived and 
preferred to a glorious death the good which he might 
still be able to perform. 'A rhetorician would have 
had much to say upon that point' (50 B). It may 
be observed however that Plato never intended to 
answer the question of casuistry, but only to exhibit the 
ideal of patient virtue which refuses to do the least evil 
in order to avoid the greatest, and to show his master 
maintaining in death the opinions which he had professed 
in his life. Not ' the world,' but the ' one wise man,' 
is still the paradox of Socrates in his last hours. He 
must be guided by reason, although her conclusions 



Personification of the Laws 97 

may be fatal to him. The remarkable sentiment that 
the wicked can do neither good nor evil is true, if taken 
in the sense, which he means, of moral evil ; in his 
own words, ' they cannot make a man wise or foolish.' 
This little dialogue is a perfect piece of dialectic, in 
which granting the ' common principle ' (49 D), there 
is no escaping from the conclusion. It is anticipated 
at the beginning by the dream of Socrates and the 
parody of Homer. The personification of the Laws, 
and of their brethren the Laws in the world below, 
is one of the noblest and boldest figures of speech 
which occur in Plato. 



CRITO 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE 

SOCRATES. CRITO. 

Scene : The Prison of Socratet. 

Steph. Socrates Why have you come at this hour? it must be quite early ? 

Crito. Yes, certainly. 

Soc . What is the exact time ? 

Cr. The dawn is breaking. 

Soc. I wonder that the keeper of the prison would 
let you in. 

Cr. He knows me, because I often come, Socrates ; 
moreover, I have done him a kindness. 

Soc. And are you only just arrived ? 

Cr. No, I came some time ago. 

Soc. Then why did you sit and say nothing, instead 
of at once awakening me ? 

Cr. I should not have liked myself, Socrates, to be 
in such great trouble and unrest as you are indeed 
I should not : I have been watching with amazement 
your peaceful slumbers ; and for that reason I did not 
awake you, because I wished to minimize the pain. 
I have always thought you to be of a happy disposition ; 
but never did I see anything like the easy, tranquil 
manner in which you bear this calamity. 

Soc. Why, Crito, when a man has reached my age 
he ought not to be repining at the approach of death. 



The vision of Socrates 99 

Cr. And yet other old men find themselves in similar 
misfortunes, and age does not prevent them from repining. 

Soc. That is true. But you have not told me why 
you come at this early hour. 

Cr. I come to bring you a message which is sad and 
painful ; not, as I believe, to yourself, but to all of us 
who are your friends, and saddest of all to me. 

Soc. What ? Has the ship come from Delos, on the 
arrival of which I am to die ? 

Cr. No, the ship has not actually arrived, but she 
will probably be here to-day, as persons who have come 
from Sunium tell me that they left her there; and therefore 
to-morrow, Socrates, will be the last day of your life. 

Soc. Very well, Crito; if such is the will of God, I am ' 
willing; but my belief is that there will be a delay of a day. 

Cr. Why do you think so ? 44 

Soc. I will tell you. I am to die on the day after 
the arrival of the ship. 

Cr. Yes ; that is what the authorities say. 

Soc. But I do not think that the ship will be here 
until to-morrow; this I infer from a vision which I 
had last night, or rather only just now, when you 
fortunately allowed me to sleep. 

Cr. And what was the nature of the vision ? 

Soc. There appeared to me the likeness of a woman, 
fair and comely, clothed in bright raiment, who called 
to me and said : O Socrates, 

' The third day hence to fertile Phthia shalt thou go *.' 

1 Homer, II. ix. 363. 
H 2 



TOO The devotion of his friends 

Cr. What a singular dream, Socrates ! 
Soc. There can be no doubt about the meaning, Crito, 
I think. 

Cr. Yes ; the meaning is only too clear. But, oh ! 
my beloved Socrates, let me entreat you once more to 
take my advice and escape. For if you die I shall not 
only lose a friend who can never be replaced, but there 
is another evil : people who do not know you and me 
will believe that I might have saved you if I had been 
willing to give money, but that I did not care. Now, 
can there be a worse disgrace than this that I should 
be thought to value money more than the life of a friend ? 
For the many will not be persuaded that I wanted you 
to escape, and that you refused. 

Soc. But why, my dear Crito, should we care about 
the opinion of the many ? Good men, and they are 
the only persons who are worth considering, will think 
of these things truly as they occurred. 

Cr. But you see, Socrates, that the opinion of the 
many must be regarded, for what is now happening 
shows that they can do the greatest evil to any one who 
has lost their good opinion. 

Soc. I only wish it were so, Crito ; and that the 
many could do the greatest evil ; for then they would 
also be able to do the greatest good and what a fine 
thing this would be ! But in reality they can do 
neither; for they cannot make a man either wise or 
foolish ; and whatever they do is the result of chance. 

Cr. Well, I will not dispute with you ; but please to 
tell me, Socrates, whether you are not acting out of 

regard to me and your other friends : are you not afraid 
that if you escape from prison we may get into trouble 
with the informers for having stolen you away, and 
lose either the whole or a great part of our property ; 
or that even a worse evil may happen to us ? Now, if 45 
you fear on our account, be at ease ; for in order to save 
you, we ought surely to run this, or even a greater risk ; 
be persuaded, then, and do as I say. 

Soc. Yes, Crito, that is one fear which you mention, 
but by no means the only one. 

Cr. Fear not there are persons who are willing to 
get you out of prison at no great cost ; and as for the 
informers, they are far from being exorbitant in their 
demands a little money will satisfy them. My means, 
which are certainly ample, are at your service, and if 
you have a scruple about spending all mine, here are 
strangers who will give you the use of theirs ; and one 
of them, Simmias the Theban, has brought a large sum 
of money for this very purpose ; and Cebes and many 
others are prepared to spend their money in helping you 
to escape. I say, therefore, do not hesitate on our 
account, and do not say, as you did in the court *, that 
you will have a difficulty in knowing what to do with 
yourself anywhere else. For men will love you in 
other places to which you may go, and not in Athens 
only ; there are friends of mine in Thessaly, if you like 
to go to them, who will value and protect you, and no 
Thessalian will give you any trouble. Nor can I think 
that you are at all justified, Socrates, in betraying your 
1 Cp. Apol. 37 C, D. 



102 The arguments of Crito 

own life when you might be saved ; in acting thus you 
are playing into the hands of your enemies, who are 
hurrying on your destruction. And further I should 
say that you are deserting your own children ; for you 
might bring them up and educate them ; instead of 
which you go away and leave them, and they will have 
to take their chance ; and if they do not meet with the 
usual fate of orphans, there will be small thanks to you. 
No man should bring children into the world who is 
unwilling to persevere to the end in their nurture and 
education. But you appear to be choosing the easier 
part, not the better and manlier, which would have been 
more becoming in one who professes to care for virtue 
in all his actions, like yourself. And indeed, I am 
ashamed not only of you, but of us who are your friends, 
when I reflect that the whole business will be attributed 
entirely to our want of courage. The trial need never 
have come on, or might have been managed differently ; 
and this last act, or crowning folly, will seem to have 
occurred through our negligence and cowardice, who 
46 might have saved you, if we had been good for anything ; 
and you might have saved yourself, for there was no 
difficulty at all. See now, Socrates, how sad and dis 
creditable are the consequences, both to us and you. 
Make up your mind then, or rather have your mind 
already made up, for the time of deliberation is over, 
and there is only one thing to be done, which must be 
done this very night, and if we delay at all will be no 
longer practicable or possible : I beseech you therefore, 
Socrates, be persuaded by me, and do as I say. 



The answer of Socrates 103 

Soc. Dear Crito, your zeal is invaluable, if a right 
one ; but if wrong, the greater the zeal the greater the 
danger; and therefore we ought to consider whether 
I shall or shall not do as you say. For I am and 
always have been one of those natures who must be 
guided by reason, whatever the reason may be which 
upon reflection appears to me to be the best ; and now 
that this chance has befallen me, I cannot repudiate my 
own words: the principles which I have hitherto 
honoured and revered I still honour, and unless we can 
at once find other and better principles, I am certain 
not to agree with you ; no, not even if the power of the 
multitude could inflict many more imprisonments, con 
fiscations, deaths, frightening us like children with 
hobgoblin terrors '. What will be the fairest way of 
considering the question ? Shall I return to your old 
argument about the opinions of men ? we were saying 
that some of them are to be regarded, and others not. 
Now were we right in maintaining this before I was 
condemned? And has the argument which was once 
good now proved to be talk for the sake of talking 
mere childish nonsense? That is what I want to 
consider with your help, Crito : whether, under my 
present circumstances, the argument appears to be in 
any way different or not ; and is to be allowed by me 
or disallowed. That argument, which, as I believe, is 
maintained by many persons of authority, was to the 
effect, as I was saying, that the opinions of some men 
are to be regarded, and of other men not to be regarded. 
1 Cp. ApoU 30 C. 



104 First Principles 

47 Now you, Crito, are not going to die to-morrow at 
least, there is no human probability of this and there 
fore you are disinterested and not liable to be deceived 
by the circumstances in which you are placed. Tell 
me then, whether I am right in saying that some 
opinions, and the opinions of some men only, are to be 
valued, and that other opinions, and the opinions of 
other men, are not to be valued. I ask you whether 
I was right in maintaining this ? 

Cr. Certainly. 

Soc. The good are to be regarded, and not the bad ? 

Cr. Yes. 

Soc. And the opinions of the wise are good, and the 
opinions of the unwise are evil ? 

Cr. Certainly. 

Soc. And what was said about another matter ? Is 
the pupil who devotes himself to the practice of gym 
nastics supposed to attend to the praise and blame and 
opinion of every man, or of one man only his physician 
or trainer, whoever he may be ? 

Cr. Of one man only. 

Soc . And he ought to fear the censure and welcome 
the praise of that one only, and not of the many ? 

Cr. Clearly so. 

Soc. And he ought to act and train, and eat and 
drink in the way which seems good to his single master 
who has understanding, rather than according to the 
opinion of all other men put together ? 

Cr. True. 

Soc. And if he disobeys and disregards the opinion 

and approval of the one, and regards the opinion of the 
many who have no understanding, will he not suffer 
evil? 

Cr. Certainly he will. 

Soc. And what will the evil be, whither tending and 
what affecting, in the disobedient person ? 

Cr. Clearly, affecting the body ; that is what is 
destroyed by the evil. 

Soc . Very good ; and is not this true, Crito, of other 
things which we need not separately enumerate? In 
questions of just and unjust, fair and foul, good and evil, 
which are the subjects of our present consultation, ought 
we to follow the opinion of the many and to fear them ; 
or the opinion of the one man who has understanding ? 
ought we not to fear and reverence him more than all 
the rest of the world : and if we desert him shall we 
not destroy and injure that principle in us which may be 
assumed to be improved by justice and deteriorated by 
injustice ; there is such a principle ? 

Cr. Certainly there is, Socrates. 

Soc. Take a parallel instance : if, acting under the 
advice of those who have no understanding, we destroy 
that which is improved by health and is deteriorated by 
disease, would life be worth having ? And that which 
has been destroyed is the body? 

Cr. Yes. 

Soc. Could we live, having an evil and corrupted 
body ? 

Cr. Certainly not. 

Soc. And will life be worth having, if that higher 



First Principles 

part of man be destroyed, which is improved by justice 
and depraved by injustice ? Do we suppose that principle, 
whatever it may be in man, which has to do with justice 
and injustice, to be inferior to the body ? 

Cr. Certainly not. 

Soc . More honourable than the body ? 

Cr. Far more. 

Soc. Then, my friend, we must not regard what the 
many say of us : but what he, the one man who has 
understanding of just and unjust, will say, and what the 
truth will say. And therefore you begin in error when 
you advise that we should regard the opinion of the 
many about just and unjust, good and evil, honourable 
and dishonourable. ' Well,' some one will say, ' but 
the many can kill us.' 

Cr. Yes, Socrates ; that will clearly be the answer. 

Soc. And it is true : but still I find with surprise 
that the old argument is unshaken as ever. And I 
should like to know whether I may say the same of 
another proposition that not life, but a good life, is 
to be chiefly valued ? 

Cr. Yes, that also remains unshaken. 

Soc. And a good life is equivalent to a just and 
honourable one that holds also ? 

Cr. Yes, it does. 

Soc. From these premisses I proceed to argue the 
question whether I ought or ought not to try and escape 
without the consent of the Athenians : and if I am 
clearly right in escaping, then I will make the attempt ; 
but if not, I will abstain. The other considerations 



The practical inference 107 

which you mention, of money and loss of character and 
the duty of educating one's children, are, I fear, only 
the doctrines of the multitude, who would be as ready 
to restore people to life, if they were able, as they are 
to put them to death and with as little reason. But now, 
since the argument has thus far prevailed, the only 
question which remains to be considered is, whether we 
shall do rightly either in escaping or in suffering others 
to aid in our escape and paying them in money and 
thanks, or whether in reality we shall not do rightly ; 
and if the latter, then death or any other calamity 
which may ensue on my remaining here must not be 
allowed to enter into the calculation. 

Cr. I think that you are right, Socrates ; how then 
shall we proceed ? 

Soc. Let us consider the matter together, and do 
you either refute me if you can, and I will be convinced ; 
or else cease, my dear friend, from repeating to me that 
I ought to escape against the wishes of the Athenians : 
for I highly value your attempts to persuade me to do 
so, but I may not be persuaded against my own better 
judgment. And now please to consider my first posi 
tion, and try how you can best answer me. 49 

Cr. I will. 

Soc. Are we to say that we are never intentionally to 
do wrong, or that in one way we ought and in 
another way we ought not to do wrong, or is doing 
wrong always evil and dishonourable, as I was just now 
saying, and as has been already acknowledged by us ? 
Are all our former admissions which were made within 

a few days to be thrown away ? And have we, at our 
age, been earnestly discoursing with one another all our 
life long only to discover that we are no better than 
children ? Or, in spite of the opinion of the many, and 
in spite of the consequences whether better or worse, 
shall we insist on the truth of what was then said, 
that injustice is always an evil and dishonour to him 
who acts unjustly ? Shall we say so or not ? 

Cr. Yes. 

Soc. Then we must do no wrong ? 

Cr. Certainly not. 

Soc. Nor when injured injure in return, as the many 
imagine ; for we must injure no one at all? 

Cr. Clearly not. 

Soc. Again, Crito, may we do evil ? 

Cr. Surely not, Socrates. 

' Soc. And what of doing evil in return for evil, which 
is the morality of the many is that just or not ? 

Cr. Not just. 

Soc. For doing evil to another is thesameasinjuringhim? 

Cr. Very true. 

Soc. Then we ought not to retaliate or render evil for 
evil to any one, whatever evil we may have suffered 
from him. But I would have you consider, Crito, 
whether you really mean what you are saying. For 
this opinion has never been held, and never will be 
held, by any considerable number of persons ; and 
those who are agreed and those who are not agreed 
upon this point have no common ground, and can only 
1 e.g. cp. Rep. i, 335 E. 



Personification of the Laws 109 

despise one another when they see how widely they differ. 
Tell me, then, whether you agree with and assent to 
my first principle, that neither injury nor retaliation 
nor warding off evil by evil is ever right. And shall 
that be the premiss of our argument? Or do you 
decline and dissent from this ? For so I have ever 
thought, and continue to think ; but, if you are of 
another opinion, let me hear what you have to say. 
If, however, you remain of the same mind as formerly, 
I will proceed to the next step. 

Cr. You may proceed, for I have not changed my mind. 

Soc. Then I will go on to the next point, which may be 
put in the form of a question : Ought a man to do what 
he admits to be right, or ought he to betray the right ? 

Cr. He ought to do what he thinks right. 

Soc, But if this is true, what is the application ? In 
leaving the prison against the will of the Athenians, do 
I wrong any ? or rather do I not wrong those whom I 
ought least to wrong? Do I not desert the principles which 
were acknowledged by us to be just what do you say ? 

Cr. I cannot tell, Socrates ; for I do not know. 

Soc. Then consider the matter in this way : 
Imagine that I am about to play truant (you may call 
the proceeding by any name which you like), and the 
laws and the government come and interrogate me : 
' Tell us, Socrates,' they say. What are you about ? 
are you not going by an act of yours to overturn us 
the laws, and the whole state, as far as in you lies ? 
Do you imagine that a state can subsist and not be 
overthrown, in which the decisions of law have no power, but are set aside and trampled upon by individuals ? What will be our answer, to these 
and the like words ? Any one, and especially a rhetorician, will have a good deal to say on behalf of the 
law which requires a sentence to be carried out. He 
will argue that this law should not be set aside ; and 
shall we reply, ' Yes ; but the state has injured us and 
given an unjust sentence.' Suppose I say that ? 

Cr. Very good, Socrates. 

Soc. And was that our agreement with you ? * the 
law would answer; 'or were you to abide by the 
sentence of the state ? ' And if I were to express my 
astonishment at their words, the law would probably 
add : ' Answer, Socrates, instead of opening your eyes 
you are in the habit of asking and answering questions. 
Tell us, What complaint have you to make against us 
which justifies you in attempting to destroy us and the 
state? In the first place did we not bring you into 
existence ? Your father married your mother by our 
aid and begat you. Say whether you have any objec 
tion to urge against those of us who regulate marriage ? ' 
None, I should reply. Or against those of us who 
after birth regulate the nurture and education of children, 
in which you also were trained ? Were not the laws, 
which have the charge of education, right in commanding 
your father to train you in music and gymnastic?' 
Right, I should reply. Well then, since you were 
brought into the world and nurtured and educated by 
us, can you deny in the first place that you are our 
child and slave, as your fathers were before you ? 



The address of the Laws 1 1 1 

And if this is true you are not on equal terms with us ; 
nor can you think that you have a right to do to us 
what we are doing to you. Would you have any right 
to strike or revile or do any other evil to your father 
or your master, if you had one, because you have been 
struck or reviled by him, or received some other evil 
at his hands ? you would not say this ? And because 
we think right to destroy you, do you think that you have 51 
any right to destroy us in return, and your country as 
far as in you lies ? Will you, O professor of true virtue, 
pretend that you are justified in this ? Has a philosopher 
like you failed to discover that our country is more to 
be valued and higher and holier far than mother or 
father or any ancestor, and more to be regarded in 
the eyes of the gods and of men of understanding ? 
also to be soothed, and gently and reverently entreated 
when angry, even more than a father, and either to be 
persuaded, or if not persuaded, to be obeyed ? And 
when we are punished by her, whether with imprison 
ment or stripes, the punishment is to be endured in 
silence ; and if she lead us to wounds or death in 
battle, thither we follow as is right ; neither may any 
one yield or retreat or leave his rank, but whether in battle 
or in court of law, or in any other place, he must do 
what his city and his country order him ; or he must 
change their view of what is just : and if he may do no 
violence to his father or mother, much less may he do 
violence to his country.' What answer shall we make 
to this, Crito ? Do the laws speak truly, or do they not ? 
Cr. 1 think that they do, 



ii2 The address of the Laws 

Soc. Then the laws will say : ' Consider, Socrates, 
if we are speaking truly that in your present attempt 
you are going to do us an injury. For, having brought 
you into the world, and nurtured and educated you, and 
given you and every other citizen a share in every good 
which we had to give, we further proclaim to any 
Athenian by the liberty which we allow him, that if he 
does not like us when he has become of age and has seen 
the ways of the city, and made our acquaintance, he 
may go where he pleases and take his goods with him. 
None of us laws will forbid him or interfere with him. 
Any one who does not like us and the city, and who 
wants to emigrate to a colony or to any other city, may 
go where he likes, retaining his property. But he who 
has experience of the manner in which we order justice 
and administer the state, and still remains, has entered 
into an implied contract that he will do as we command 
him. And he who disobeys us is, as we maintain, 
thrice wrong ; first, because in disobeying us he is 
disobeying his parents; secondly, because we are 
the authors of his education; thirdly, because he 
has made an agreement with us that he will duly obey 
52 our commands; and he neither obeys them nor con 
vinces us that our commands are unjust ; and we do 
not rudely impose them, but give him the alternative of 
obeying or convincing us ; that is what we offer, and 
he does neither. 

' These are the sort of accusations to which, as we 
were saying, you, Socrates, will be exposed if you 
accomplish your intentions ; you, above all other Athen- 



The address of the Laws 113 

ians.' Suppose now I ask, why I rather than anybody 
else ? they will justly retort upon me that I above all 
other men have acknowledged the agreement. ' There 
is clear proof,' they will say, ' Socrates, that we and the 
city were not displeasing to you. Of all Athenians 
you have been the most constant resident in the city, 
which, as you never leave, you may be supposed to 
love l . For you never went out of the city either to see 
the games, except once when you went to the Isthmus, 
or to any other place unless when you were on military 
service; nor did you travel as other men do. Nor 
had you any curiosity to know other states or their 
laws : your affections did not go beyond us and our \ 
state ; we were your special favourites, and you ac- 
quiesced in our government of you ; and here in this 
city you begat your children, which is a proof of your 
satisfaction. Moreover, you might in the course of the 
trial, if you had liked, have fixed the penalty at banish 
ment ; the state which refuses to let you go now would 
have let you go then. But you pretended that you 
preferred death to exile *, and that you were not un 
willing to die. And now you have forgotten these fine 
sentiments, and pay no respect to us the laws, of whom 
you are the destroyer ; and are doing what only a miser 
able slave would do, running away and turning your 
back upon the compacts and agreements which you 
made as a citizen. And first of all answer this very 
question : Are we right in saying that you agreed to 
be governed according to us in deed, and not in word only ? Is that true or not ? ' How shall we answer? Must we not assent ? 

Cr. We cannot help it, Socrates. 

Soc. Then will they not say : ' You, Socrates, are 
breaking the covenants and agreements which you made 
with us at your leisure, not in any haste or under any 
compulsion or deception, but after you have had seventy 
years to think of them, during which time you were at 
liberty to leave the city, if we were not to your mind, 
or if our covenants appeared to you to be unfair. 
You had your choice, and might have gone either to 
Lacedaemon or Crete, both which states are often 
praised by you for their good government, or to some 
53 other Hellenic or foreign state. Whereas you, above 
all other Athenians, seemed to be so fond of the state, 
or, in other words, of us her laws (and who would care 
about a state which has no laws ?), that you never stirred 
out of her; the halt, the blind, the maimed were not 
more stationary in her than you were. And now you 
run away and forsake your agreements. Not so, 
Socrates, if you will take our advice ; do not make 
yourself ridiculous by escaping out of the city. 

For just consider, if you transgress and err in this 
sort of way, what good will you do either to yourself 
or to your friends ? That your friends will be driven 
into exile and deprived of citizenship, or will lose their 
property, is tolerably certain ; and you yourself, if you 
fly to one of the neighbouring cities, as, for example, 
Thebes or Megara, both of which are well governed, 
will come to them as an enemy, Socrates, and their 



The address of the Laws 1 1 f 

government will be against you, and all patriotic citizens 
will cast an evil eye upon you as a subverter of the laws, 
and you will confirm in the minds of the judges the 
justice of their own condemnation of you. For he who 
is a corrupter of the laws is more than likely to be 
a corrupter of the young and foolish portion of mankind. 
Will you then flee from well-ordered cities and virtuous 
men ? and is existence worth having on these terms ? 
Or will you go to them without shame, and talk to 
them, Socrates ? And what will you say to them ? 
What you say here about virtue and justice and in 
stitutions and laws being the best things among men ? 
Would that be decent of you ? Surely not. But if 
you go away from well-governed states to Crito's 
friends in Thessaly, where there is great disorder and 
licence, they will be charmed to hear the tale of your 
escape from prison, set off with ludicrous particulars of 
the manner in which you were wrapped in a goatskin 
or some other disguise, and metamorphosed as the 
manner is of runaways ; but will there be no one to 
remind you that in your old age you were not ashamed 
to violate the most sacred laws from a miserable desire 
of a little more life ? Perhaps not, if you keep them 
in a good temper ; but if they are out of temper you 
will hear many degrading things ; you will live, but 
how ? as the flatterer of all men, and the servant of 
all men ; and doing what ? eating and drinking in 
Thessaly, having gone abroad in order that you may 
get a dinner. And where will be your fine sentiments 
about justice and virtue ? Say that you wish to live for the sake of your children you want to bring them 
up and educate them will you take them into Thessaly 
and deprive them of Athenian citizenship ? Is this 
the benefit which you will confer upon them ? Or are 
you under the impression that they will be better cared 
for and educated here if you are still alive, although 
absent from them ; for your friends will take care of 
them ? Do you fancy that if you are an inhabitant of 
Thessaly they will take care of them, and if you are an 
inhabitant of the other world that they will not take care 
of them ? Nay ; but if they who call themselves friends 
are good for anything, they will to be sure they will. 

* Listen, then, Socrates, to us who have brought you 
up. Think not of life and children first, and of justice 
afterwards, but of justice first, that you may be justified 
before the princes of the world below. For neither 
will you nor any that belong to you be happier or 
holier or juster in this life, or happier in another, if 
you do as Crito bids. Now you depart in innocence, 
a sufferer and not a doer of evil ; a victim, not of the 
laws but of men. But if you go forth, returning evil 
for evil, and injury for injury, breaking the covenants 
and agreements which you have made with us, and 
wronging those whom you ought least of all to wrong, 
that is to say, yourself, your friends, your country, and 
us, we shall be angry with you while you live, and our 
brethren, the laws in the world below, will receive you as 
an enemy ; for they will know that you have done your 
best to destroy us. Listen, then, to us and not to Crito. 

This, dear Crito, is the voice which I seem to hear 



The address of the Laws 117 

murmuring in my ears, like the sound of a flute in the 
ears of the mystic ; that voice, I say, is humming in 
my ears, and prevents me from hearing any other. 
And I know that anything more which you may say 
will be vain. Yet speak, if you have anything to say. 

Cr. I have nothing to say, Socrates. 

Soc. Leave me then, Crito, to fulfil the will of God, 
and to follow whither he leads. 



INTRODUCTION TO 
PHAEDO 

Analysis. 

Steph. A FTER an interval of some months or years, and at 
^ oJLPhlius, a town of Peloponnesus, the tale of the last 
hours of S ocrates is narrated to E checrates and other Phli- 
asians by Phaedothe ' beloved disciple.' The Dialogue ne 
cessarily takes the form of a narrative, because Socrates 

58 has to be described acting as well as speaking. The 
minutest particulars of the event are interesting to distant 
friends, and the narrator has an equal interest in them. 

During the voyage of the sacred ship to and from 
Delos, which has occupied thirty days, the execution 
of Socrates has been deferred. (Cp. Xen. Mem. iv. 8. 2.) 
The time has been passed by him in conversation with 

59 a select company of disciples. But now the holy sea 
son is over, and the disciples meet earlier than usual in 
order that they may converse with Socrates for the last 
time. Those who were present, and those who might 
have been expected to be present, are mentioned by 
name. There are Simmias and Cebes (Crito 45 B), 
two disciples of Philolaus whom Socrates ' by his en 
chantments has attracted from Thebes' (Mem. Hi. n. 
1 7), Crito the aged friend, the attendant of the prison, 
who is as good as a friend these take part in the con 
versation. There are present also, Hermogenes, from 
whom Xenophon derived his information about the trial 
of Socrates (Mem. iv. 8. 4), the ' madman ' Apollodorus 



Analysis 77-62 119 

(Symp. 173 D), Euclid and Terpsion from Megara 
(cp. Theaet. sub init.), Ctesippus, Antisthenes, Me- 
nexenus, and some other less-known members of the 
Socratic circle, all of whom are silent auditors. Ari- 
stippus, Cleombrotus, and Plato are noted as absent. 
Almost as soon as the friends of Socrates enter the 60 
prison Xanthippe and her children are sent home in the 
care of one of Crito's servants. Socrates himself has 
just been released from chains, and is led by this circum 
stance to make the natural remark that ' pleasure follows 
pain.' (Observe that Plato is preparing the way for 
his doctrine of the alternation of opposites.) ' Aesop 
would have represented them in a fable as a two-headed 
creature of the gods.' The mention of Aesop reminds 
Cebes of a question which had been asked by Evenus 
the poet (cp. Apol. 20 A) : * Why Socrates, who was 
not a poet, while in prison had been putting Aesop into 
verse ? ' ' Because several times in his life he had been 61 
warned in dreams that he should practise music ; and 
as he was about to die and was not certain of what was 
meant, he wished to fulfil the admonition in the letter as 
well as in the spirit, by writing verses as well as by 
cultivating philosophy. Tell this to Evenus ; and say 
that I would have him follow me in death.' 'He is 
not at all the sort of man to comply with your request, 
Socrates.' * Why, is he not a philosopher ? ' ' Yes.' 
' Then he will be willing to die, although he will not 
take his own life, for that is held to be unlawful.' 

Cebes asks why suicide is thought not to be right, if 6a 
death is to be accounted a good ? Well, (i) according 
to one explanation, because man is a prisoner, who must 



120 



Phaedo 



not open the door of his prison and ran away this is 
the truth in a ' mystery.' Or (2) rather, because he is 
not his own property, but a possession of the gods, and 
has no right to make away with that which does not 
belong to him. But why, asks Cebes, if he is a pos 
session of the gods, should he wish to die and leave 
them ? for he is under their protection ; and surely he 
cannot take better care of himself than they take of 

63 him. Simmias explains that Cebes is really referring to 
Socrates, whom they think too unmoved at the prospect 
of leaving the gods and his friends. Socrates answers 
that he is going to other gods who are wise and good, 
and perhaps to better friends ; and he professes that he 
is ready to defend himself against the charge of Cebes. 
The company shall be his judges, and he hopes that he 
will be more successful in convincing them than he had 
been in convincing the court. 

64 The philosopher desires death which the wicked 
world will insinuate that he also deserves : and perhaps 
he does, but not in any sense which they are capable of 
understanding. Enough of them : the real question is, 
What is the nature of that death which he desires ? 
Death is the separation of soul and body and the 
philosopher desires such a separation. He would like 
to be freed from the dominion of bodily pleasures and 
of the senses, which are always perturbing his mental 

65 vision. He wants to get rid of eyes and ears, and with 
the light of the mind only to behold the light of truth. 
All the evils and impurities and necessities of men come 

66 from the body. And death separates him from these 
corruptions, which in life he cannot wholly lay aside. 

Why then should he repine when the hour of separation 
arrives ? Why, if he is dead while he lives, should he 
fear that other death, through which alone he can behold 68 
wisdom in her purity ? 

Besides, the philosopher has notions of good and evil 
unlike those of other men. For they are courageous 
because they are afraid of greater dangers, and temperate 69 
because they desire greater pleasures. But he disdains 
this balancing of pleasures and pains, which is the ex 
change of commerce and not of virtue. All the virtues, 
including wisdom, are regarded by him only as puri 
fications of the soul. And this was the meaning of the 
founders of the mysteries when they said, ' Many are 
the wand-bearers but few are the mystics.' (Cp. Matt. 
xxii. 14: 'Many are called, but few are chosen.') 
And in the hope that he is one of these mystics, 
Socrates is now departing. This is his answer to any 
one who charges him with indifference at the prospect 
of leaving the gods and his friends. 

Still, a fear is expressed that the soul upon leaving 70 
the body may vanish away like smoke or air. Socrates 
in answer appeals first of all to the old Orphic tradition 
that the souls of the dead are in the world below, and 
that the living come from them. This he attempts to 
found on a philosophical assumption that all opposites 
e. g. less, greateTJ" weaker, stronger ; sleeping, waking ; 71 
life, death are generated out of each other. Nor 
can the process of generation be only a passage from 
living to dying, for then all would end in death. The 73 
perpetual sleeper (Endymion) would be no longer dis 
tinguished from the rest of mankind. The circle of 



122 Phaedo 

nature is not complete unless the living come from the 
dead as well as pass to them. 

The Platonic doctrine of reminiscence is then ad 
duced as a confirmation. pf the pre-existence of the soul. 

73 Some proofs of this doctrine are demanded. One proof 
given is the same as that of the Meno (82 foil.), and 
is derived from the latent knowledge of mathematics, 
which may be elicited from an unlearned person when 
a diagram is presented to him. Again, there is a power 
of association, which from seeing Simmias may re 
member Cebes, or from seeing a picture of Simmias 

74 may remember Simmias. The lyre may recall the 
player of the lyre, and equal pieces of wood or stone 
may be associated with the higher notion of absolute 
equality. But here observe that material equalities fall 
short of the conception of absolute equality with which 
they are compared, and which is the measure of them. 

75 And the measure or standard must be prior to that 
which is measured, the idea of equality prior to the 
visible equals. And if prior to them, then prior also 
to the perceptions of the senses which recall them, and 

76 therefore either given JjgjjiarejMith or at birth._ But all 
men have not this knowledge, nor have any without a 
process of reminiscence ; which is a proof that it is not 
innate or given at birth, unless indeed it was given and 
taken away at the same instant. But if not given to men 
in birth, it must have been given before birth this is the 
only alternative which remains. And if we had ideas in 
a former state, then our souls must have existed and must 

77 have had intelligence in a former stjf^ The pre-existence 
of the soul stands or falls with the doctrine of ideas. 



Analysts 7281 123 

It is objected by Simmias and Cebes that these argu 
ments only prove a former and not a future existence. 
Socrates answers this objection by recalling the previous 
argument, in which he had shown that the living come 
from the dead. But the fear that the soul at departing 
may vanish into air (especially if there is a wind blowing 
at the time) has not yet been charmed away. When we fear that the soul will vanish away, 
let us ask ourselves what is that which we suppose to 
be liable to dissolution? Is it the simple or the com 
pound, the unchanging or the changing, the invisible 
idea or the visible object of sense ? Clearly the latter 79 
and not the former ; and therefore not the soul, which 
in her own pure thought is unchangeable, and only when 
using the senses descends into the region of change. 
Again, the soul commands, the body serves : in this 80 
respect too the soul is akin to the divine, and the body 
to the mortal. And in every point of view the soul is 
the image of divinity and immortality, and the body of 
the human and mortal. And whereas the body is liable 
to speedy dissolution, the soul is almost if not quite 
indissoluble. (Cp. Tim. 41 A.) Yet even the body 
may be preserved for ages by the embalmer's art : how 
unlikely, then, that the soul will perish and be dis 
sipated into air while on her way to the good and wise 
God ! She has been gathered into herself, holding 
aloof from the body, and practising death all her life Si 
long, and she is now finally released from the errors and 
follies and passions of men, and for ever dwells in the 
company of the god^ 

But the soul which is polluted and engrossed by the 



1 24 Pbaedo 

corporeal, and has no eye except that of the senses, and 
is weighed down by the bodily appetites, cannot attain 
to this abstraction. In her fear of the world below she 
lingers about the sepulchre, loath to leave the body 
which she loved, a ghostly apparition, saturated with 
sense, and therefore visible. At length entering into 
8 a some animal of a nature congenial to her former life of 
sensuality or violence, she takes the form of an ass, a 
wolf or a kite. And of these earthly souls the happiest 
are those who have practised virtue without philosophy ; 
they are allowed to pass into gentle and social natures, 
such as bees and ants. (Cp. Rep. x. 619 C, Meno 
100 A.) But only the philosopher who departs pure 
is permitted to enter the company of the gods. (Cp. 
Phaedrus 249.) This is the reason why he abstains 
from fleshly lusts, and not because he fears loss or dis- 

83 grace, which is the motive of other men. He too has 
been a captive, and the willing agent of his own cap 
tivity. But philosophy has spoken to him, and he has 
heard her voice ; she has gently entreated him, and 
brought him out of the ' miry clay,' and purged away 
the mists of passion and the illusions 'of sense which 
envelope him ; his soul has escaped from the influence 
of pleasures and pains, which are like nails fastening 

84 her to the body. To that prison-house she will not 
return ; and therefore she abstains from bodily pleasures 
not from a desire of having more or greater ones, 
but because she knows that only when calm and free 
from the dominion of the body can she behold the light 
of truth. 

Simmias and Cebes remain in doubt ; but they are 



Analysis 81-88 

unwilling to raise objections at such a time. Socrates 
wonders at their reluctance. Let them regard him 
rather as the swan, who, having sung the praises of 
Apollo all his life long, sings at his death more lustily 85 
than ever. (Cp. 60 D.) Simmias acknowledges that 
there is cowardice in not probing truth to the bottom. 
' And if truth divine and inspired is not to be had, then 
let a man take the best of human notions, and upon this 
frail bark let him sail through life/ He proceeds to 
state his difficulty : It has been argued that the soul is 86 
invisible and incorporeal, and therefore immortal, and 
prior to the body. But is not the soul acknowledged 
to be a harmony, and has she not the same relation to 
the body, as the harmony which like her is invisible 
has to the lyre? And yet the harmony does not 
survive the lyre. Cebes has also an objection, which 
like Simmias he expresses in a figure. He is willing 
to admit that the soul is more lasting than the body. 
But the more lasting nature of the soul does not prove 87 
her immortality ; for after having worn out many bodies 
in a single life, and many more in successive births and 
deaths, she may at last perish, or, as Socrates after 
wards restates the objection, the very act of birth may 
be the beginning of her death, and her last body may 
survive her, just as the coat of an old weaver is left 
behind him after he is dead, although a man is more 88 
lasting than his coat. And he who would prove the 
immortality of the soul, must prove not only that the 
soul outlives one or many bodies, but that she outlives 
them all. 

The audience, like the chorus in a play, for a mo- 



126 Phaedo 

89 ment interpret the feelings of the actors ; there is a 
temporary depression, and then the enquiry is resumed. 
It is a melancholy reflection that arguments, like men, 
are apt to be deceivers ; and those who have been often 
deceived become distrustful both of arguments and of 
friends. But this unfortunate experience should not 
make us either haters of men or haters of arguments. 

90 The want of health and truth is not in the argument, 

91 but in ourselves. Socrates, who is about to die, is sen 
sible of his own weakness ; he desires to be impartial, 
but he cannot help feeling that he has too great an in 
terest in the truth of the argument. And therefore he 
would have his friends examine and refute him, if they 
think that he is in error. 

At his request Simmias and Cebes repeat their objec- 
93 tions. They do not go to the length of denying the 
pre-existence of ideas. Simmias is of opinion that the 
soul is a harmony of the body. But the admission of 
the pre-existence of ideas, and therefore of the soul, is 
at variance with this. (Cp. a parallel difficulty in 

93 Theaet. 203, 204.) For a harmony is an effect, 
whereas the soul is not an effect but a cause ; a harmony 
follows, but the soul leads ; a harmony admits of degrees, 
and the soul has no degrees. Again, upon the supposition 
that the soul is a harmony, why is one soul better than 
another ? Are they more or less harmonized, or is there one harmony within another ? But the soul does not admit 
of degrees, and cannot therefore be more or less har 
monized. Further, the soul is often engaged in resisting 
the affections of the body, as Homer describes Odysseus 

95 ' rebuking his heart.' Could he have written this under the idea that the soul is a harmony of the body ? Nay 
rather, are we not contradicting Homer and ourselves 
in affirming anything of the sort ? 

The goddess Harmonia, as Socrates playfully terras 
the argument of Simmias, has been happily disposed of; 
and now an answer has to be given to the Theban 
Cadmus. Socrates recapitulates the argument of Cebes, 96 
which, as he remarks, involves the whole question of 
natural growth or causation ; about this he proposes to 
narrate his own mental experience. When he was 
young he had puzzled himself with physics : he had 
enquired into the growth and decay of animals, and 
the origin of thought, until at last he began to doubt 
the self-evident fact that growth is the result of eating 
and drinking ; and so he arrived at the conclusion that 
he was not meant for such enquiries. Nor was he 
less perplexed with notions of comparison and number. 
At first he had imagined himself to understand differences 
of greater and less, and to know that ten is two more 
than eight, and the like. But now those very notions 
appeared to him to contain a contradiction. For how can one be divided into two ? or two be compounded 
into one? These are difficulties which Socrates can 
not answer. Of generation and destruction he knows 
nothing. But he has a confused notion of another 
method in which matters of this sort are to be investi 
gated. (Cp. Rep. iv. 435 D; vii. 533 A; Charm. 
1 70 foil.) 

Then he heard some one reading out of a book of 
Anaxagoras, that mind is the cause of all things. 
And he said to himself: If mind is the cause of all 



128 Pbaedo 

things, surely mind must dispose them all for the best. 

98 The new teacher will show me this ' order of the best ' 
in man and nature. How great had been his hopes 
and how great his disappointment ! For he found that 
his new friend was anything but consistent in his use of 
mind as a cause, and that he soon introduced winds, 
waters, and other eccentric notions. (Cp. Arist. Metaph. 
i. 4, 5.) It was as if a person had said that Socrates 

99 is sitting here because he is made up of bones and 
muscles, instead of telling the true reason that he 
is here because the Athenians have thought good 
to sentence him to death, and he has thought good to 
await his sentence. Had his bones and muscles been 
left by him to their own ideas of right, they would 
long ago have taken themselves off. But surely there 
is a great confusion of the cause and condition in all 
this. And this confusion also, leads people into all 
sorts of erroneous theories about the position and 
motions of the earth. None of them know how much 
stronger than any Atlas is the power of the best. But 
this ' best 'jsjstilMmdiscovered ; ^nd In enquiring after 
the cause, we can only hoi Q attain the second best. 

Now there is a danger in the contemplation of the 
100 nature of things, as there is a danger in looking at the 
sun during an eclipse, unless the precaution is taken of 
looking only at the image reflected in the water, or in 
a glass. (Cp. Laws x. 897 D; Rep. vii. 516 foil.) 
' I was afraid,' says Socrates, ' that I might injure the 
eye of the soul. I thought that I had better return to 
the old and safe method of ideas. Though I do not 
mean to say that he who contemplates existence through 



Analysis 97102 129 

the medium of ideas sees only through a glass darkly, 
any more than he who contemplates actual effects.' 

If the existence of ideas is granted to hirn f Socrates 
is* of opinion that he wilLtEijL haTg_no^7iifficulty in 
proving the immortality of the soul. He will only ask 
for a further admission : that beauty is the cause oft 
the beautiful, greatness the cause of the great, small- 
ness of the small, and so on of other things. This is roi 
a safe and simple answer, which escapes the contradic 
tions of greater and less (greater by reason of that 
which is smaller!), of addition and subtraction, and 
the other difficulties of relation. These subtleties he is 
for leaving to wiser heads than his own ; he prefers to 
test ideas by the consistency of their consequences, 
and7 if asked to give an account of them, goes back to 
some higher idea or hypothesis which appears to him to 
be the best, until at last he arrives at a resting-place. 
(Rep. vi. 510 foll.i PhiKjd-folL)____ 

The doctrine of ideas, which has long ago received roa 
the assent of the Socratic circle, is now affirmed by the 
Phliasian auditor to command the assent of any man of 
sense. The narrative is continued ; Socrates is desirous 
of explaining how opposite ideas may appear to co-exist 
but do not really co-exist in the same thing or person. 
For example, Simmias may be said to have greatness 
and also smallness, because he is greater than Socrates 
and less than Phaedo. And yet Simmias is not really 
great and also small, but only when compared to 
Phaedo and Socrates. I use the illustration, says 
Socrates, because I want to show you not only that 
ideal opposites exclude one another, but also the 




130 Pbaedo 

opposites in us. I, for example, having the attribute 
of smallness remain small, and cannot become great : 

103 the smallness which is in me drives out greatness. 

One of the company here remarked that this was 
inconsistent with the old assertion that opposites 
generated opposites. But that, replies Socrates, was 
affirmed, ._ not of opposite ideas either in us or in 
nature, but of opposition in the concrete not of life 
and death, but of individuals living and dying. When 
this objection has been removed, Socrates proceeds: 
This doctrine of the mutual exclusion of opposites 
is not only true of the opposites themselves, but of 
things which are inseparable from them. For example, 
cold and heat are opposed ; and fire, which is insepar 
able from heat, cannot co-exist with cold, or snow, 
which is inseparable from cold, with heat. Again, the 
number three excludes the number four, because three 
is an odd number and four is an even number, and the 

104 odd is opposed to the even. Thus we are able to 
proceed a step beyond * the safe and simple answer.' 
We may say, not only that the odd excludes the even, 
but that the number three, which participates in odd- 

105 ness, excludes the even. And in like manner, not' 
only does life exclude death, but the soul, of which life 
is the inseparable attribute, also excludes death. And 
that of which life is the inseparable attribute is by the 

1 06 force of the terms imperishable. If the odd principle 
were imperishable, then the number three would not perish 
but remove, on the approach of the even principle. But 
the immortal is imperishable ; and therefore the soul on 
the approach of death does not perish but removes. 



\ 



Analysis 1021 1 o 131 

Thus all objections appear to be finally silenced. 107 
And now the application has to be made : If the soul 
is immortal, ' what manner of persons ought we to be ?' 
having regard not only to time but to eternity. For 
death is not the end of all, and the wicked is not 
released from his evil by death ; but every one carries 
with him into the world below that which he is or has 
become, and that only. 

For after death the soul is carried away to judgment, 
and when she has received her punishment returns to 
earth in the course of ages. The wise soul is 108 
conscious of her situation, and follows the attendant 
angel who guides her through the windings of the 
world below ; but the impure soul wanders hither and 
thither without companion or guide, and is carried at 
last to her own place, as the pure soul is also carried 
away to hers. ' In order that you may understand 
this, I must first describe to you the nature and con 
formation of the earth.' 

Now the whole earth is a globe placed in the centre 
of the heavens, and is maintained there by the perfection 109 
of balance. That which we call the earth is only one 
of many small hollows, wherein collect the mists and 
waters and the thick lower air ; but the true earth is 
above, and is in a finer and subtler element. And if, 
like birds, we could fly to the surface of the air, in the 
same manner that fishes come to the top of the sea, 
then we should behold the true earth and the true 
heaven and the true stars. Our earth is everywhere no 
corrupted and corroded ; and even the land which is 
fairer than the sea, for that is a mere chaos or waste of 

K a 



132 Phaedo 

water and mud and sand, has nothing to show in com 
parison of the other world. But the heavenly earth is 
of divers colours, sparkling with jewels brighter than 
gold and whiter than any snow, having flowers and 

in fruits innumerable. And the inhabitants dwell some 
on the shore of the sea of air, others in ' islets of the 
blest,' and they hold converse with the gods, and 
behold the sun, moon, and stars as they truly are, and 
their other blessedness is of a piece with this. 

The hollows on the surface of the globe vary in size 
and shape from that which we inhabit : but all are 
connected by passages and perforations in the interior 
of the earth. And there is one huge chasm or opening 
called Tartarus, into which streams of fire and water 
and liquid mud are ever flowing ; of these small portions 

us find their way to the surface and form seas and rivers 
and volcanoes. There is a perpetual inhalation and 
exhalation of the air rising and falling as the waters 
pass into the depths of the earth and return again, 
in their course forming lakes and rivers, but never de 
scending below the centre of the earth ; for on either 
side the rivers flowing either way are stopped by a 
precipice. These rivers are many and mighty, and 
there are four principal ones, Oceanus, Acheron, 
Pyriphlegethon, and Cocytus. Oceanus is the river 
which encircles the earth ; Acheron takes an opposite 
direction, and after flowing under the earth through 

113 desert places, at last reaches the Acherusian lake, this 
is the river at which the souls of the dead await their 
return to earth. Pyriphlegethon is a stream of fire, 
which coils round the earth and flows into the depths 



Analysis 110115* 133 

of Tartarus. The fourth river, Cocytus, is that which 
is called by the poets the Stygian river, and passes into 
and forms the lake Styx, from the waters of which it 
gains new and strange powers. This river, too, falls 
into Tartarus. 

The dead are first of all judged according to their 
deeds, and those who are incurable are thrust into 
Tartarus, from which they never come out. Those 
who have only committed venial sins are first purified 
of them, and then rewarded for the good which they 
have done. Those who have committed crimes, great 114 
indeed, but not unpardonable, are thrust into Tartarus, 
but are cast forth at the end of a year by way of 
Pyriphlegethon or Cocytus, and these carry them as 
far as the Acherusian lake, where they call upon their 
victims to let them come out of the rivers into the lake. 
And if they prevail, then they are let out and their 
sufferings cease: if not, they are borne unceasingly 
into Tartarus and back again, until they at last obtain 
mercy. The pure souls also receive their reward, and 
have their abode in the upper earth, and a select few in 
still fairer ' mansions/ 

Socrates is not prepared to insist on the literal 
accuracy of this description, but he is confident that 
something of the kind is true. He who has sought 
after the pleasures of knowledge and rejected the 
pleasures of the body, has reason to be of good hope 
at the approach of death ; whose voice is already 
speaking to him, and who will one day be heard 
calling all men. 

The hour has come at which he must drink the 115 



1 34 Phaedo 

poison, and not much remains to be done. How shall 
they bury him ? That is a question which he refuses 
to entertain, for they are burying, not him, bxit his dead 

116 body. His friends had once been sureties that he 
would remain, and they shall now be sureties that he 
has run away. Yet he would not die without the 
customary ceremonies of washing and burial. Shall he make a libation of the poison ? In the spirit he 
will, but not in the letter. One request he utters in 
the very act of death, which has been a puzzle to after 

118 ages. With a sort of irony he remembers that a trifling 
religious duty is still unfulfilled, just as above (60 E) 
he desires before he departs to compose a few verses 
in order to satisfy a scruple about a dream unless, 
indeed, we suppose him to mean, that he was now 
restored to health, and made the customary offering to 
Asclepius in token of his recovery. 

I . The doctrine of the immortality of the soul has 
sunk deep into the heart of the human race ; and men 
are apt to rebel against any examination of the nature 
or grounds of their belief. They do not like to 
acknowledge that this, as well as the other 'eternal 
ideas' of man, has a history in time, which may be 
traced in Greek poetry or philosophy, and also in the 
Hebrew Scriptures. They convert feeling into reasoning, 
and throw a network of dialectics over that which is_ 
really a deeply-rooted instinct. In the same temper 
which Socrates reproves in himself (91 B) they are 
disposed to think that even fallacies will do no harm, 
for they will die with them, and while they live they 



The immortality of the soul 135" 

will gain by the delusion. And when they consider 
the numberless bad arguments which have been pressed 
into the service of theology, they say, like the companions 
of Socrates, ' What argument can we ever trust again ? ' 
But there is a better and higher spirit to be gathered 
from the Phaedo, as well as from the other writings of 
Plato, which says that first principles 
^ constantly reviewed (Phaedo 107 B. and Crat. 436), 
and that the highest subjects demand of us the greatest 
accuracy (Rep. vi. 504 E); also that we must not 
become misologists because arguments are apt to be 
deceivers. 

2. In former ages there was a customary rather than 
a reasoned belief in the immortality **f * |jy| It 
was based on the authority of the Church, on the 
necessity of such a belief to morality and the order of 
society, on the evidence of an historical fact, and also 
on analogies and figures of speech which filled up the 
void or gave an expression in words to a cherished 
instinct. The mass of mankind went on their way 
busy with the affairs of this life, hardly stopping to 
think about another. But in our own day the question 
has been reopened, and it is doubtful whether the belief 
which in the first ages of Christianity was the strongest 
motive of action can survive the conflict with a scientific 
age in which the rules of evidence are stricter and the 
mind has become more sensitive to criticism. It has 
faded into the distance by a natural process as it was 
removed further and further from the historical fact on 
which it has been supposed to rest. Arguments derived 
from material things such as the seed and the ear of 



1 3 6 Phaedo 

corn or transitions in the life of animals from one state 
of being to another (the chrysalis and the butterfly) are 
not ' in pari materia ' with arguments from the visible 
to the invisible, and are therefore felt to be no longer 
applicable. The evidence to the historical fact seems 
to be weaker than was once supposed : it is not con 
sistent with itself, and is based upon documents which 
are of unknown origin. The immortality of man must 
be proved by other arguments than these if it is again 
to become a living belief. We must ask ourselves afresh 
why we still maintain it, and seek to discover a founda 
tion for it in the nature of God and in the first principles 
of morality. 

3. At the outset of the discussion we may clear 
away a confusion. We certainly do not mean by the 
immortality of the soul the immortality of fame, which 
whether worth having or not can only be ascribed to 
a very select class of the whole race of mankind, and 
even the interest in these few is comparatively short 
lived. To have been a benefactor to the world, 
whether in a higher or a lower sphere of life and 
thought, is a great thing : to have the reputation of 
being one, when men have passed out of the sphere of 
earthly praise or blame, is hardly worthy of consider 
ation. The memory of a great man, so far from being 
immortal, is really limited to his own generation : so 
long as his friends or his disciples are alive, so long as 
his books continue to be read, so long as his political 
or military successes fill a page in the history of his 
country. The praises which are bestowed upon him 
at his death hardly last longer than the flowers which 



The immortality of the soul 137 

are strewed upon his coffin or the ' immortelles ' which 
are laid upon his tomb. Literature makes the most 
of its heroes, but the true man is well aware that far 
from enjoying an immortality of fame, in a generation 
or two, or even in a much shorter time, he will be 
forgotten and the world will get on without him. 

4. Modern philosophy is perplexed at this whole 
question, which is sometimes fairly given up and handed 
over to the realm of faith. The perplexity should not 
be forgotten by us when we attempt to submit the 
Phaedo of Plato to the requirements of logic. For 
what idea can we form of the soul when separated. 



How can the soul be united with the body and still be Independent ? Is the soul related to 
the body as the ideal to the real, or as the whole to the 
parts, or as the subject to the object, or as the cause 
to the effect, or as the end to the means? Shall we 
say with Aristotle, that the soul is the entelechy or form 
of an organized living body ? a life of her own ? Is the Pythagorean image of the 
Harmony, or that of the monad, the truer expression ? 
Is the soul related to the body as sight to the eye, or 
as the boatman to his boat? (Arist. de Anim. ii. i, 
II, 12.) And in another state of being is the soul 
to be conceived of as vanishing into infinity, hardly 
possessing an existence which she can call her own, 
as in the pantheistic system of Spinoza ? or as an 
individual informing another body and entering into 
new relations, but retaining her own character ? Or is the opposition of soul 
and body a mere illusion, and the true self neither soul nor body, but the union of the two in the 'I' which is above them ? And is death the assertion of this 
individuality in the higher nature, and the falling away 
into nothingness of the lower? Or are we vainly 
attempting to pass the boundaries of human thought ? 
The body and the soul seem to be inseparable, not 
only in fact, but in our conceptions of them ; and any 
philosophy which too closely unites them, or too 
widely separates them, either in this life or in another, 
disturbs the balance of human nature. No thinker has 
perfectly adjusted them, or been entirely consistent 
with himself in describing their relation to one another. 
Nor can we wonder that Plato in the infancy of human 
thought should have confused mythology and philo 
sophy, or have mistaken verbal arguments for real 
ones 

5. Again, believing in the immortality of the soul, 
we must still ask the question of Socrates. What is 
that which we suppose to be immortal? Is it the 
personal and individual element in us, or the spiritual 
and universal ? Is it the principle of knowledge or of 
goodness, or the union of the two ? Is it the mere 
force of life which is determined to be, or the con 
sciousness of self which cannot be got rid of, or the 
fire of genius which refuses to be extinguished ? Or 
is there a hidden being which is allied to the Author 
of all existence, who is because he is perfect, and to 
whom our ideas of perfection give us a title to belong ? 
Whatever answer is given by us to these questions, 
there still remains the necessity of allowing the per 
manence of evil, if not for ever, at any rate for a time, 



The immortality of the soul 139 

in order that the wicked ( may not have too good a 
bargain.' For the annihilation of evil at death, or the 
eternal duration of it, seem to involve equal difficulties 
in the moral government of the universe. Sometimes 
we are led by our feelings, rather than by our reason, 
to think of the good and wise only as existing in 
another life. Why should the mean, the weak, the 
idiot, the infant, the herd of men who have never in 
any proper sense the use of reason, reappear with 
blinking eyes in the light of another world ? But our 
second thought is that the hope of humanity is a 
common one, and that all or none will be partakers of 
immortality. Reason does not allow us to suppose 
an y greater c)j"'"is * han nfh<>rc i "*"* 



experience may often r*""al tfl " 



of the higher nature in those whom we had despised. 
Why should the wicked suffer any more than ourselves ? 
had we been placed in their circumstances should we 
have been any better than they ? The worst of men 
are objects of pity rather than of anger to the philan 
thropist ; must they not be equally such to divine 
benevolence? Even more than the good they have 
need of another life; not that they may be punished, 
but that they may be educated. These are a few of 
the reflections which arise in our minds when we 
attempt to assign any form to our conceptions of 
a future state. 

There are some other questions which are disturbing 
to us because we have no answer to them. What is 
to become of the animals in a future state ? Have we 
not seen dogs more faithful and intelligent than men, 

and men who are more stupid and brutal than any 
animals ? Does their life cease at death, or is there 
some 'better thing reserved' also for them? They 
may be said to have a shadow or imitation of morality, 
and imperfect moral claims upon the benevolence of 
man and upon the justice of God. We cannot think 
of the least or lowest of them, the insect, the bird, the 
inhabitants of the sea or the desert, as having any place 
in a future world, and if not all, why should those 
who are specially attached to man be deemed worthy 
of any exceptional privilege ? When we reason about 
such a subject, almost at once we degenerate into 
nonsense. It is a passing thought which has no real 
hold on the mind. We may argue for the existence 
of animals in a future state from the attributes of God, 
or from texts of Scripture (' Are not two sparrows 
sold for one farthing ? ' &c.), but the truth is that we 
are only filling up the void of another world with our 
own fancies. Again, we often talk about the origin 
of evil, that great bugbear of theologians, by which 
they frighten us into believing any superstition. What 
answer can be made to the old commonplace, * Is not 
God the author of evil, if he knowingly permitted, but 
could have prevented it?' Even if we assume that 
the inequalities of this life are rectified by some 
transposition of human beings in another, still the 
existence of the very least evil if it could have been 
avoided, seems to be at variance with the love and 
justice of God. And so we arrive at the conclusion 
that we are carrying logic too far, and that the attempt 
to frame the world according to a rule of divine 



The immortality of the soul 141 

perfection is opposed to experience and had better be 
given up. The case of the animals is our own. We 
must admit that the Divine Being, although perfect 
himself, has placed us in a state of life in which we 
may work together with Himforj>ood, but we are very 
/arjrom hnving nttninrd to it. 

6. Again, ideas must be given through something ; 
and we are always prone to argue about the soul from 
analogies of outward things which may serve to embody 
our thoughts, but are also partly delusive. For we 
cannot reason from the natural to the spiritual, or from 
the outward to the inward. The progress of physio 
logical science, without bringing us nearer to the great 
secret, has tended to remove some erroneous notions 
respecting the relations of body and mind, and in this 
we have the advantage of the ancients. But no one 
imagines that any seed of immortality is to be discerned 
in bur mortal frames. Most people have been content 
to rest their belief in another life on the agreement 
of the more enlightened pan of mankind, and on 
the inseparable connexion of such a doctrine with the 
existence of a God also in a less degree on the 
impossibility of doubting about the continued existence 
of those whom we love and reverence in this world. 
And after all has been said, the figure, the analogy, 
the argument, are felt to be only approximations in 
different forms to an expression of the common senti 
ment of the human heart. That we shall live again is 
far more certain than that we shall take any particular 
form of life. 

7. When we speak of the immortality of the soul, 



142 Phaedo 

we must ask further what wr m ^ n by the word 
immortality. For of the duration of a living being in 
countless ages we can form no conception ; far less 
than a three years' old child of the whole of life. 
The naked eye might as well try to see the furthest 
star in the infinity of heaven. Whether time and space 
really exist when we take away the limits of them may 
be doubted; at any rate the thought of them when 
unlimited is so overwhelming to us as to lose all 
distinctness. Philosophers have spoken of them as 
forms of the human mind, but what is the mind with 
out them ? As then infinite time, or an existence out 
of time, which are the only possible explanations of 
eternal duration, are equally inconceivable to us, let us 
substitute for them a hundred or a thousand years after 
death, and ask not what will be our employment in 
eternity, but what will happen to us in that definite 
portion of time ; or what is now happening to those 
who passed out of life a hundred or a thousand years 
ago. Do we imagine that the wicked are suffering 
torments, or that the good are singing the praises of 
God, during a period longer than that of a whole life, 
or of ten lives of men ? Is the suffering physical or 
mental ? And does the worship of God consist only 
of praise, or of many forms of service ? Who are the 
wicked, and who are the good, whom we venture to 
divide by a hard and fast line ; and in which of the 
two classes should we place ourselves and our friends ? 
May we not suspect that we are making differences of 
kind, because we are unable degree ? putting the whole human race into heaven or hell for the greater convenience of logical division ? 
Are we not at the same time superlatives, only that we may satisfy the demands of 
rhetoric ? What is that pain which does not become 
deadened after a thousand years ? or what is the nature 
of that pleasure or happiness which never wearies by 
monotony ? Earthly pleasures and pains are short in 
proportion as they are keen ; of any others which are 
both intense and lasting we have no experience, and 
can form no idea. The words or figures of speech 
which we use are not consistent with themselves. 
For are we not imagining heaven under the similitude 
of a church, and hell as a prison, or perhaps a mad 
house or chamber of horrors ? And yet to beings 
constituted as we are, the monotony of singing psalms 
would be as great an infliction as the pains of hell, and 
might be even pleasantly interrupted by them. Where 
are the actions worthy of rewards greater than those 
which are conferred on the greatest benefactors of 
mankind ? And where are the crimes which according 
to Plato's merciful reckoning, more merciful, at any 
rate, than the eternal damnation of so-called Christian 
teachers, for every ten years in this life deserve 
a hundred of punishment in the life to come ? We 
should be ready to die of pity if we could see the least 
of the sufferings which the writers of Infernos and 
Purgatorios have attributed to the damned. Yet these 
joys and terrors seem hardly to exercise an appreciable 
influence over the lives of men. The wicked man 
when old, is not, as Plato supposes (Rep. i. 330 D, 
E), more agitated by the terrors of another world 



1 44 Pbaedo 

when he is nearer to them, nor the good in an ecstasy 
at the joys of which he is soon to be the partaker. 
Age numbs the sense of both worlds ; and the habit of 
life is strongest in death. Even the dying mother is 
dreaming of her lost children as they were forty or 
fifty years before, 'pattering over the boards,' not of 
reunion with them in another state of being. Most 
persons when the last hour comes are resigned to the 
order of nature and the will of God. They are not 
thinking of Dante's Inferno or Paradise, or of the 
Pilgrim's Progress. Heavea mLhdLatt-iiOt- 



to them, but words or ideas ; the outward symbols of 
some great mystery, they hardly know what. Many 
noble poems and pictures have been suggested by the 
traditional representations of them, which have been 
fixed in forms of art and can no longer be altered. 
Many sermons have been filled with descriptions of 
celestial or infernal mansions. But hardly even in 
childhood did the thought of heaven and hell supply 
the motives of our actions^ or at any time seriously. 
affect the 



8. Another life must be describeduf at all, in forms 
jjf . thought and tt^/L of eD8e. To draw pictures of 
heaven and hell, whether in the language of Scripture 
or any other, adds nothing to our real knowledge, but 
may perhaps disguise our ignorance. The truest, f" n - 
ception which we can form of a future life is a state of 
progress or education a progress from evil to good, 
from ignorance to knowledge. To this we are led by 
the analogy of the present life, in which we see 
different races and nations of men, and different men 



The immortality of the soul 

and women of the same nation, in various states or 
stages of cultivation ; some more and some less de 
veloped, and all of them capable of improvement under 
favourable circumstances. There are punishments too 
of children when they are growing up inflicted by their 
parents, of elder offenders which are imposed by the 
law of the land, of all men at all times of life, which 
are attached by the laws of nature to the performance 
of certain actions. All these punishments are really 
educational ; that is to say, they are not intended to 
retaliate on the offender, but to teach him a lesson. 
Also there is an element of chance in them, which is 
another name for our ignorance of the laws of nature. 
There is evil too inseparable from good (cp. Lysis 220 
E); not always punished here,, as good" is not always 
rewarded. It is capable of being indefinitely diminished; 
and as knowledge increases, the element of chance may 
more and more disappear. 

For we do not argue merely from the analogy of the 
present state of this world to another, but from the 
analogy of a probable future to which we are tending. 
The greatest changes of which we have had experience 
as yet are due to our increasing knowledge of history 
and of nature. They have been produced by a few 
minds appearing in three or four favoured nations, in a 
comparatively short period of time. May we be allowed 
to imagine the minds of men everywhere working to 
gether during many ages for the completion of our know 
ledge ? May not the science of physiology transform 
the world ? Again, the majority of mankind have really 
experienced some moral improvement ; almost every 

IMO 



Phaedo 

ane feels that he has tendencies to good, and is capable 
/ [>f becoming better. And these germs of good are 
/ often found to be developed by new circumstances, like 
stunted trees when transplanted to a better soil. The 
differences between the savage and the civilized man, or 
between the civilized man in old and new countries, 
may be indefinitely increased. The first difference is 
the effect of a few thousand, the second of a few hun 
dred years. We congratulate ourselves that slavery has 
become industry ; that law and constitutional govern 
ment have superseded despotism and violence ; that 
an ethical religion has taken the place of Fetichism. 
There may yet come a time when the many may be as 
well off as the few ; when no one will be weighed down 
by excessive tftil ; when the necessity of providing for 
the body will not interfere with mental improvement ; 
when the physical frame may be strengthened and 
developed ; and the religion of all men may become a 
reasonable service. 

Nothing therefore, either in the present state of man 
or in the tendencies of the future, as far as we can 
entertain conjecture of them, would lead us to suppose 
that God governs us vindictively in this world, and 
therefore we have no reason to infer that He will govern 
us vindictively in another. The true argument from 
analogy is not, ' This life is a mixed state of justice and 
injustice, of great waste, of sudden casualties, of dis 
proportionate punishments, and therefore the like incon 
sistencies, irregularities, injustices are to be expected in 
another ; ' but * This life is subject to law, and is in a 
state of progress, and therefore law and progress may be 



The immortality of the soul 147 

believed to be the governing principles of another/ All 
the analogies of this world would be against unmeaning 
punishments inflicted a hundred or a thousand years after 
an offence had been committed. Suffering there might be 
as a part of education, but not hopeless or protracted ; 
as there might be a retrogression of individuals or of 
bodies of men, yet not such as to interfere with a plan for 
the improvement of the whole (cp. Laws x. 903). 

9. But some one will say : That we cannot reason 
from the seen to the unseen, and that we are creating 
another world after the image of this, just as men in 
former ages have created gods in their own likeness. 
And we, like the companions of Socrates, may feel 
discouraged at hearing our favourite ' argument from 
analogy* thus summarily disposed of. Like himself, 
too, we may adduce other arguments in which he seems 
to have anticipated us, though he expresses them in 
different language. For we feel that the soul partakes 
of the ideal and invisible ; and can never fall into the 
error of confusing the external circumstances of man 
with his higher self; or his origin with his nature. 
It is as repugnant to us as it was to him to imagine 
that our moral ideas are to be attributed only to cere 
bral forces. The value of a human soul, like the value 
of a man's life to himself, isjanrtimahlc, and cannot be 
reckoned in earthly or material things. The human 
being alone has the consciousness of truth and justice 
and love, which is the consciousness of God. And 
the soul becnaMB^-qngpB^^BQpficJnng of these, becomes 
more consn'oi^ nf hr m j 

10. The last ground of our belief in immortality, and 

L a 



I 



148 Pbaedo 

the strongest, is the perfection of the divine nature. 
The mere fact of the Existence of God does not tend 
to show the continued existence of man. An evil God 
or an indifferent God might have had the power, but 
not the will, to preserve us. He might have regarded 
us as fitted to minister to his service by a succession 
of existences, like the animals, without attributing to 
each soul an incomparable value. But if he is perfect, 
he must will that all rational beings should partake of 
that perfection which he himself is. In the words of 
the Timaeus, he is good, and therefore he desires that all 
other things should be as like himself as possible. And 
the manner in which he accomplishes this is by permit 
ting evil, or rather degrees of good, which are otherwise 
called evil. For all progress is good relatively to the 
past, and yet may be comparatively evil when regarded 
in the light of the future. Good and evil are relative 
terms, and degrees of evil are merely the negative aspect 
of degrees of good. Of the absolute goodness of any 
finite nature we can form no conception ; we are all of 
us in process of transition from one degree of good or 
evil to another. The difficulties which are urged about 
the origin or existence of evil are mere dialectical puzzles, 
standing in the same relation to Christian philosophy as 
the puzzles of the Cynics and Megarians to the philo 
sophy of Plato. They arise out of the tendency of 
the human mind to regard good and evil both as relative 
and absolute ; just as the riddles about motion are to be 
explained by the double conception of space or matteri 
which the human mind has the power of regarding either 
as continuous or discrete. 



The immortality of the soul 149 

In speaking of divine perfection, we mean to say that 
God is just and true and loving, the author of order 
and not of disorder, of good and not of evil. Or 
rather, that he is justice, that he is truth, that he is 
love, that he is order, that he is the very progress of 
which we were speaking; and that wherever these 
qualities are present, whether in the human soul or in 
the order of nature, there is God. We might still see 
him everywhere, if we had not been mistakenly seeking 
for him apart from us, instead of in us ; away from the 
laws of nature, instead of in them. And we become 
united to him not by mystical absorption, but by par 
taking, whether consciously or unconsciously, of that 
truth and justice and love which he himself is. 

Thus the belief in the immortality of the soul rests 
at last on the belief in God. If there is a pood and 
wise God, then there is a progress of mankind towards 
Infection ; and if there is no progress of men towards 
perfection, then there is no good and wise God. We 
cannot suppose that the moral government of God of 
which we see the beginnings in the world and in our 
selves will cease when we pass out of life. 

1 1 . Considering the * feebleness of the human facul 
ties and the uncertainty of the subject,' we are inclined 
to believe that the fewer our words the better. At the 
approach of death there is not much said ; good men 
are too honest to go out of the world professing more 
than they know. There is perhaps no important 
subject about which, at any time, even religious people 
speak so little to one another. In the fullness of life 



i f o Phaedo 

the thought of death is mostly awakened by the sight 
or recollection of the death of others rather than by the 
prospect of our own. We must also acknowledge that 
there are degrees of the belief in immortality, and many 
forms in which it presents itself to the mind. Some 
persons will say no more than that they trust in God, 
and that they leave all to Him. It is a great part of 
true religion not to pretend to know more than we do. 
Others when they quit this world are comforted with 
the hope * That they will see and know their friends in 
heaven.' But it is better to leave them in the hands of 
God and to be assured that ' no evil shall touch them.' 
There are others again to whom the belief in a divine 
personality has ceased to have any longer a meaning; 
yet they are satisfied that the end of all is not here, but 
that something still remains to us, ' and some better 
thing for the good than for the evil.' They are 
persuaded, in spite of their theological nihilism, that 
the ideas of justice and truth and holiness and love are 
realities. They cherish an enthusiastic devotion to the 
first principles of morality. Through these they see, 
or seem to see, darkly, and in a figure, that the soul 
is immortal. 

But besides differences of theological opinion which 
must ever prevail about things unseen, the hope 
of immortality is weaker or stronger In men at one 
time of life than at another ; it even varies from day to 
day. It comes and goes ; the mind, like the sky, is 
apt to be overclouded. Other generations of men may 
have sometimes lived under an ' eclipse of faith,' to us 
the total disappearance of it might be compared to the 



The immortality of the soul 

'sun falling from heaven.' And we may sometimes 
have to begin again and acquire the belief for ourselves ; 
or to win it back again when it is lost. It is really 
weakest in the hour of death. For Nature, like a kind 
mother or nurse, lays us to sleep without frightening 
us ; physicians, who are the witnesses of such scenes, 
say that under ordinary circumstances there is no fear 
of the future. 



^Tim. 8 1 D.) When 

the end is still uncertain, the cry of many a one has 
been, ' Pray, that I may be taken.' The last thoughts 
even of the best men depend chiefly on the accidents of 
their bodily state. Pain soon_ 
of life ; old-age, like the child, is laid to sleep almost 
in a moment. The long experience of life will often 
destroy the interest which mankind hare in it. So 
various are the feelings with which different persons 
draw near to death ; and still more various the forms 
in which imagination clothes it. For this alternation of 
feeling cp.the Old Testament, Psalm vi. 5, xvi. 10, xc; 
Isaiah xxxviii. 1 8 ; Eccles. viii. 8 ff., iii. 19, iv. 2. 

12. When we think of God and of man in his 
relation to God; of the imperfection of our present 
state and yet of the progress which is observable in the 
history of the world and of the human mind; of the 
depth and power of our moral ideas which seem to 
partake of the very nature of God Himself; when we 
consider the contrast between the physical laws to 
which we are subject and the higher law which raises 
us above them and is yet a part of them ; when we 
reflect on our capacity of becoming the ' spectators of 



1 5" 2 Phaedo 

all time and all existence,' and of framing in our own 
minds the ideal of a perfect Being ; when we see how 
the human mind in all the higher religions of the world, 
including Buddhism, notwithstanding some aberrations, 
has tended towards such a belief we have reason to 
think that our destiny is different from that of animals ; 
and though we cannot altogether shut out the childish 
fear that the soul upon leaving the body may 'vanish 
into thin air,' we have still, so far as the nature of the 
subject admits, a hope of "nmr f aVy w ifk *M"^ 
comfort ourselves on sufficient grounds. The_jjenial~- 
of the belief takes the heart out of human life ; it 
kacgsgjen to the levelrfjhEJmnaL As Goethe 
also says, * He is dead even in this world who has ao 
belief in another/ 

^ *^^M^^^^^^^^^ 

13. It is well also that we should sometimes think 
of the forms of thought under which the idea of 
immortality is most naturally presented to us. It is 
clear that to our minds the risen soul can no longer be 
described, as in a picture, by the symbol of a creature 
half-bird, half-human, nor in any other form of sense. 
The multitude of angels, as in Milton, singing the 
Almighty's praises, are a noble image, and may furnish 
a theme for the poet or the painter, but they are no 
longer an adequate expression of the kingdom of God 
which is within us. Neither is there any mansion, in 
this world or another, in which the departed can be 
imagined to dwell and carry on their occupations. 
When this earthly tabernacle is dissolved, no other 
habitation or building can take them in : it is in the 
language of ideas onlutejye pek0f thtm. 



The immortality of the soul 1 5-3 

First of all there is the thought of rest and freedom 
from pain ; they have gone home, as the common 
saying is, and the cares of this world touch them no 
more. Secondly, we may imagine them as they were 
at their best and brightest, humbly fulfilling their daily 
round of duties selfless, childlike, unaffected by the 
world ; when the eye was single and the whole body 
seemed to be full of light; when the mind was clear 
and saw into the purposes of God. Thirdly, we may 
think of them as possessed by a great love of God and 
man, working out His will at a further stage in the 
heavenly pilgrimage. And yet we acknowledge that 
these are the things which eye hath not seen nor ear 
heard, and therefore it hath not entered into the heart 
of man in any sensible manner to conceive them. 
Fourthly, there may have been some moments in our 
own lives when we have risen above ourselves, or been 
conscious of our truer selves, in which the will of God 
has superseded our wills, and we have entered into 
communion with Him, and been partakers for a brief 
season of the Divine truth and love, in which like 
Christ we have been inspired to utter the prayer, ' I in 
them, and Thou in Me, that we may be all made perfect 
in one.' These precious moments, if we have ever 
known them, are the nearest approach which we con 
make to the idea of immortality. 

14. Returning now to the earlier stage of human 
thought which is represented by the writings of 
Plato, we find that many of the same questions have 
already arisen : there is the same tendency to material- 



1 74 Phaedo 

ism ; the same inconsistency in the application of the 
idea of mind ; the same doubt whether the soul is to 
be regarded as a cause or as an effect ; the same falling 
back on moral convictions. In the Phaedo the soul is 
conscious of her divine nature, and the separation from 
the body which has been commenced in this life is 
perfected in another. Beginning in mystery, Socrates, 
in the intermediate part of the Dialogue, attempts to 
bring the doctrine of a future life into connexion with 
his theory of knowledge. In proportion as he succeeds 
in this, the individual seems to disappear in a more 
general notion of the soul ; the contemplation of ideas 
'under the form of eternity* takes the place of past 
and future states of existence. His language may be 
compared to that of some modern philosophers, who 
speak of eternity, not in the sense of perpetual duration 
of time, but as an ever-present quality of the soul. 
Yet at the conclusion of the Dialogue, having ' arrived 
at the end of the intellectual word* (Rep. vii. 532 B), 
he replaces the veil of mythology, and describes the 
soul and her attendant genius in the language of the 
mysteries or of a disciple of Zoroaster. Nor can we 
fairly demand of Plato a consistency which is wanting 
among ourselves, who acknowledge that another world 
is beyond the range of human thought, and yet are 
always seeking to represent the mansions of heaven or 
hell in the colours of the painter, or b the descriptions 
of the poet or rhetorician. 

15. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul was 
not new to the Greeks in the age of Socrates, but, like 
the unity of God, had a foundation in the popular belief. 



The immortality of the soul iff 

The old Homeric notion of a gibbering ghost flitting 
away to Hades ; or of a few illustrious heroes 
enjoying the isles of the blest; or of an existence 
divided between the two ; or the Hesiodic, of righteous 
spirits, who become guardian angels, had given place 
in the mysteries and the Orphic poets to representations, 
partly fanciful, of a future state of rewards and punish 
ments. (Laws ix. 870.) The reticence of the Greeks 
on public occasions and in some part of their literature 
respecting this 'underground' religion, is not to be 
taken as a measure of the diffusion of such beliefs. 
If Pericles in the funeral oration is silent on the 
consolations of immortality, the poet Pindar and the 
tragedians on the other hand constantly assume the 
continued existence of the dead in an upper or under 
world. Darius and Laius are still alive; Antigone 
will be dear to her brethren after death ; the way to 
the palace of Cronos is found by those who 'have 
thrice departed from evil.' The tragedy of the 
Greeks is not 'rounded' by this life, but is deeply 
set in decrees of fate and mysterious workings of 
powers beneath the earth. In the caricature of 
Aristophanes there is also a witness to the common 
sentiment. The Ionian and Pythagorean philosophies 
arose, and some new elements were added to the 
popular belief. The individual must find an expression 
as well as the world. Either the soul was supposed 
to exist in the form of a magnet, or of a particle of 
fire, or of light, or air, or water ; or of a number or 
of a harmony of number; or to be or have, like the 
stars, a principle of motion (Arist. de Anim. i. i, 



Phaedo 

2, 3). At length Anaxagoras, hardly distinguishing 
between life and mind, or between mind human and 
divine, attained the pure abstraction ; and this, like 
the other abstractions of Greek philosophy, sank deep 
into the human intelligence. The opposition of the 
intelligible and the sensible, and of God to the world, 
supplied an analogy which assisted in the separation 
of soul and body. If ideas were separable from 
phenomena, mind was also separable from matter; 
if the ideas were eternal, the mind that conceived them 
was eternal too. As the unity of God was more 
distinctly acknowledged, the conception of the human 
soul became more developed. The succession, or 
alternation of life and death, had occurred to Heracleitus. 
The Eleatic Parmenides had stumbled upon the modern 
thesis, that ' thought and being are the same.' The 
Eastern belief in transmigration defined the sense of 
individuality; and some, like Empedocles, fancied 
that the blood which they had shed in another state 
of being was crying against them, and that for thirty 
thousand years they were to be ' fugitives and vagabonds 
upon the earth.' The desire of recognizing a lost 
mother or love or friend in the world below (Phaedo 
68) was a natural feeling which, in that age as well as 
in every other, has given distinctness to the hope of 
immortality. .Nor were ethical considerations wanting, 
partly derived from the necessity of punishing the 
greater sort of criminals, whom no avenging power 
of this world could reach. The voice of conscience, 
too, was heard reminding the good man that he was 
not altogether innocent. (Rep. i. 330.) To these 



The immortality of the soul 177 

indistinct longings and fears an expression was given 
in the mysteries and Orphic poets : a ' heap of books ' 
(Rep. ii. 364 E), passing under the names of Musaeus 
and Orpheus in Plato's time, were filled with notions 
of an under-world. 

1 6. Yet after all the belief in the individuality of the 
soul after death had but a feeble hold on the Greek 
mind. Like the personality of God, the personality of 
man in a future state was not inseparably bound up with 
the reality of his existence. For the distinction between 
the personal and impersonal, and also between the divine 
and human, was far less marked to the Greek than to 
ourselves. And as Plato readily passes from the 
notion of the good to that of God, he also passes almost 
imperceptibly to himself and his reader from the future 
life of the individual soul to the eternal being of the 
absolute soul. There has been a clearer statement and 
a clearer denial of the belief in modern times than is 
found in early Greek philosophy, and hence the com 
parative silence on the whole subject which is often 
remarked in ancient writers, and particularly in Aristotle. 
For Plato and Aristotle are not further removed in their 
teaching about the immortality of the soul than they are 
in their theory of knowledge. 

17. Living in an age when logic was beginning to 
mould human thought, Plato naturally cast his belief in 
immortality into a logical form. And when we consider 
how much the doctrine of ideas was also one of words, 
it is not surprising that he should have fallen into verbal 
fallacies: early logic is always mistaking the truth of 
the form for the truth of the matter. It is easy to see 



1 5- 8 Pbaedo 

that the alternation of opposites is not the same as the 
generation of them out of each other; and that the 
generation of them out of each other, which is the first 
argument in the Phaedo, is at variance with their mutual 
exclusion of each other, whether in themselves or in us, 
which is the last. For even if we admit the distinction 
which he draws at p. 103, between the opposites and 
the things which have the opposites, still individuals fall 
under the latter class ; and we have to pass out of the 
region of human hopes and fears to a conception of an 
abstract soul which is the impersonation of the ideas. 
Such a conception, which in Plato himself is but half 
expressed, is unmeaning to us, and relative only to a 
particular stage in the history of thought. The doc 
trine of reminiscence is also a fragment of a former 
world, which has no place in the philosophy of modern 
times. But Plato had the wonders of psychology just 
opening to him, and he had not the explanation of them 
which is supplied by the analysis of language and the 
history of the human mind. The question, ' Whence 
come our abstract ideas ? ' he could only answer by an 
imaginary hypothesis. Nor is it difficult to see that 
his crowning argument is purely verbal, and is but the 
expression of an instinctive confidence put into a logical 
form: 'The soul is immortal because it contains a 
principle of imperishableness.' Nor does he himself 
seem at all to be aware that nothing is added to human 
knowledge by his ' safe and simple answer,' that beauty 
is the cause of the beautiful ; and that he is merely 
reasserting the Eleatic being ' divided by the Pythagorean 
numbers,' against the Heracleitean doctrine of perpetual 



The immortality of the soul i 79 

generation. The answer to the 'very serious question' 
of generation and destruction is really the denial of them. 
For this he would substitute, as in the Republic, a 
system of ideas, tested, not by experience, but by their 
consequences, and not explained by actual causes, but 
by a higher, that is, a more general notion. Consistency 
with themselves is the only test which is to be applied 
to them. (Rep. vi. 510 foil., and Phaedo 101 foil.) 

1 8. To deal fairly with such arguments, they should 
be translated as far as possible into their modern equi 
valents. * If the ideas of men are eternal, their souls 
are eternal, and if not the ideas, then not the souls/ 
Such an argument stands nearly in the same relation to 
Plato and his age, as the argument from the existence 
of God to immortality among ourselves. ' If God 
exists, then the soul exists after death ; and if there is 
no God, there is no existence of the soul after death/ 
For the ideas are to his mind the reality, the truth, the 
principle of permanence, as well as of intelligence and 
order in the world. When Simmias and Cebes say 
that they are more strongly persuaded of the existence 
of ideas than they are of the immortality of the soul, 
they represent fairly enough the order of thought in 
Greek philosophy. And we might say in the same 
way that we are more certain of the existence of God 
than we are of the immortality of the soul, and are led 
by the belief in the one to a belief in the other. The 
parallel, as Socrates would say, is not perfect, but 
agrees in as far as the mind in either case is re 
garded as dependent on some thing above and beyond 
herself. The analogy may even be pressed a step 



i do Phaedo 

further: 'We are more certain of our ideas of truth 
and right than we are of the existence of God, and are 
led on in the order of thought from one to the other.' 
Or more correctly: 'The existence of right and truth 
is the existence of God, and can never for a moment 
be separated from Him.' 

19. The main argument of the Phaedo is derived 
from the existence of eternal ideas of which the soul 
is a partaker ; the other argument of the alternation of 
opposites is replaced by this. And there have not been 
wanting philosophers of the idealist school who have 
imagined that the doctrine of the immortality of the 
soul is a theory of knowledge, and that in what has 
preceded Plato is accommodating himself to the popular 
belief. Such a view can only be elicited from the 
Phaedo by what may be termed the transcendental 
method of interpretation, and is obviously inconsistent 
with the Gorgias and the Republic. Those who 
maintain it are immediately compelled to renounce the 
shadow which they have grasped, as a play of words 
only. But the truth is, that Plato in his argument for 
the immortality of the soul has collected many elements 
of proof or persuasion, ethical and mythological as well 
as dialectical, which are not easily to be reconciled with 
one another ; and he is as much in earnest about his 
doctrine of retribution, which is repeated in all his more 
ethical writings, as about his theory of knowledge. And 
while we may fairly translate the dialectical into the lan- 
guageof Hegel, and the religious and mythological into the 
language of Dante or Bunyan, the ethical speaks to us 
still in the same voice, and appeals to a common feeling. 



The immortality of the soul 161 

20. Two arguments of this ethical character occur 
in the Phaedo. The first may be described as the 
aspiration of the soul after another state of being. 
Like the Oriental or Christian mystic, the philosopher 
is seeking to withdraw from impurities of sense, to 
leave the world and the things of the world, and to 
find his higher self. Plato recognizes in these aspira 
tions the foretaste of immortality ; as Butler and 
Addison in modern times have argued, the one from 
the moral tendencies of mankind, the other from the 
progress of the soul towards perfection. In using this 
argument Plato has certainly confused the soul which 
has left the body, with the soul of the good and wise. 
(Cp. Rep. x. 6n C.) Such a confusion was natural, 
and arose partly out of the antithesis of soul and 
body. The soul in her own essence, and the soul 
' clothed upon ' with virtues and graces, were easily 
interchanged with one another, because on a subject 
which passes expression the distinctions of language 
can hardly be maintained. 

21. The other ethical proof of the immortality of 
the soul is derived from the necessity of retribution. 
The wicked would be too well off if their evil deeds 
came to" an end. It is not to be supposed that an 
Ardiaeus, an Archelaus, an Ismenias could ever have 
suffered the penalty of their crimes in this world. 
The manner in which this retribution is accomplished 
Plato represents under the figures of mythology. 
Doubtless he felt that it was easier to improve than 
to invent, and that in religion especially the traditional 
form was required in order to give verisimilitude to the 

ia.o M 



162 Phaedo 

myth. The myth too is far more probable to that age 
than to ours, and may fairly be regarded as ' one guess 
among many ' about the nature of the earth, which he 
cleverly supports by the indications of geology. Not 
that he insists on the absolute truth of his own particular 
notions: 'no man of sense will be confident in such 
matters ; but he will be confident that something of the 
kind is true' (114 D). As in other passages (Gorg. 
527 A, Tim. 29 D; cp. Crito, 107 B), he wins belief 
for his fictions by the moderation of his statements ; 
he does not, like Dante or Swedenborg, allow himself 
to be deceived by his own creations. 

The Dialogue must be read in the light of the 
situation. And first of all we are struck by the calm 
ness of the scene. Like the spectators at the time, 
we cannot pity Socrates ; his mien and his language are 
so noble and fearless. He is the same that he ever 
was, but milder and gentler, and he has in no degree 
lost his interest in dialectics ; he will not forgo the 
delight of an argument in compliance with the jailer's 
intimation that he should not heat himself with talking. 
At such a time he naturally expresses the hope of his 
life, that he has been a true mystic and not a mere 
routineer or wand-bearer : and he refers to passages of 
his personal history. To his old enemies the Comic 
poets, and to the proceedings on the trial, he alludes 
playfully ; but he vividly remembers the disappointment 
which he felt in reading the books of Anaxagoras. 
The return of Xanthippe and his children indicates 
that the philosopher is not ' made of oak or rock.' 



The character of Socrates 

Some other traits of his character may be noted ; for 
example, the courteous manner in which he inclines his 
head to the last objector, or the ironical touch, 4 Me 
already, as the tragic poet would say, the voice of fate 
calls ' ; or the depreciation of the arguments with which 
' he comforted himself and them ' ; or his fear of 
* misology ' ; or his references to Homer ; or the 
playful smile with which he ' talks like a book ' about 
greater and less ; or the allusion to the possibility of 
finding another teacher among barbarous races (cp. 
Polit. 262 D) ; or the mysterious reference to another 
science (mathematics ?) of generation and destruction 
for which he is vainly feeling. There is no change in 
him ; only now he is invested with a sort of sacred 
character, as the prophet or priest of Apollo the God 
of the festival, in whose honour he first of all composes 
a hymn, and then like the swan pours forth his dying 
lay. Perhaps the extreme elevation of Socrates above 
his own situation, and the ordinary interests of life 
(compare his/i cFetprit about his burial, in which for 
a moment he puts on the ' Silenus mask '), create in the 
mind of the reader an impression stronger than could be 
derived from arguments that such a one has in him * a 
principle which does not admit of death.' 

The other persons of the Dialogue may be con 
sidered under two heads : (i) private friends : (2) the 
respondents in the argument. 

First there is Crito, who has been already introduced 
to us in the Euthydemus and the Crito ; he is the equal 
in years of Socrates, and stands in quite a different 

M 2 



1 6\ Phaedo 

relation to him from his younger disciples. He is 
a man of the world who is rich and prosperous (cp. 
the jest in the Euthydemus, 304 C), the best friend of 
Socrates, who wants to know his commands, in whose 
presence he talks to his family, and who performs the 
last duty of closing his eyes. It is observable too that, 
as in the Euthydemus, Crito shows no aptitude for 
philosophical discussions. Nor among the friends of 
Socrates must the jailer be forgotten, who seems to 
have been introduced by Plato in order to show the 
impression made by the extraordinary man on the 
common. The gentle nature of the man is indicated 
by his weeping at the announcement of his errand and 
then turning away, and also by the words of Socrates 
to his disciples : * How charming the man is ! since I 
have been in prison he has been always coming to me, 
and is as good as could be to me.' We are reminded 
too that he has retained this gentle nature amid scenes 
of death and violence by the contrasts which he draws 
between the behaviour of Socrates and of others when 
about to die. 

Another person who takes no part in the philoso- | 
phical discussion is the excitable Apollodorus, the 
same who, in the Symposium, of which he is the 
narrator, is called ' the madman,' and who testifies his 
grief by the most violent emotions. Phaedo is also 
present, the ' beloved disciple ' as he may be termed, 
who is described, if not ' leaning on his bosom,' as 
seated next to Socrates, who is playing with his hair. 
He too, like Apollodorus, takes no part in the discus 
sion, but he loves above all things to hear and speak of 



The friends of Socrates 16 f 

Socrates after his death. The calmness of his be 
haviour, veiling his face when he can no longer restrain 
his tears, contrasts with the passionate outcries of the 
other. At a particular point the argument is described 
as falling before the attack of Simmias. A sort of 
despair is introduced in the minds of the company. 
The effect of this is heightened by the description of 
Phaedo, who has been the eye-witness of the scene, 
and by the sympathy of his Phliasian auditors who 
are beginning to think ' that they too can never trust 
an argument again.' And the intense interest of the 
company is communicated not only to the first auditors, 
but to us who in a distant country read the narrative of 
their emotions after more than two thousand years have 
passed away. 

The two principal interlocutors are Simmias and 
Cebes, the disciples of Philolaus the Pythagorean philoso 
pher of Thebes. Simmias is described in the Phaedrus 
(242 B) as fonder of an argument than any man living; 
and Cebes, although finally persuaded by Socrates, is 
said to be the most incredulous of human beings. It 
is Cebes who at the commencement of the Dialogue 
asks why ' suicide is held to be unlawful/ and who 
first supplies the doctrine of recollection in confirmation 
of the pre-existence of the soul. It is Cebes who 
urges that the pre-existence does not necessarily involve 
the future existence of the soul, as is shown by the 
illustration of the weaver and his coat. Simmias, on 
the other hand, raises the question about harmony and 
the lyre, which is naturally put into the mouth of 
a Pythagorean disciple. It is Simmias, too, who first 



1 66 Date of the Phaedo 

remarks on the uncertainty of human knowledge, and 
only at last concedes to the argument such a qualified 
approval as is consistent with the feebleness of the 
human faculties. Cebes is the deeper and more con 
secutive thinker, Simmiasmore superficial and rhetorical; 
they are distinguished in much the same manner as 
Adeimantus and Glaucon in the Republic. 

Other persons, Menexenus, Ctesippus, Lysis, are 
old friends ; Evenus has been already satirized in the 
Apology ; Aeschines and Epigenes were present at the 
trial ; Euclid and Terpsion will reappear in the Intro 
duction to the Theaetetus, Hermogenes has already 
appeared in the Cratylus. No inference can fairly be 
drawn from the absence of Aristippus, nor from the 
omission of Xenophon, who at the time of Socrates' 
death was in Asia. The mention of Plato's own 
absence seems like an expression of sorrow, and may, 
perhaps, be an indication that the report of the con 
versation is not to be taken literally. 

The place of the Dialogue in the series is doubtful. 
The doctrine of ideas is certainly carried beyond the 
Socratic point of view ; in no other of the writings of 
Plato is the theory of them so completely developed. 
Whether the belief in immortality can be attributed 
to Socrates or not is uncertain ; the silence of the 
Memorabilia, and of the earlier Dialogues of Plato, is 
an argument to the contrary. Yet in the Cyropaedia 
Xenophon (viii. 7, 19 foil.) has put language into the 
mouth of the dying Cyrus which recalls the Phaedo, 
and may have been derived from the teaching of 
Socrates. It may be fairly urged that the greatest 



/// relation to other Dialogues 167 

religious interest of mankind could not have been 
wholly ignored by one who passed his life in fulfilling 
the commands of an oracle, and who recognized 
a Divine plan in man and nature. (Xen. Mem. 1 , 4.) 
And the language of the Apology and of the Crito 
confirms this view. 

The Phaedo is not one of the Socratic Dialogues of 
Plato ; nor, on the other hand, can it be assigned to 
that later stage of the Platonic writings at which the 
doctrine of ideas appears to be forgotten. It belongs 
rather to the intermediate period of the Platonic 
philosophy, which roughly corresponds to the Phaedrus, 
Gorgias, Republic, Theaetetus. Without pretending to 
determine the real time of their composition, the 
Symposium, Meno, Euthyphro, Apology, Phaedo may 
be conveniently read by us in this order as illustrative 
of the life of Socrates. Another chain may be formed 
of the Meno, Phaedrus, Phaedo, in which the immor 
tality of the soul is connected with the doctrine of 
ideas. In the Meno the theory of ideas is based on 
the ancient belief in transmigration, which reappears 
again in the Phaedrus as well as in the Republic and 
Timaeus, and in all of them is connected with a doc 
trine of retribution. In the Phaedrus the immortality 
of the soul is supposed to rest on the conception of the 
soul as a principle of motion, whereas in the Republic 
the argument turns on the natural continuance of the 
soul, which, if not destroyed by her own proper evil, 
can hardly be destroyed by any other. The soul of 
man in the Timaeus (42 foil.) is derived from the 
Supreme Creator, and either returns after death to her 



1 68 /// relation to earlier philosophy 

kindred star, or descends into the lower life of an 
animal. The Apology expresses the same view as 
the Phaedo, but with less confidence ; there the proba 
bility of death being a long sleep is not excluded. 
The Theaetetus also describes, in a digression, the 
desire of the soul to fly away and be with God ' and 
to fly to him is to be like him' (176 B). The 
Symposium may be observed to resemble as well as to 
differ from the Phaedo. While the first notion of 
immortality is only in the way of natural procreation 
or of posthumous fame and glory, the higher revelation 
of beauty, like the good in the Republic, is the vision 
of the eternal idea. So deeply rooted in Plato's mind 
is the belief in immortality; so various are the forms of 
expression which he employs. 

As in several other Dialogues, there is more of 
system in the Phaedo than appears at first sight. 
The succession of arguments is based on previous 
philosophies ; beginning with the mysteries and the 
Heracleitean alternation of opposites, and proceeding 
to the Pythagorean harmony and transmigration; making 
a step by the aid of Platonic reminiscence, and a further 
step by the help of the vovs of Anaxagoras; until at 
last we rest in the conviction that the soul is inseparable 
from the ideas, and belongs to the world of the invisible 
and unknown. Then, as in the Gorgias or Republic, 
the curtain falls, and the veil of mythology descends 
upon the argument. After the confession of Socrates 
that he is an interested party, and the acknowledgment 
that no man of sense will think the details of his 
narrative true, but that something of the kind is true, 



Difficulties of Interpretation 169 

we return from speculation to practice. He is himself 
more confident of immortality than he is of his own 
arguments ; and the confidence which he expresses is 
less strong than that which his cheerfulness and com 
posure in death inspire in us. 

Difficulties of two kinds occur in the Phaedo one 
kind to be explained out of contemporary philosophy, 
the other not admitting of an entire solution, (i) The 
difficulty which Socrates says that he experienced in 
explaining generation and corruption ; the assumption 
of hypotheses which proceed from the less general to 
the more general, and are tested by their consequences ; 
the puzzle about greater and less; the resort to the 
method of ideas, which to us appear only abstract 
terms, these are to be explained out of the position 
of Socrates and Plato in the history of philosophy. 
They were living in a twilight between the sensible and 
the intellectual world, and saw no way of connecting 
them. They could neither explain the relation of 
ideas to phenomena, nor their correlation to one another. 
The very idea of relation or comparison was embarrass 
ing to them. Yet in this intellectual uncertainty they 
had a conception of a proof from results, and of 
a moral truth, which remained unshaken amid the 
questionings of philosophy. (2) The other is a diffi 
culty which is touched upon in the Republic as well as 
in the Phaedo, and is common to modern and ancient 
philosophy. Plato is not altogether satisfied with his 
safe and simple method of ideas. He wants to have 
proved to him by facts that all things are for the best, 
and that there is one mind or design which pervades 



170 The Dialogue a Drama 

them all. But this ' power of the best ' he is unable 
to explain ; and therefore takes refuge in universal 
ideas. And are not we at this day seeking to discover 
that which Socrates in a glass darkly foresaw ? 

Some resemblances to the Greek drama may be 
noted in all the Dialogues of Plato. The Phaedo is 
the tragedy of which Socrates is the protagonist and 
Simmias and Cebes the secondary performers, stand 
ing to them in the same relation as to Glaucon 
and Adeimantus in the Republic. No Dialogue has 
a greater unity of subject and feeling. Plato has 
certainly fulfilled the condition of Greek, or rather of 
all art, which requires that scenes of death and suffering 
should be clothed in beauty. The gathering of the 
friends at the commencement of the Dialogue, the dis 
missal of Xanthippe, whose presence would have been 
out of place at a philosophical discussion, but who 
returns again with her children to take a final farewell, 
the dejection of the audience at the temporary overthrow 
of the argument, the picture of Socrates playing with 
the hair of Phaedo, the final scene in which Socrates 
alone retains his composure are masterpieces of art. 
And the chorus at the end might have interpreted the 
feeling of the play : * There can no evil happen to 
a good man in life or death.' 

* The art of concealing art ' is nowhere more perfect 
than in those writings of Plato which describe the trial 
and death of Socrates. Their charm is their simplicity, 
which gives them verisimilitude; and yet they touch, 
as if incidentally, and because they were suitable to the 
occasion, on some of the deepest truths of philosophy. 



Its artistic beauty 171 

There is nothing in any tragedy, ancient or modern, 
nothing in poetry or history (with one exception), like 
the last hours of Socrates in Plato. The master could 
not be more fitly occupied at such a time than in 
discoursing of immortality ; nor the disciples more 
divinely consoled. The arguments, taken in the spirit 
and not in the letter, are our arguments ; and Socrates 
by anticipation may be even thought to refute some 
' eccentric notions ' current in our own age. For there 
are philosophers among ourselves who do not seem to 
understand how much stronger is the power of intelli 
gence, or of the best, than of Atlas, or mechanical force. 
How far the words attributed to Socrates were actually 
uttered by him we forbear to ask ; for no answer can 
be given to this question. And it is better to resign 
ourselves to the feeling of a great work, than to linger 
among critical uncertainties. 



PHAEDO 

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE 

PHAEDO, <who is the narrator APOLLODORUS. 

of the Dialogue to Si MM I AS. 

EC hecrates of Phllus. CEBES. 

SOCRATES. CRITO. 

ATTENDANT OF THE PRISON. 

Scene: The Prison of Socrates. 
Place of the Narration : Phlius. 

steph. Echecrates. ~\ T 7"ERE you yourself, Phaedo, in the 

57 VV prison with Socrates on the day.

Were you in the prison when he drank the poison ? 

Phaedo. Yes, Echecrates, I was. 

Ech. I should so like to hear about his death. What 
did he say in his last hours ? We were informed that 
he died by taking poison, but no one knew anything 
more ; for no Phliasian ever goes to Athens now, and 
it is a long time since any stranger from Athens has 
found his way hither ; so that we had no clear account. 

58 Phaed. Did you not hear of the proceedings at the 
trial ? 

Ech. Yes ; some one told us about the trial, and we 
could not understand why, having been condemned, he 
should have been put to death, not at the time, but long 
afterwards. What was the reason of this ? 

Phaed. An accident, Echecrates : the stern of the 
ship which the Athenians send to Delos happened to 
have been crowned on the day before he was tried. 



The narrative of Phaedo 173 

Eeh. What is this ship ? 

Phaed. It is the ship in which, according to 
Athenian tradition, Theseus went to Crete when he 
took with him the fourteen youths, and was the saviour 
of them and of himself. And they are said to have 
vowed to Apollo at the time, that if they were saved 
they would send a yearly mission to Delos. Now this 
custom still continues, and the whole period of the 
voyage to and from Delos, beginning when the priest of 
Apollo crowns the stern of the ship, is a holy season, 
during which the city is not allowed to be polluted by 
public executions ; and when the vessel is detained by 
contrary winds, the time spent in going and returning is 
very considerable. As I was saying, the ship was 
crowned on the day before the trial, and this was the 
reason why Socrates lay in prison and was not put to 
death until long after he was condemned. 

Ech. What was the manner of his death, Phaedo ? 
What was said or done ? And which of his friends 
were with him ? Or did the authorities forbid them to 
be present so that he had no friends near him when 
he died? 

Phaed. No ; there were several of them with him. 

Ecb. If you have nothing to do, I wish that you 
would tell me what passed, as exactly as you can. 

Phaed. I have nothing at all to do, and will try 
to gratify your wish. To be reminded of Socrates is 
always the greatest delight to me, whether I speak 
myself or hear another speak of him. 

Ech. You will have listeners who are of the same 



174 The last morning 



mind with you, and I hope that you will be as exact as 
you can. 

Phaed. I had a singular feeling at being in his 
company. For I could hardly believe that I was present 
at the death of a friend, and therefore I did not pity 
him, Echecrates ; he died so fearlessly, and his words 
and bearing were so noble and gracious, that to me 
he appeared blessed. I thought that in going to the 
other world he could not be without a divine call, and 
59 that he would be happy, if any man ever was, when he 
arrived there ; and therefore I did not pity him as might 
have seemed natural at such an hour. But I had not 
the pleasure which I usually feel in philosophical dis 
course (for philosophy was the theme of which we 
spoke). I was pleased, but in the pleasure there was 
also a strange admixture of pain ; for I reflected that he 
was soon to die, and this double feeling was shared by us 
all ; we were laughing and weeping by turns, especially 
the excitable Apollodorus, you know the sort of man ? 

Ech. Yes. 

Phaed. He was quite beside himself; and I and all 
of us were greatly moved. 

Ech. Who were present ? 

Phaed. Of native Athenians there were, besides 
Apollodorus, Critobulus and his father Crito, Hermo- 
genes, Epigenes, Aeschines, Antisthenes ; likewise 
Ctesippus of the deme of Paeania, Menexenus, and 
some others. Plato, if I am not mistaken, was ill.


Were there any strangers? 

Phaed. Yes, there were ; Simmias the Theban, and 



Socrates and Xanthtppt 

Cebes, and Phaedondes ; Euclid and Terpsion, who 
came from Megara. 

Ech. And was Aristippus there, and Cleombrotus? 

Phaed. No, they were said to be in Aegina. 

Ecb. Any one else ? 

Phaed. I think that these were nearly all. 

Ech. Well, and what did you talk about? 

Phaed. I will .begin at the beginning, and endeavour 
to repeat the entire conversation. On the previous days 
we had been in the habit of assembling early in the 
morning at the court in which the trial took place, and 
which is not far from the prison. There we used to 
wait talking with one another until the opening of the 
doors (for they were not opened very early) ; then we 
went in and generally passed the day with Socrates. 
On the last morning we assembled sooner than usual, 
having heard on the day before when we quitted the 
prison in the evening that the sacred ship had come 
from Delos ; and so we arranged to meet very early 
at the accustomed place. On our arrival the jailer who 
answered the door, instead of admitting us, came out 
and told us to stay until he called us. ' For the Eleven,' 
he said, ' are now with Socrates ; they are taking off 
his chains, and giving orders that he is to die to-day.' 
He soon returned and said that we might come in. 
On entering we found Socrates just released from chains, 60 
and Xanthippe, whom you know, sitting by him, and 
holding his child in her arms. When she saw us she 
uttered a cry and said, as women will : * O Socrates, 
this is the last time that either you will converse with 



IT 6 Pleasure and pain 

r ^ 

your friends, or they with you.' Socrates turned to 
Crito and said : * Crito, let some one take her home.' 
Some of Crito's people accordingly led her away, crying 
out and beating herself. And when she was gone, 
Socrates, sitting up on the couch, bent and rubbed his 
leg, saying, as he was rubbing : How singular is the 
thing called pleasure, and how curiously related to pain, 
which might be thought to be the opposite of it ; for they 
are never present to a man at the same instant, and yet 
he who pursues either is generally compelled to take 
the other ; their bodies are two, but they are joined by 
a single head. And I cannot help thinking that if 
Aesop had remembered them, he would have made a 
fable about God trying to reconcile their strife, and how, 
when he could not, he fastened their heads together ; 
and this is the reason why when one comes the other 
follows : as I know by my own experience now, when 
after the pain in my leg which was caused by the chain 
pleasure appears to succeed. 

Upon this Cebes said : I am glad, Socrates, that you 
have mentioned the name of Aesop. For it reminds 
me of a question which has been asked by many, and 
was asked of me only the day before yesterday by 
Evenus the poet he will be sure to ask it again, and 
therefore if you would like me to have an answer ready 
for him, you may as well tell me what I should say to 
him : he wanted to know why you, who never before 
wrote a line of poetry, now that you are in prison are 
turning Aesop's fables into verse, and also composing 
that hymn in honour of Apollo. 



Socrates as a poet 177 

Tell him, Cebes, he replied, what is the truth that 
I had no idea of rivalling him or his poems ; to do so, 
as I knew, would be no easy task. But I wanted to 
see whether I could purge away a scruple which I felt 
about the meaning of certain dreams. In the course 
of my life I have often had intimations in dreams ' that 
I should compose music.' The same dream came to 
me sometimes in one form, and sometimes in another, 
but always saying the same or nearly the same words : 
'Cultivate and make music,' said the dream. And 
hitherto I had imagined that this was only intended to 
exhort and encourage me in the study of philosophy, 
which has been the pursuit of my life, and is the noblest 61 
and best of music. The dream was bidding me do 
what I was already doing, in the same way that the 
competitor in a race is bidden by the spectators to run 
when he is already running. But I was not certain of 
this ; for the dream might have meant music in the 
popular sense of the word, and being under sentence of 
death, and the festival giving me a respite, I thought 
that it would be safer for me to satisfy the scruple, and, 
in obedience to the dream, to compose a few verses 
before I departed. And first I made a hymn in honour 
of the god of the festival, and then considering that a 
poet, if he is really to be a poet, should not only put 
together words, but should invent stories, and that 
I have no invention, I took some fables of Aesop, which 
I had ready at hand and which I knew they were the 
first I came upon and turned them into verse. Tell 
this to Evenus, Cebes, and bid him be of good cheer. 



Is death a blessing? 

say that I would have him come after me if he be a 
wise man, and not tarry ; and that to-day I am likely 
to be going, for the Athenians say that I must. 

Simmias said : What a message for such a man ! 
having been a frequent companion of his I should say 
that, as far as I know him, he will never take your 
advice unless he is obliged. 

Why, said Socrates, is not Evenus a philosopher ? 

I think that he is, said Simmias. 

Then he, or any man who has the spirit of philo 
sophy, will be willing to die ; but he will not take his 
own life, for that is held to be unlawful. 

Here he changed his position, and put his legs off 
the couch on to the ground, and during the rest of the 
conversation he remained sitting. 

Why do you say, enquired Cebes, that a man ought 
not to take his own life, but that the philosopher will 
be ready to follow the dying ? 

Socrates replied : And have you, Cebes and Simmias, 
who are the disciples of Philolaus, never heard him 
speak of this ? 

Yes, but his language was obscure, Socrates. 

My words, too, are only an echo ; but there is no 
reason why I should not repeat what I have heard : and 
indeed, as I am going to another place, it is very meet 
for me to be thinking and talking of the nature of the 
pilgrimage which I am about to make. What can I do 
better in the interval between this and the setting of the 
sun? 

Then tell me, Socrates. Why is suicide held to be unlawful? as I have certainly heard Philolaus, about whom 
you were just now asking, affirm when he was staying 
with us at Thebes ; and there are others who say the 
same, although I have never understood what was meant 
by any of them. 

Do not lose heart, replied Socrates, and the day 62 
may come when you will understand. I suppose that 
you wonder why, when other things which are evil may 
be good at certain times and to certain persons, death is 
to be the only exception, and why, when a man is 
better dead, he is not permitted to be his own benefactor, 
but must wait for the hand of another. 

Fery true, said Cebes, laughing gently and speaking 
in his native Boeotian. 

I admit the appearance of inconsistency in what I am 
saying ; but there may not be any real inconsistency 
after all. There is a doctrine whispered in secret that 
man is a prisoner who has no right to open the door and 
run away ; this is a great mystery which I do not quite 
understand. Yet I too believe that the gods are our 
guardians, and that we men are a possession of theirs. 
Do you not agree ? 

Yes, I quite agree, said Cebes. 

And if one of your own possessions, an ox or an ass, 
for example, took the liberty of putting himself out of 
the way when you had given no intimation of your wish 
that he should die, would you not be angry with him, 
and would you not punish him if you could ? 

Certainly, replied Cebes. 

Then, if we look at the matter thus, there may be 

reason in saying that a man should wait, and not take 
his own life until God summons him, as he is now 
summoning me. 

Yes, Socrates, said Cebes, there seems to be truth 
in what you say. And yet how can you reconcile this 
seemingly true belief that God is our guardian and we 
his possessions, with the willingness to die which you 
were just now attributing to the philosopher? That 
the wisest of men should be willing to leave a service 
in which they are ruled by the gods who are the best 
of rulers, is not reasonable ; for surely no wise man 
thinks that when set at liberty he can take better care 
of himself than the gods take care of him. A fool 
may perhaps think so he may argue that he had better 
run away from his master, not considering that his duty 
is to remain to the end, and not to run away from the 
good, and that there would be no sense in his running 
away. The wise man will want to be ever with him 
who is better than himself. Now this, Socrates, is the 
reverse of what was just now said ; for upon this view 
the wise man should sorrow and the fool rejoice at 
passing out of life. 

63 The earnestness of Cebes seemed to please Socrates. 
Here, said he, turning to us, is a man who is always 
enquiring, and is not so easily convinced by the first 
thing which he hears. 

And certainly, added Simmias, the objection which 
he is now making does appear to me to have some 
force. For what can be the meaning of a truly wise 
man wanting to fly away and lightly leave a master who is better than himself? And I rather imagine that 
Cebes is referring to you; he thinks that you are too 
ready to leave us, and too ready to leave the gods whom 
you acknowledge to be our good masters. 

Yes, replied Socrates ; there is reason in what you 
say. And so you think that I ought to answer your 
indictment as if I were in a court ? 

We should like you to do so, said Simmias. 

Then I must try to make a more successful de 
fence before you than I did before the judges. For 
I am quite ready to admit, Simmias and Cebes, 
that I ought to be grieved at death, if I were not 
persuaded in the first place that I am going to other 
gods who are wise and good (of which I am as certain as 
I can be of any such matters), and secondly (though 
I am not so sure of this last) to men departed, better 
than those whom I leave behind; and therefore I do 
not grieve as I might have done, for I have good hope 
that there is yet something remaining for the dead, and 
as has been said of old, some far better thing for the 
good than for the evil. 

But do you mean to take away your thoughts with 
you, Socrates ? said Simmias. Will you not impart them 
to us ? for they are a benefit in which we too are entitled 
to share. Moreover, if you succeed in convincing us, 
that will be an answer to the charge against yourself. 

I will do ray best, replied Socrates. But you must 
first let me hear what Crito wants ; he has long been 
wishing to say something to me. 

Only this, Socrates, replied Crito : the attendant 



182 The philosopher seeJ(r death 

who is to give you the poison has been telling me, and 
he wants me to tell you, that you are not to talk much ; 
talking, he says, increases heat, and this is apt to 
interfere with the action of the poison ; persons who 
excite themselves are sometimes obliged to take a 
second or even a third dose. 

Then, said Socrates, let him mind his business and 
be prepared to give the poison twice or even thrice if 
necessary ; that is all. 

I knew quite well what you would say, replied Crito ; 
but I was obliged to satisfy him. 

Never mind him, he said. 

And now, O my judges, I desire to prove to you 
that the real philosopher has reason to be of good 
64 cheer when he is about to die, and that after death he 
may hope to obtain the greatest good in the other 
world. And how this may be, Simmias and Cebes, 
I will endeavour to explain. For I deem that the 
true votary of philosophy is likely to be misunderstood 
by other men ; they do not perceive that he is always 
pursuing death and dying ; and if this be so, and he has 
had the desire of death all his life long, why when his 
time comes should he repine at that which he has been 
always pursuing and desiring ? 

Simmias said laughingly : Though not in a laughing 
humour, you have made me laugh, Socrates; for I 
cannot help thinking that the many when they hear 
your words will say how truly you have described 
philosophers, and our people at home will likewise 
say that the life which philosophers desire is in reality 



Horv death becomes gain 183 

death, and that they have found them out to be deserving 
of the death which they desire. 

And they are right, Simmias, in thinking so, with 
the exception of the words ' they have found them out ' ; 
for they have not found out either what is the nature of 
that death which the true philosopher deserves, or how 
he deserves or desires death. But enough of them : let 
us discuss the matter among ourselves. Do we believe 
that there is such a thing as death ? 

To be sure, replied Simmias. 

Is it not the separation of soul and body ? And 
to be dead is the completion of this; when the soul 
exists in herself, and is released from the body and 
the body is released from the soul, what is this but 
death ? 

Just so, he replied. 

There is another question, which will probably throw 
light on our present enquiry if you and I can agree 
about it: Ought the philosopher to care about the 
pleasures if they are to be called pleasures of eating 
and drinking? 

Certainly not, answered Simmias. 

And what about the pleasures of love should he 
care for them ? 

By no means. 

And will he think much of the other ways of indulging 
the body, for example, the acquisition of costly raiment, 
or sandals, or other adornments of the body ? Instead 
of caring about them, does he not rather despise any 
thing more than nature needs ? What do you say ? 



184 Hotp death becomes gain 

I should say that the true philosopher would despise 
them. 

Would you not say that he is entirely concerned 
with the soul and not with the body ? He would like, 
as far as he can, to get away from the body and to turn 
to the soul. 

Quite true. 

In matters of this sort philosophers, above all other 
65 men, may be observed in every sort of way to dissever 
the soul from the communion of the body. 

Very true. 

Whereas, Simmias, the rest of the world are of 
opinion that to him who has no sense of pleasure and 
no part in bodily pleasure, life is not worth having ; 
and that he who is indifferent about them is as good 
as dead. 

That is also true. 

What again shall we say of the actual acquirement of 
knowledge? is the body, if invited to share in the 
enquiry, a hinderer or a helper ? I mean to say, have 
sight and hearing any truth in them ? Are they not, 
as the poets are always telling us, inaccurate witnesses ? 
and yet, if even they are inaccurate and indistinct, what 
is to be said of the other senses ? for you will allow 
that they are the best of them ? 

Certainly, he replied. 

Then when does the soul attain truth ? for in 
attempting to consider anything in company with the 
body she is obviously deceived. 

True. 



The sensible is not the real?

Then must not true existence be revealed to her in 
thought, if at all ? 

Yes. 

And thought is best when the mind is gathered into 
herself and none of these things trouble her neither 
sounds nor sights nor pain nor any pleasure, when she 
takes leave of the body, and has as little as possible to do 
with it, when she has no bodily sense or desire, but 
is aspiring after true being ? 

Certainly. 

And in this the philosopher dishonours the body ; 
his soul runs away from his body and desires to be 
alone and by herself? 

That is true. 

Well, but there is another thing, Simmias : Is there 
or is there not an absolute justice ? 

Assuredly there is. 

And an absolute beauty and absolute good ? 

Of course. 

But did you ever behold any of them with your eyes ? 

Certainly not. 

Or did you ever reach them with any other bodily 
sense ? and I speflfc nnt nf K. ga oUn K..f f -iKcrJ..^ 
greatness, and health, and strength, and of the essence 
or true nature of everything. Has the reality of them 
ever been perceived by you through the bodily organs ? 
or rather, is not the nearest approach to the knowledge 
of their several natures made by him who so orders his 
intellectual vision as to have the most exact conception 
of the essence of each thing which he considers ? 



i8d The ideal is the real 

Certainly. 

And he attains to the purest knowledge of them who 
goes to each with the mind alone, not introducing or 
intruding in the act of thought sight or any other sense 
66 together with reason, but with the very light of the mind 
in her own clearness searches into the very truth of each ; 
he who has got rid, as far as he can, of eyes and ears 
and, so to speak, of the whole body, these being in his 
opinion distracting elements which when they infect 
the soul hinder her from acquiring truth and knowledge 
who, if not he, is likely to attain to the knowledge 
of true being ? 

What you say has a wonderful truth in it, Socrates, 
replied Simmias. 

And when real philosophers consider all these things, 
will they not be led to make a reflection which they 
will express in words something like the following? 
Have we not found,' they will say, ' a path of thought 
which seems to bring us and our argument to the 
conclusion, that while we are in the body, and while 
the soul is infected with the evils of the body, our 
desire will not be satisfied ? and our desire is of the 
truth. For the body is a source of endless trouble to 
us by reason of the mere requirement of food ; and is 
liable also to diseases which overtake and impede us in 
the search after true being : it fills us full of loves, and 
lusts, and fears, and fancies of all kinds, and endless 
foolery, and in fact, as men say, takes away from us 
the power of thinking at all. Whence come wars, and 
fightings, and factions ? whence but from the body and the lusts of the body ? Wars are occasioned by the 
love of money, and money has to be acquired for the 
sake and in the service of the body ; and by reason of 
all these impediments we have no time to give to 
philosophy ; and, last and worst of all, even if we are 
at leisure and betake ourselves to some speculation, the 
body is always breaking in upon us, causing turmoil 
and confusion in our enquiries, and so amazing us that 
we are prevented from seeing the truth. It has been 
proved to us by experience that if we would have pure 
knowledge of anything we must be quit of the body 
the soul in herself must behold things in themselves ; 
and then we shall attain the wisdom which we desire, 
and of which we say that we are lovers ; not while we 
live, but after death ; for if while in company with the 
body, the soul cannot have pure knowledge, one of two / 
things follows either knowledge is not to be attained 
at all, or, if at all, after death. For then, and not till 67 
then, the soul will be parted from the body and exist 
in herself alone. In this present life, I reckon that 
we make the nearest approach to knowledge when we 
have the least possible intercourse or communion with the 
body, and are not surfeited with the bodily nature, but 
keep ourselves pure until the hour when God himself is 
pleased to release us. And thus having got rid of the 
foolishness of the body we shall be pure and hold con 
verse with the pure, and know of ourselves the clear light 
everywhere, which is no other than the light of truth.* 
For the impure are not permitted to approach the pure. 
These are the sort of words, Simmias, which the true 



1 88 The way to knowledge 

lovers of knowledge cannot help saying to one another 
and thinking. You would agree ; would you not ? 

Undoubtedly, Socrates. 

But, O my friend, if this be true, there is great 
reason to hope that, going whither I go, when I have 
come to the end of my journey, I shall attain that which 
has been the pursuit of my life. And therefore I go 
on my way rejoicing, and not I only, but every other 
man who believes that his mind has been made ready and 
that he is in a manner purified. 

Certainly, replied Simmias. 

And what is purification but the separation of the 
soul from the body, as I was saying before ; the habit 
of the soul gathering and collecting herself into herself 
from all sides out of the body ; the dwelling in her 
own place alone, as in another life, so also in this, as 
far as she can ; the release of the soul from the 
chains of the body ? 

Very true, he said. 

And this separation and release of the soul from the 
body is termed death ? 

To be sure, he said. 

And the true philosophers, and they only, are ever 
seeking to release the soul. Is not the separation and 
release of the soul from the body their especial study ? 

That is true. 

And, as I was saying at first, there would be a 
ridiculous contradiction in men studying to live as nearly 
as they can in a state of death, and yet repining when 
it comes upon them. 



The practice of dying 189 

Clearly. 

And the true philosophers, Simmias, are always 
occupied in the practice of dying, wherefore also to 
them least of all men is death terrible. Look at the 
matter thus : if they have been in every way the 
enemies of the body, and are wanting to be alone with 
the soul, when this desire of theirs is granted, how 
inconsistent would they be if they trembled and repined, 
instead of rejoicing at their departure to that place 
where, when they arrive, they hope to gain that which 
in life they desired and this was wisdom and at the 68 
same time to be rid of the company of their enemy. 
Many a man has been willing to go to the world below 
animated by the hope of seeing there an earthly love, 
or wife, or son, and conversing with them. And will 
he who is a true lover of wisdom, and is strongly 
persuaded in like manner that only in the world below 
he can worthily enjoy her, still repine at death ? Will 
he not depart with joy ? Surely he will, O my friend, 
if he be a true philosopher. For he will have a firm 
conviction that there, and there only, he can find wisdom 
in her purity. And if this be true, he would be very 
absurd, as I was saying, if he were afraid of death. 

He would indeed, replied Simmias. 

And when you see a man who is repining at the ap 
proach of death, is not his reluctance a sufficient proof 
that he is not a lover of wisdom, but a lover of the 
body, and probably at the same time a lover of either 
money or power, or both ? 

Quite so, he replied. 



190 The true philosopher 

And is not courage, Simmias, a quality which is 
specially characteristic of the philosopher ? 

Certainly. 

There is temperance again, which even by the vulgar 
is supposed to consist in the control and regulation of 
the passions, and in the sense of superiority to them 
is not temperance a virtue belonging to those only who 
despise the body, and who pass their lives in philosophy ? 

Most assuredly. 

For the courage and temperance of other men, if you 
will consider them, are really a contradiction. 

How so? 

Well, he said, you are aware that death is regarded 
by men in general as a great evil. 

Very true, he said. 

And do not courageous men face death because they 
are afraid of yet greater evils ? 

That is quite true. 

Then all but the philosophers are courageous only 
from fear, and because they are afraid ; and yet that a 
man should be courageous from fear, and because he is 
a coward, is surely a strange thing. 

Very true. 

And are not the temperate exactly in the same case ? 
They are temperate because they are intemperate 
which might seem to be a contradiction, but is never 
theless the sort of thing which happens with this foolish 
temperance. For there are pleasures which they are 
afraid of losing ; and in their desire to keep them, they 
abstain from some pleasures, because they are overcome 



The exchange of virtue 191 

by others ; and although to be conquered by pleasure is 
called by men intemperance, to them the conquest of 69 
pleasure consists in being conquered by pleasure. And 
that is what I mean by saying that, in a sense, they are 
made temperate through intemperance. 

Such appears to be the case. 

Yet the exchange of one fear or pleasure or pain for 
another fear or pleasure or pain, and of the greater for 
the less, as if they were coins, is not the exchange of 
virtue. O my blessed Simmias, is there not one true 
coin for which all things ought to be exchanged ? and 
that is wisdom ; and only in exchange for this, and in 
company with this, is anything truly bought or sold, 
whether courage or temperance or justice. And is not 
all true virtue the companion of wisdom, no matter what 
fears or pleasures or other similar goods or evils may or 
may not attend her ? But the virtue which is made up 
of these goods, when they are severed from wisdom 
and exchanged with one another, is a shadow of virtue 
only, nor is there any freedom or health or truth in 
her ; but in the true exchange there is a purging away 
of all these things, and temperance, and justice, and 
courage, and wisdom herself are the purgation of them. 
The founders of the mysteries would appear to have 
had a real meaning, and were not talking nonsense when 
they intimated in a figure long ago that he who passes 
unsanctified and uninitiated into the world below will lie 
in a slough, but that he who arrives there after initiation 
and purification will dwell with the gods. For ' many,' 
as they say in the mysteries, ' are the thyrsus-bearers, 



192 The incredulity of Cebes 

but few are the mystics,' meaning, as I interpret the 
words, 'the true philosophers.' In the number of 
whom, during my whole life, I have been seeking, 
according to my ability, to find a place ; whether I 
have sought in a right way or not, and whether I have 
succeeded or not, I shall truly know in a little while, if 
God will, when I myself arrive in the other world 
such is my belief. And therefore I maintain that I 
am right, Simmias and Cebes, in not grieving or repin 
ing at parting from you and my masters in this world, 
for I believe that I shall equally find good masters and 
friends in another world. But most men do not believe 
this saying ; if then I succeed in convincing you by my 
defence better than I did the Athenian judges, it will 
be well. 

Cebes answered : I agree, Socrates, in the greater 
70 part of what you say. But in what concerns the soul, 
men are apt to be incredulous ; they fear that when she 
has left the body her place may be nowhere, and that 
on the very day of death she may perish and come to 
an end immediately on her release from the body, 
issuing forth dispersed like smoke or air and in her 
flight vanishing away into nothingness. If she could 
only be collected into herself after she has obtained 
release from the evils of which you were speaking, 
there would be good reason to hope, Socrates, that 
what you say is true. But surely it requires a great 
deal of argument and many proofs to show that when 
the man is dead his soul yet exists, and has any force 
or intelligence. True, Cebes, said Socrates. Shall I suggest 
that we converse a little of the probabilities of these 
things ? 

I am sure, said Ccbes, that I should greatly like to 
know your opinion about them. 

I reckon, said Socrates, that no one who heard me 
now, not even if he were one of my old enemies, the 
Comic poets, could accuse me of idle talking about 
matters in which I have no concern : If you please, 
then, we will proceed with the enquiry. 

Suppose we consider the question whether the souls 
of men after death are or are not in the world below. 
There comes into my mind an ancient doctrine which 
affirms that they go from hence into the other world, 
and returning hither, are born again from the dead. 
Now if it be true that the living come from the dead, 
then our souls must exist in the other world, for if not, 
how could they have been born again ? And this 
would be conclusive, if there were any real evidence 
that the living are only born from the dead ; but if this 
is not so, then other arguments will have to be adduced. 

Very true, replied Cebes. 

Then let us consider the whole question, not in 
relation to man only, but in relation to animals gener 
ally, and to plants, and to everything of which there 
is generation, and the proof will be easier. Are not 
all things which have opposites generated out of their 
opposites ? I mean such things as good and evil, just 
and unjust and there are innumerable other opposites 
which are generated out of opposites. And I want 

wo o 



194 The alternation of all existence 

to show that in all opposites there is of necessity 
a similar alternation ; I mean to say, for example, that 
anything which becomes greater must become greater 
after being less. 

True. 

And that which becomes less must have been once 
71 greater and then have become less. 

Yes. 

And the weaker is generated from the stronger, and 
the swifter from the slower. 

Very true. 

And the worse is from the better, and the more just 
is from the more unjust. 

Of course. 

And is this true of all opposites ? and are we con 
vinced that all of them are generated out of opposites ? 

Yes. 

And in this universal opposition of all things, are 
there not also two intermediate processes which are 
ever going on, from one to the other opposite, and back 
again ; where there is a greater and a less there is also 
an intermediate process of increase and diminution, 
and that which grows is said to wax, and that which 
decays to wane ? 

Yes, he said. 

And there are many other processes, such as di 
vision and composition, cooling and heating, which 
equally involve a passage into and out of one another. 
And this necessarily holds of all opposites, even 
though not always expressed in words they are really 



The alternation of sleep and waking 

generated out of one another, and there is a passing 
or process from one to the other of them ? 

Very true, he replied. 

Well, and is there not an opposite of life, as sleep 
is the opposite of waking ? 

True, he said. 

And what is it ? 

Death, he answered. 

And these, if they are opposites, are generated the 
one from the other, and have their two intermediate 
processes also ? 

Of course. 

Now, said Socrates, I will analyse one of the two 
pairs of opposites which I have mentioned to you, and 
also its intermediate processes, and you shall analyse 
the other to me. One of them I term sleep, the 
other waking. The state of sleep is opposed to the 
state of waking, and out of sleeping waking is gener 
ated, and out of waking, sleeping ; and the process 
of generation is in the one case falling asleep, and in 
the other waking up. Do you agree ? 

I entirely agree. 

Then, suppose that you analyse life and death to me 
in, the same manner. Is not death opposed to life? 

Yes. 

And they are generated one from the other? 

Yes. 

What is generated from the living ? 

The dead. 

And what from the dead ? 
o a 



1 9 6 The alternation of life and death 

I can only say in answer the living. 

Then the living, whether things or persons, Cebes, 
are generated from the dead ? 

That is clear, he replied. 

Then the inference is that our souls exist in the 
world below ? 

That is true. 

And one of the two processes or generations is 
visible for surely the act of dying is visible ? 

Surely, he said. 

What then is to be the result? Shall we exclude 
the opposite process ? and shall we suppose nature 
to walk on one leg only ? Must we not rather assign 
to death some corresponding process of generation ? 

Certainly, he replied. 

And what is that process ? 

Return to life. 

And return to life, if there be such a thing, is the 
a birth of the dead into the world of the living ? 

Quite true. 

Then here is a new way by which we arrive at the 
conclusion that the living come from the dead, just as 
the dead come from the living; and this, if true, 
affords a most certain proof that the souls of the dead 
exist in some place out of which they come again. 

Yes, Socrates, he said ; the conclusion seems to flow 
necessarily out of our previous admissions. 

And that these admissions were not unfair, Cebes, 
he said, may be shown, I think, as follows : If gener 
ation were in a straight line only, and there were no 



The alternation of life and death 197 

compensation or circle in nature, no turn or return of 
elements into their opposites, then you know that all 
things would at last have the same form and pass into 
the same state, and there would be no more generation 
of them. 

What do you mean : he said. 

A simple thing enough, which I will illustrate by 
the case of sleep, he replied. You know that if there 
were no alternation of sleeping and waking, the tale of 
the sleeping Endymion would in the end have no 
meaning, because all other things would be asleep too, 
and he would not be distinguishable from the rest. Or 
if there were composition only, and no division of sub 
stances, then the chaos of Anaxagoras would come 
again. And in like manner, my dear Cebes, if all 
things which partook of life were to die, and after 
they were dead remained in the form of death, and 
did not come to life again, all would at last die, and 
nothing would be alive what other result could there 
be? For if the living spring from any other things, 
and they too die, must not all things at last be swal 
lowed up in death ? * 

There is no escape, Socrates, said Cebes ; and to 
me your argument seems to be absolutely true. 

Yes, he said, Cebes, it is and must be so, in my 
opinion; and we have not been deluded in making 
these admissions ; but I am confident that there truly is 
such a thing as living again, and that the living spring 
from the dead, and that the souls of the dead are in 

1 But cp. Rep. x. 6n A. 



198 The doctrine of Reminiscence 

existence, and that the good souls have a better portion 
than the evil. 

Cebes added : Your favourite doctrine, Socrates, 
that knowledge is simply recollection, if true, also 
necessarily implies a previous time in which we have 
learned that which we now recollect. But this would 
73 be impossible unless our soul had been in some place 
before existing in the form of man ; here then is another 
proof of the soul's immortality. 

But tell me, Cebes, said Simmias, interposing, what 
arguments are urged in favour of this doctrine of 
recollection. I am not very sure at the moment that 
I remember them. 

One excellent proof, said Cebes, is afforded by 
questions. If you put a question to a person in a right 
way, he will give a true answer of himself, but how could 
he do this unless there were knowledge and right reason 
already in him ? And this is most clearly shown when 
he is taken to a diagram or to anything of that sort '. 

But if, said Socrates, you are still incredulous, 
Simmias, I would ask you whether you may not agree 
with me when you look at the matter in another way; 
I mean, if you are still incredulous as to whether 
knowledge is recollection? 

Incredulous 1 am not, said Simmias ; but I want to 
have this doctrine of recollection brought to my own 
recollection, and, from what Cebes has said, I am 
beginning to recollect and be convinced : but I should 
still like to hear what you were going to say. 

1 Cp. Meiio 83 ff. 



How Reminiscence works 199 

This is what I would say, he replied : We should 
agree, if I am not mistaken, that what a man recollects 
he most have known at some previous time. 

Very true. 

And what is the nature of this knowledge or recol 
lection I I mean to ask, Whether a person who, having 
seen or heard or in any way perceived anything, knows 
not only that, but has a conception of something else 
which is the subject, not of the same but of some other 
kind of knowledge, may not be fairly said to recollect 
that of which he has the conception ? 

What do you mean ? 

I mean what I may illustrate by the following 
instance : The knowledge of a lyre is not the same as 
the knowledge of a man ? 

True. 

And yet what is die feeling of lovers when they 
recognize a lyre, or a garment, or anything else which 
the beloved has been in the habit of using ? Do not 
they, from knowing the lyre, form in the mind's eye 
an image of the youth to whom the lyre belongs ? 
And this is recollection. In like manner any one who 
sees Simmias may remember Cebes; and there are 
endless examples of the same thing. 

Endless, indeed, replied Simmias. 

And recollection is most commonly a process of 
recovering that which has been already forgotten through 
time and inattention. 

Very true, he said. 

Well ; and may you not also from seeing the picture of a horse or a lyre remember a man ? and from the 
picture of Simmias, you may be led to remember Cebes ? 

True. 

Or you may also be led to the recollection of Simmias 
himself ? 
74 Quite so. 

And in all these cases, the recollection may be 
derived from things either like or unlike ? 

It may be. 

And when the recollection is derived from like 
things, then another consideration is sure to arise, 
which is whether the likeness in any degree falls 
short or not of that which is recollected ? 

Very true, he said. 

And shall we proceed a step further, and affirm that 
there is such a thing as equality, not of one piece 
of wood or stone with another, but that, over and above 
this, there is absolute equality ? Shall we say so ? 

Say so, yes, replied Simmias, and swear to it, with 
all the confidence in life. 

And do we know the nature of this absolute essence ? 
^ To be sure, he said. 

And whence did we obtain our knowledge ? Did 
we not see equalities of material things, such as pieces 
of wood and stones, and gather from them the idea 
of an equality which is different from them ? For you 
will acknowledge that there is a difference. Or look 
at the matter in another way : Do not the same pieces 
of wood or stone appear at one time equal, and at 
another time unequal ? 



The particular recalls the universal 201 

That is certain. 

But are real equals ever unequal ? or is the idea of 
equality the same as of inequality ? 

Impossible, Socrates. 

Then these (so-called) equals are not the same with 
the idea of equality ? 

I should say, clearly not, Socrates. 

And yet from these equals, although differing from 
the idea of equality, you conceived and attained that idea ? 

Very true, he said. 

Which might be like, or might be unlike them ? 

Yes. 

But that makes no difference : whenever from seeing 
one thing you conceived another, whether like or unlike, 
there must surely have been an act of recollection ? 

Very true. 

But what would you say of equal portions of wood 
and stone, or other material equals ? and what is the 
impression produced by them ? Are they equals in the 
same sense in which absolute equality is equal ? or do 
they fall short of this perfect equality in a measure ? 

Yes, he said, in a very great measure too. 
And must we not allow, that when I or any one, 
looking at any object, observes that the thing which he 
sees aims at being some other thing, but falls short 
of, and cannot be, that other thing, but is inferior, 
he who makes this observation must have had a previous 
knowledge of that to which the other, although similar, 
was inferior? 

Certainly.

And has not this been our own case in the matter of 
equals and of absolute equality ? 

Precisely. 

Then we must have known equality previously to 
the time when we first saw the material equals, and reflected that all these apparent equals strive to attain 
absolute equality, but fall short of it ? 

Very true. 

And we recognize also that this absolute equality 
has only been known, and can only be known, through 
the medium of sight or touch, or of some other of the 
senses, which are all alike in this respect ? 

Yes, Socrates, as far as the argument is concerned, 
one of them is the same as the other. 

From the senses then is derived the knowledge that 
all sensible things aim at an absolute equality of which 
they fall short ? 
- Yes. 

Then before we began to see or hear or perceive in any 
way, we must have had a knowledge of absolute equality, 
or we could not have referred to that standard the equals 
which are derived from the senses ? for to that they 
all aspire, and of that they fall short. 

No other inference can be drawn from the previous 
statements. 

And did we not see and hear and have the use of 
our other senses as soon as we were born ? 

Certainly. 

Then we must have acquired the knowledge of 
equality at some previous time I 



Learning is Recollection 203 

Yes. 

That is to say, before we were born, I suppose ? 

True. 

And if we acquired this knowledge before we were 
born, and were born having the use of it, then we also 
knew before we were born and at the instant of birth 
not only the equal or the greater or the less, but all 
other ideas ; for we are not speaking only of equality, 
but of beauty, goodness, justice, holiness, and of all 
which we stamp with the name of essence in the 
dialectical process, both when we ask and when we 
answer questions. Of all this we may certainly affirm 
that we acquired the knowledge before birth ? 

We may. 

But if, after having acquired, we have not forgotten 
what in each case we acquired, then we must always 
have come into life having knowledge, and shall always 
continue to know as long as life lasts for knowing is 
the acquiring and retaining knowledge and not for 
getting. Is not forgetting, Simmias, just the losing of 
knowledge ? 

Quite true, Socrates. 

But if the knowledge which we acquired before birth 
was lost by us at birth, and if afterwards by the use of 
the senses we recovered what we previously knew, will 
not the process which we call learning be a recovering 
of the knowledge which is natural to us, and may not 
this be rightly termed recollection ? 

Very true. 

So much is clear that when we perceive something, 



204 Recollection proves pre-existence 

either by the help of sight, or hearing, or some other 
sense, from that perception we are able to obtain 
a notion of some other thing like or unlike which is 
associated with it but has been forgotten. Whence, as 
I was saying, one of two alternatives follows : either 
we had this knowledge at birth, and continued to know 
through life ; or, after birth, those who are said to 
l<n learn only remember, and learning is simply recollection. 

Yes, that is quite true, Socrates. 

And which alternative, Simmias, do you prefer? 
Had we the knowledge at our birth, or did we 
recollect the things which we knew previously to our 
birth ? 

I cannot decide at the moment. 

At any rate you can decide whether he who has 
knowledge will or will not be able to render an account 
of his knowledge ? What do you say ? 

Certainly, he will. 

But do you think that every man is able to give an 
account of these very matters about which we are 
speaking ? 

Would that they could, Socrates, but I rather fear 
that to-morrow, at this time, there will no longer be 
any one alive who is able to give an account of them 
such as ought to be given. 

Then you are not of opinion, Simmias, that all men 
know these things ? 

Certainly not. 

They are in process of recollecting that which they 
learned before ? 



Recollection p roves pre-existence 2 o y 

Certainly. 

But when did our souls acquire this knowledge ? 
not since we were born as men ? 

Certainly not. 

And therefore, previously ? 

Yes. 

Then, Simmias, our souls must also have existed 
without bodies before they were in the form of man, 
and must have had intelligence. 

Unless indeed you suppose, Socrates, that these 
notions are given us at the very moment of birth ; for 
this is the only time which remains. 

Yes, my friend, but if so, when do we lose them ? 
for they are not in us when we are born that is 
admitted. Do we lose them at the moment of receiv 
ing them, or if not at what other time ? 

No, Socrates, I perceive that I was unconsciously 
talking nonsense. 

Then may we not say that if, as we are always repeating, there is an absolute beauty, and 
goodness, and an absolute essence of all things ; and if 
to this, which is now discovered to have existed in our 
former state, we refer all our sensations, and with this 
compare them, finding these ideas to be pre-existent 
and our inborn possession then our souls must have 
had a prior existence, but if not, there would be no 
force in the argument ? There is the same proof that 
these ideas must have existed before we were born, as 
that our souls existed before we were born ; and if not 
the ideas, then not the souls. 



206 But what proves immortality ? 

Yes, Socrates ; I am convinced that there is precisely 
the same necessity for the one as for the other ; and 
77 the argument retreats successfully to the position that 
the existence of the soul before birth cannot be 
separated from the existence of the essence of which 
you speak. For there is nothing which to my mind is 
so patent as that beauty, goodness, and the other 
notions of which you were just now speaking, have 
a most real and absolute existence ; and I am satisfied 
with the proof. 

Well, but is Cebes equally satisfied? for I must 
convince him too. 

I think, said Simmias, that Cebes is satisfied : 
although he is the most incredulous of mortals, yet I 
believe that he is sufficiently convinced of the existence 
of the soul before birth. But that after death the soul 
will continue to exist is not yet proven even to my own 
satisfaction. I cannot get rid of the feeling of the 
many to which Cebes was referring the feeling that 
when the man dies the soul will be dispersed, and that 
this may be the extinction of her. For admitting 
that she may have been born elsewhere, and framed 
out of other elements, and was in existence before 
entering the human body, why after having entered 
in and gone out again may she not herself be destroyed 
and come to an end ? 

Very true, Simmias, said Cebes ; about half of what 
was required has been proven ; to wit, that our souls 
existed before we were born : that the soul will exist 
after death as well as before birth is the other half 



The two arguments combined 207 

of which the proof is still wanting, and has to be 
supplied ; when that is given the demonstration will be 
complete. 

But that proof, Simmias and Cebes, has been already 
given, said Socrates, if you put the two arguments 
together I mean this and the former one, in which 
we admitted that everything living is born of the dead. 
For if the soul exists before birth, and in coming to 
life and being born can be born only from death and 
dying, must she not after death continue to exist, since 
she has to be born again ? Surely the proof which 
you desire has been already furnished. Still I suspect 
that you and Simmias would be glad to probe the 
argument further. Like children, you are haunted 
with a fear that when the soul leaves the body, the 
wind may really blow her away and scatter her; 
especially if a man should happen to die in a great 
storm and not when the sky is calm. 

Cebes answered with a smile : Then, Socrates, you 
must argue us out of our fears and yet, strictly 
speaking, they are not our fears, but there is a child 
within us to whom death is a sort of hobgoblin : him 
too we must persuade not to be afraid when he is alone 
in the dark. 

Socrates said : Let the voice of the charmer be applied 
daily until you have charmed away the fear. 

And where shall we find a good charmer of our g 
fears, Socrates, when you are gone ? 

Hellas, he replied, is a large place, Cebes, and has 
many good men, and there are barbarous races not 



20 8 What is simple is indestructible 

a few : seek for him among them all, far and wide, 
sparing neither pains nor money ; for there is no better 
way of spending your money. And you must seek 
among yourselves too; for you will not find others 
better able to make the search. 

The search, replied Cebes, shall certainly be made. 
And now, if you please, let us return to the point of 
the argument at which we digressed. 

By all means, replied Socrates ; what else should I 
please ? 

Very good. 

Must we not, said Socrates, ask ourselves what that 
is which, as we imagine, is liable to be scattered, and 
about which we fear ? and what again is that about 
which we have no fear ? And then we may proceed 
further to enquire whether that which suffers dispersion 
is or is not of the nature of soul our hopes and fears 
as to our own souls will turn upon the answers to these 
questions. 

Very true, he said. 

Now the compound or composite may be supposed 
to be naturally capable, as of being compounded, so 
also of being dissolved; but that which is uncompounded, 
and that only, must be, if anything is, indissoluble. 

Yes ; I should imagine so, said Cebes. 

And the uncompounded may be assumed to be the 
same and unchanging, whereas the compound is always 
changing and never the same. 

I agree, he said. 

Then now let us return to the previous discussion. 

Is that idea or essence, which in the dialectical process 
we define as essence or true existence whether essence 
of equality, beauty, or anything else are these essences, 
I say, liable at times to some degree of change ? or are 
they each of them always what they are, having the 
same simple self-existent and unchanging forms, not 
admitting of variation at all, or in any way, or at any 
time ? 

They must be always the same, Socrates, replied 
Cebes. 

And what would you say of the many beautiful 
whether men or horses or garments or any other things 
which are named by the same names and may be called 
equal or beautiful, are they all unchanging and the 
same always, or quite the reverse ? May they not 
rather be described as almost always changing and 
hardly ever the same, either with themselves or with 
one another? 

The latter, replied Cebes ; they are always in a state 
of change. 

And these you can touch and see and perceive with 
the senses, but the unchanging things you can only per 
ceive with the mind they are invisible and are not seen ? 

That is very true, he said. 

Well then, added Socrates, let us suppose that there 
are two sorts of existences one seen, the other 
unseen. 

Let us suppose them. 

The seen is the changing, and the unseen is the un 
changing ? 

IMO p 



2i o Objects of sense are changeable 

That may be also supposed. 

And, further, is not one part of us body, another 
part soul ? 

To be sure. 

And to which class is the body more alike and akin ? 

Clearly to the seen no one can doubt that. 

And is the soul seen or not seen ? 

Not by man, Socrates. 

And what we mean by 'seen' and 'not seen' is 
that which is or is not visible to the eye of man ? 

Yes, to the eye of man. 

And is the soul seen or not seen ? 

Not seen. 

Unseen then ? 

Yes. 

Then the soul is more like to the unseen, and the 
body to the seen ? 

That follows necessarily, Socrates. 

And were we not saying long ago that the soul 
when using the body as an instrument of perception, 
that is to say, when using the sense of sight or hearing 
or some other sense (for the meaning of perceiving 
through the body is perceiving through the senses) 
were we not saying that the soul too is then dragged 
by the body into the region of the changeable, and 
wanders and is confused ; the world spins round her, 
and she is like a drunkard, when she touches change ? 

Very true. 

But when returning into herself she reflects, then she 
passes into the other world, the region of purity, and 



The body change s^ not the soul 211 

eternity, and immortality, and unchangeableness, which 
are her kindred, and with them she ever lives, when 
she is by herself and is not let or hindered ; then she 
ceases from her erring ways, and being in communion 
with the unchanging is unchanging. And this state of 
the soul is called wisdom ? 

That is well and truly said, Socrates, he replied. 

And to which class is the soul more nearly alike and 
akin, as far as may be inferred from this argument, as 
well as from the preceding one ? 

I think, Socrates, that, in the opinion of every one 
who follows the argument, the soul will be infinitely 
more like the unchangeable even the most stupid per 
son will not deny that. 

And the body is more like the changing ? 

Yes. 

Yet once more consider the matter in another light : 
When the soul and the body are united, then nature 80 
orders the soul to rule and govern, and the body to 
obey and serve. Now which of these two functions 
is akin to the divine ? and which to the mortal ? Does 
not the divine appear to you to be that which naturally 
orders and rules, and the mortal to be that which is 
subject and servant ? 

True. 

And which does the soul resemble ? 

The soul resembles the divine, and the body the 
mortal there can be no doubt of that, Socrates. 

Then reflect, Cebes : of all which has been said is 
not this the conclusion ? that the soul is in the very 
P 2 



212 



The death of the body 



likeness of the divine, and immortal, and intellectual, anc 

uniform, and indissoluble, and unchangeable; and that 

I the body is in the very likeness of the human, and 

1 mortal, and unintellectual, and multiform, and dissoluble, 

and changeable. Can this, my dear Cebes, be denied ? 

It cannot. 

But if it be true, then is not the body liable to speedy 
dissolution ? and is not the soul almost or altogether in 
dissoluble ? 

Certainly. 

And do you further observe, that after a man is 
dead, the body, or visible part of him, which is lying in 
the visible world, and is called a corpse, and would 
naturally be dissolved and decomposed and dissipated, is 
not dissolved or decomposed at once, but may remain for 
some time, nay even for a long time, if the constitution 
be sound at the time of death, and the season of the 
year favourable ? For the body when shrunk and embalmed, as the manner is in Egypt, may remain almost 
entire through infinite ages ; and even in decay, there 
are still some portions, such as the bones and ligaments, 
which are practically indestructible : Do you agree? 

Yes. 

And is it likely that the soul, which is invisible, in 
passing to the place of the true Hades, which like her 
is invisible, and pure, and noble, and on her way to the 
good and wise God, whither, if God will, my soul is 
also soon to go, that the soul, I repeat, if this be her 
nature and origin, will be blown away and destroyed 
immediately on quitting the body, as the many say ? 



The immortality of the soul 213 

That can never be, my dear Simmias and Cebes. The 
truth rather is, that the soul which is pure at departing 
and draws after her no bodily taint, having never volun 
tarily during life had connection with the body, which 
she is ever avoiding, herself gathered into herself ; and 
making such abstraction her perpetual study which 
means that she has been a true disciple of philosophy ; 81 
and therefore has in fact been always engaged in the 
practice of dying ? For is not philosophy the study of i 
death ? 

Certainly 

That soul, I say, herself invisible, departs to the 
invisible world to the divine and immortal and ra 
tional : thither arriving, she is secure of bliss and is 
released from the error and folly of men, their fears 
and wild passions and all other human ills, and for ever 
dwells, as they say of the initiated, in company with 
the gods *. Is not this true, Cebes ? 

Yes, said Cebes, beyond a doubt. 

But the soul which has been polluted, and is impure 
at the time of her departure, and is the companion and 
servant of the body always, and is in love with and 
fascinated by the body and by the desires and pleasures 
of the body, until she is led to believe that the truth 
only exists in a bodily form, which a man may touch 
and see and taste, and use for the purposes of his lusts, 
the soul, I mean, accustomed to hate and fear and 
avoid the intellectual principle, which to the bodily eye 
is dark and invisible, and can be attained only by philosophy ; do you suppose that such a soul will depart 
pure and unalloyed ? 

Impossible, he replied. 

She is held fast by the corporeal, which the continual 
association and constant care of the body have wrought 
into her nature. 

Very true. 

And this corporeal element, my friend, is heavy and 
weighty and earthy, and is that element of sight by 
which a soul is depressed and dragged down again into 
the visible world, because she is afraid of the invisible 
and of the world below prowling about tombs and 
sepulchres, near which, as they tell us, are seen certain 
ghostly apparitions of souls which have not departed 
pure, but are cloyed with sight and therefore visible *. 

That is very likely, Socrates. 

Yes, that is very likely, Cebes ; and these must be 
the souls, not of the good, but of the evil, which 

1 Compare Milton, Comus, 463 foil. : 

' But when lust, 

By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk, 
But most by lewd and lavish act of sin, 
Lets in defilement to the inward parts, 
The soul grows clotted by contagion, 
Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite lose 
The divine property of her first being. 
Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp 
Oft seen in charnel vaults and sepulchres. 
Lingering and sitting by a new-made grave, 
As loth to leave the body that it loved, 
And linked itself by carnal sensually 
To a degenerate and degraded state.' 



Transmigration into animals 21 f 

are compelled to wander about such places in payment 
of the penalty of their former evil way of life ; and 
they continue to wander until through the craving after 
the corporeal which never leaves them, they are im 
prisoned finally in another body. And they may be 
supposed to find their prisons in the same natures which 
they have had in their former lives. 

What natures do you mean, Socrates ? 

What I mean is that men who have followed after 
gluttony, and wantonness, and drunkenness, and have 
had no thought of avoiding them, would pass into asses 
and animals of that sort. What do you think ? g j 

I think such an opinion to be exceedingly probable. 

And those who have chosen the portion of injustice, 
and tyranny, and violence, will pass into wolves, or 
into hawks and kites ; whither else can we suppose 
them to go ? 

Yes, said Cebes ; with such natures, beyond question. 

And there is no difficulty, he said, in assigning to 
all of them places answering to their several natures 
and propensities ? 

There is not, he said. 

Some are happier than others ; and the happiest both 
in themselves and in the place to which they go are 
those who have practised the civil and social virtues 
which are called temperance and justice, and are 
acquired by habit and attention without philosophy and 
mind 1 . 

Why are they the happiest ? 

1 Cp. Rep. x. 619 a 



2i 6 Philosophy delivers the soul 

Because they may be expected to pass into some 
gentle and social kind which is like their own, such as 
bees or wasps or ants, or back again into the form 
of man, and just and moderate men may be supposed to 
spring from them. 

Very likely. 

No one who has not studied philosophy and who is 

not entirely pure at the time of his departure is allowed 

to enter the company of the Gods, but the lover of 

' knowledge only. And this is the reason, Simmias and 

( Cebes, why the true votaries of philosophy abstain from 

/ all fleshly lusts, and hold out against them and refuse 

to give themselves up to them, not because they fear 

poverty or the ruin of their families, like the lovers 

of money, and the world in general ; nor like the lovers 

of power and honour, because they dread the dishonour 

or disgrace of evil deeds. 

No, Socrates, that would not become them, said 
Cebes. 

No indeed, he replied ; and therefore they who have 
any care of their own souls, and do not merely live 
moulding and fashioning the body, say farewell to all 
this ; they will not walk in the ways of the blind : and 
when philosophy offers them purification and release 
from evil, they feel that they ought not to resist her 
influence, and whither she leads they turn and follow. 

What do you mean, Socrates ? 

I will tell you, he said. The lovers of knowledge 

/are conscious that the soul was simply fastened and 

glued to the body until philosophy received her, she 



Why the philosopher is temperate 2 1 7 

could only view real existence through the bars of 
a prison, not in and through herself; she was wallowing 
in the mire of every sort of ignorance, and by reason of 
lust had become the principal accomplice in her own 
captivity. This was her original state ; and then, as 83 
I was saying, and as the lovers of knowledge are well 
aware, philosophy, seeing how terrible was her confine 
ment, of which she was to herself the cause, received 
and gently comforted her and sought to release her, 
pointing out that the eye and the ear and the other 
senses are full of deception, and persuading her to retire 
from them, and abstain from all but the necessary use 
of them, and be gathered up and collected into herself, 
bidding her trust in herself and her own pure apprehen 
sion of pure existence, and to mistrust whatever comes 
to her through other channels and is subject to variation ; 
for such things are visible and tangible, but what she 
sees in her own nature is intelligible and invisible. 
And the soul of the true philosopher thinks that she 
ought not to resist this deliverance, and therefore 
abstains from pleasures and desires and pains and fears, 
as far as she is able ; reflecting that when a man has 
great joys or sorrows or fears or desires, he suffers 
from them, not merely the sort of evil which might 
be anticipated as for example, the loss of his health 
or property which he has sacrificed to his lusts but 
an evil greater far, which is the greatest and worst 
of all evils, and one of which he never thinks. 

What is it, Socrates ? said Cebes. 

The evil is that when the feeling of pleasure or pain 



21 



8 Why the philosopher is temperate 



is most intense, every soul of man imagines the objects 
of this intense feeling to be then plainest and truest : 
but this is not so, they are really the things of sight. 

Very true. 

And is not this the state in which the soul is most 
enthralled by the body ? 

How so ? 

Why, because each pleasure and pain is a sort of 
> nail which nails and rivets the soul to the body, until 
she becomes like the body, and believes that to be true 
\ which the body affirms to be true ; and from agreeing 
with the body and having the same delights she is 
obliged to have the same habits and haunts, and is not 
likely ever to be pure at her departure to the world 
below, but is always infected by the body ; and so she 
sinks into another body and there germinates and grows, 
and has therefore no part in the communion of the divine 
and pure and simple. 

Most true, Socrates, answered Cebes. 

And this, Cebes, is the reason why the true lovers 
of knowledge are temperate and brave ; and not for the 
reason which the world gives. 
84 Certainly not. 

Certainly not ! The soul of a philosopher will 
reason in quite another way; she will not ask philo 
sophy to release her in order that when released she 
may deliver herself up again to the thraldom of pleasures 
and pains, doing a work only to be undone again, 
weaving instead of unweaving her Penelope's web. 
But she will calm passion, and follow reason, and dwell 



Nen> difficulties stated 219 

in the contemplation of her, beholding the true and 
divine (which is not matter of opinion), and thence 
deriving nourishment. Thus she seeks to live while she 
lives, and after death she hopes to go to her own kindred 
and to that which is like her, and to be freed from 
human ills. Never fear, Simmias and Cebes, that a soul 
which has been thus nurtured and has had these pur 
suits, will at her departure from the body be scattered 
and blown away by the winds and be nowhere and 
nothing. 

When Socrates had done speaking, for a considerable 
time there was silence; he himself appeared to be 
meditating, as most of us were, on what had been said ; 
only Cebes and Simmias spoke a few words to one 
another. And Socrates observing them asked what 
they thought of the argument, and whether there was 
anything wanting ? For, said he, there are many 
points still open to suspicion and attack, if any one 
were disposed to sift the matter thoroughly. Should 
you be considering some other matter I say no more, 
but if you are still in doubt do not hesitate to say 
exactly what you think, and let us have anything better 
which you can suggest ; and if you think that I can be 
of any use, allow me to help you. 

Simmias said : I must confess, Socrates, that doubts 
did arise in our minds, and each of us was urging 
and inciting the other to put the question which we 
wanted to have answered but which neither of us liked 
to ask, fearing that our importunity might be troublesome 
at such a time. Socrates replied with a smile. O Simmias, what are 
you saying ? I am not very likely to persuade other 
men that I do not regard my present situation as 
a misfortune, if I cannot even persuade you that I am 
no worse off now than at any other time in my life. 
Will you not allow that I have as much of the spirit of 
prophecy in me as the swans ? For they, when they 
perceive that they must die, having sung all their life 
long, do then sing more lustily than ever, rejoicing 
85 in the thought that they are about to go away to the 
god- whose ministers they are. But men, because they 
are themselves afraid of death, slanderously affirm of 
the swans that they sing a lament at the last, not 
considering that no bird sings when cold, or hungry, or 
in pain, not even the nightingale, nor the swallow, nor 
yet the hoopoe ; which are said indeed to tune a lay 
of sorrow, although I do not believe this to be true 
of them any more than of the swans. But because 
they are sacred to Apollo, they have the gift of 
prophecy, and anticipate the good things of another 
world ; wherefore they sing and rejoice in that day 
more than ever they did before. And I too, believing 
myself to be the consecrated servant of the same God, 
and the fellow-servant of the swans, and thinking that 
I have received from my master gifts of prophecy 
which are not inferior to theirs, would not go out of 
life less merrily than the swans. Never mind then, if 
this be your only objection, but speak and ask anything 
which you like, while the eleven magistrates of Athens 
allow. 



The doubt of Simmias 221 

Very good, Socrates, said Simmias ; then I will tell 
you my difficulty, and Cebes will tell you his. I feel 
myself (and I daresay that you have the same feeling), 
how hard or rather impossible is the attainment of any 
certainty about questions such as these in the present 
life. And yet I should deem him a coward who did 
not prove what is said about them to the uttermost, 
or whose heart failed him before he had examined them 
on every side. For he should persevere until he has 
achieved one of two things : either he should discover, 
or be taught the truth about them ; or, if this be im 
possible, I would have him take the best and most 
irrefragable of human theories, and let this be the raft 
upon which he sails through life not without risk, as 
I admit, if he cannot find some word of God which 
will more surely and safely carry him. And now, as 
you bid me, I will venture to question you, and then I 
shall not have to reproach myself hereafter with not 
having said at the time what I think. For when I 
consider the matter, either alone or with Cebes, the 
argument does certainly appear to me, Socrates, to be 
not sufficient. 

Socrates answered : I dare say, my friend, that you 
may be right, but I should like to know in what respect 
the argument is insufficient. 

In this respect, replied Simmias : Suppose a person 
to use the same argument about harmony and the lyre 
might he not say that harmony is a thing invisible, 
incorporeal, perfect, divine, existing in the lyre which 
is harmonized, but that the lyre and the strings are 86 



222 



The soul the harmony of the body 



matter and material, composite, earthy, and akin to 
mortality ? And when some one breaks the lyre, or 
cuts and rends the strings, then he who takes this view 
would argue as you do, and on the same analogy, that 
the harmony survives and has not perished you cannot 
imagine, he would say, that the lyre without the strings, 
and the broken strings themselves Which are mortal 
remain, and yet that the harmony, which is of heavenly 
and immortal nature and kindred, has perished 
perished before the mortal. The harmony must still 
be somewhere, and the wood and strings will decay 
before anything can happen to that. The thought, 
Socrates, must have occurred to your own mind that 
such is our conception of the soul ; and that when the 
body is in a manner strung and held together by the 
elements of hot and cold, wet and dry, then the soul is 
the harmony or due proportionate admixture of them. 
But if so, whenever the strings of the body are unduly 
loosened or overstrained through disease or other injury, 
then the soul, though most divine, like other harmonies 
of music or of works of art, of course perishes at once ; 
although the material remains of the body may last for 
a considerable time, until they are either decayed or 
burnt. And if any one maintains that the soul, being 
the harmony of the elements of the body, is first to 
perish in that which is called death, how shall we 
answer him ? 

Socrates looked fixedly at us as his manner was, and 
said with a smile : Simmias has reason on his side ; and 
why does not some one of you who is better able than 

myself answer him? for there is force in his attack 
upon me. But perhaps, before we answer him, we had 
better also hear what Cebes has to say that we may 
gain time for reflection, and when they have both 
spoken, we may either assent to them, if there is truth 
in what they say, or if not, we will maintain our position. 
Please to tell me then, Cebes, he said, what was the 
difficulty which troubled you ? 

Cebes said : I will tell you. My feeling is that the 
argument is where it was, and open to the same objec 
tions which were urged before ; for I am ready to admit gy 
that the existence of the soul before entering into the 
bodily form has been very ingeniously, and, if I may 
say so, quite sufficiently proven ; but the existence of 
the soul after death is still, in my judgment, unproven. 
Now my objection is not the same as that of Simmias ; 
for I am not disposed to deny that the soul is stronger 
and more lasting than the body, being of opinion that 
in all such respects the soul very far excels the body. 
Well then, says the argument to me, why do you 
remain unconvinced ? When you see that the weaker 
continues in existence after the man is dead, will you 
not admit that the more lasting must also survive during 
the same period of time? Now I will ask you to 
consider whether the objection, which, like Simmias, 
I will express in a figure, is of any weight. The 
analogy which I will adduce is that of an old weaver, 
who dies, and after his death somebody says : He is 
not dead, he must be alive; see, there is the coat 
which he himself wove and wore, and which remains 



224 May not the soul wear out? 

whole and undecayed. And then he proceeds to ask 
of some one who is incredulous, whether a man lasts 
longer, or the coat which is in use and wear; and 
when he is answered that a man lasts far longer, thinks 
that he has thus certainly demonstrated the survival 
of the man, who is the more lasting, because the less 
lasting remains. But that, Simmias, as I would beg 
you to remark, is a mistake ; any one can see that he 
who talks thus is talking nonsense. For the truth 
is, that the weaver aforesaid, having woven and worn 
many such coats, outlived several of them ; and was 
outlived by the last ; but a man is not therefore proved 
to be slighter and weaker than a coat. Now the relation 
of the body to the soul may be expressed in a similar 
figure ; and any one may very fairly say in like manner 
that the soul is lasting, and the body weak and shortlived 
in comparison. He may argue in like manner that every 
soul wears out many bodies, especially if a man live 
many years. While he is alive the body deliquesces 
and decays, and the soul always weaves another garment 
and repairs the waste. But of course, whenever the 
soul perishes, she must have on her last garment, and 
this will survive her ; and then at length, when the 
soul is dead, the body will show its native weakness, 
and quickly decompose and pass away. I would there 
fore rather not rely on the argument from superior 
strength to prove the continued existence of the soul 
88 after death. For granting even more than you affirm 
to be possible, and acknowledging not only that the 
soul existed before birth, but also that the souls of 
some exist, and will continue to exist after death, and 
will be born and die again and again, and that there is 
a natural strength in the soul which will hold out and 
be born many times nevertheless, we may be still 
inclined to think that she will weary in the labours 
of successive births, and may at last succumb in one of 
her deaths and utterly perish ; and this death and 
dissolution of the body which brings destruction to the 
soul may be unknown to any of us, for no one of us 
can have had any experience of it : and if so, then 
I maintain that he who is confident about death has 
but a foolish confidence, unless he is able to prove that 
the soul is altogether immortal and imperishable. But 
if he cannot prove the soul's immortality, he who is 
about to die will always have reason to fear that when 
the body is disunited, the soul also may utterly perish. 

All of us, as we afterwards remarked to one another, 
had an unpleasant feeling at hearing what they said. 
When we had been so firmly convinced before, now to 
have our faith shaken seemed to introduce a confusion 
and uncertainty, not only into the previous argument, 
but into any future one; either we were incapable 
of forming a judgment, or there were no grounds of 
belief. 

Ecb. There I feel with you by heaven I do, 
Phaedo, and when you were speaking, I was beginning 
to ask myself the same question : What argument can I 
ever trust again ? For what could be more convincing 
than the argument of Socrates, which has now fallen 
into discredit ? That the soul is a harmony is a doc- 
mo Q 



226 Dejection of the audience 

trine which has always had a wonderful attraction for 
me, and, when mentioned, came back to me at once, as 
my own original conviction. And now I must begin again 
and find another argument which will assure me that 
when the man is dead the soul survives. Tell me, 
I implore you, how did Socrates proceed ? Did he 
appear to share the unpleasant feeling which you men 
tion ? or did he calmly meet the attack ? And did he 
answer forcibly or feebly? Narrate what passed as 
exactly as you can. 

Phaed. Often, Echecrates, I have wondered at 
89 Socrates, but never more than on that occasion. That 
he should be able to answer was nothing, but what 
astonished me was, first, the gentle and pleasant and 
approving manner in which he received the words of 
the young men, and then his quick sense of the wound 
which had been inflicted by the argument, and the 
readiness with which he healed it. He might be 
compared to a general rallying his defeated and broken 
army, urging them to accompany him and return to the 
field of argument. 

Ecb. What followed? 

Phaed. You shall hear, for I was close to him on 
his right hand, seated on a sort of stool, and he on a 
couch which was a good deal higher. He stroked my 
head, and pressed the hair upon my neck he had a 
way of playing with my hair ; and then he said : To 
morrow, Phaedo, I suppose that these fair locks of 
yours will be severed. 

Yes, Socrates, I suppose that they will, I replied. 



Socrates comes to the rescue 227 

Not so, if you will take my advice. 

What shall I do with them ? I said. 

To-day, he replied, and not to-morrow, if this argu 
ment dies and we cannot bring it to life again, you and 
I will both shave our locks : and if I were you, and 
the argument got away from me, and I could not hold 
my ground against Simmias and Cebes, I would myself 
take an oath, like the Argives, not to wear hair any 
more until I had renewed the conflict and defeated 
them. 

Yes, I said ; but Heracles himself is said not to be 
a match for two. 

Summon me then, he said, and I will be your lolaus 
until the sun goes down. 

I summon you rather, I rejoined, not as Heracles 
summoning lolaus, but as lolaus might summon Hera 
cles. 

That will do as well, he said. But first let us take 
care that we avoid a danger. 

Of what nature ? I said. 

Lest we become misologists, he replied : no worse 
thing can happen to a man than this. For as there are 
misanthropists or haters of men, there are also miso 
logists or haters of ideas, and both spring from the 
same cause, which is ignorance of the world. Misan 
thropy arises out of the too great confidence of in 
experience; you trust a man and think him altogether 
true and sound and faithful, and then in a little while 
he turns out to be false and knavish ; and then another 
and another, and when this has happened several times 
Q* 



228 The danger of misology 

to a man, especially when it happens among those whom 
he deems to be his own most trusted and familiar 
friends, and he has often quarrelled with them, he at 
last hates all men, and believes that no one has any 
good in him at all. You must have observed this trait 
of character ? 

I have. 

And is not the feeling discreditable? Is it not 
obvious that such an one having to deal with other men, 
was clearly without any experience of human nature ; for 
experience would have taught him the true state of the 
90 case, that few are the good and few the evil, and that 
the great majority are in the interval between them. 

What do you mean ? I said. 

I mean, he replied, as you might say of the very large 
and very small that nothing is more uncommon than 
a very large or very small man ; and this applies gener 
ally to all extremes, whether of great and small, or 
swift and slow, or fair and foul, or black and white : 
and whether the instances you select be men or dogs 
or anything else, few are the extremes, but many are in 
the mean between them. Did you never observe this ? 

Yes, I said, 1 have. 

And do you not imagine, he said, that if there were 
a competition in evil, the worst would be found to be 
very few? 

Yes, that is very likely, I said. 

Yes, that is very likely, he replied ; although in this 
respect arguments are unlike men there I was led on 
by you to say more than I had intended ; but the point 



The cause of misology 229 

of comparison was, that when a simple man who has 
no skill in dialectics believes an argument to be true 
which he afterwards imagines to be false, whether 
really false or not, and then another and another, he has 
no longer any faith left, and great disputers, as you 
know, come to think at last that they have grown to be 
the wisest of mankind ; for they alone perceive the 
utter unsoundness and instability of all arguments, or 
indeed, of all things, which, like the currents in the 
Euripus, are going up and down in never-ceasing ebb 
and flow. 

That is quite true, I said. 

Yes, Phaedo, he replied, and how melancholy, if 
there be such a thing as truth or certainty or possibility 
of knowledge that a man should have lighted upon 
some argument or other which at first seemed true and 
then turned out to be false, and instead of blaming 
himself and his own want of wit, because he is annoyed, 
should at last be too glad to transfer the blame from 
himself to arguments in general : and for ever afterwards 
should hate and revile them, and lose truth and the 
knowledge of realities. 

Yes, indeed, I said ; that is very melancholy. 

Let us then, in the first place, he said, be careful of 
allowing or of admitting into our souls the notion that 
there is no health or soundness in any arguments at all. 
Rather say that we have not yet attained to soundness 
in ourselves, and that we must struggle manfully and do 
our best to gain health of mind you and all other men 
having regard to the whole of your future life, and I 



230 How Socrates deals with doubt 

91 myself in the prospect of death. For at this moment 
I am sensible that I have not the temper of a philo 
sopher ; like the vulgar, I am only a partisan. Now 
the partisan, when he is engaged in a dispute, cares 
nothing about the rights of the question, but is anxious 
only to convince his hearers of his own assertions. 
And the difference between him and me at the present 
moment is merely this that whereas he seeks to con- 
, vince his hearers that what he says is true, I am rather 
seeking to convince myself; to convince my hearers is 
la secondary matter with me. And do but see how 
much I gain by the argument. For if what I say is 
true, then I do well to be persuaded of the truth ; but 
if there be nothing after death, still, during the short 
time that remains, I shall not distress my friends with 
lamentations, and my ignorance will not last, but will 
die with me, and therefore no harm will be done. This 
is the state of mind, Simmias and Cebes, in which I 
approach the argument. And I would ask you to be 
thinking of the truth and not of Socrates: agree with 
me, if I seem to you to be speaking the truth ; or if 
not, withstand me might and main, that I may not 
deceive you as well as myself in my enthusiasm, and 
like the bee, leave my sting in you before I die. 

And now let us proceed, he said. And first of all 
let me be sure that I have in my mind what you were 
saying. Simmias, if I remember rightly, has fears and 
misgivings whether the soul, although a fairer and 
diviner thing than the body, being as she is in the form 
of harmony, may not perish first. On the other hand, 



The soul not a harmony 231 

Cebes appeared to grant that the soul was more lasting 
than the body, but he said that no one could know 
whether the soul, after having worn out many bodies, 
might not perish herself and leave her last body behind 
her ; and that this is death, which is the destruction 
not of the body but of the soul, for in the body the 
work of destruction is ever going on. Are not these, 
Simmias and Cebes, the points which we have to consider ? 

They both agreed to this statement of them. 

He proceeded : And did you deny the force of the 
whole preceding argument, or of a part only ? 

Of a part only, they replied. 

And what did you think, he said, of that part of the 
argument in which we said that knowledge was re 
collection, and hence inferred that the soul must have 
previously existed somewhere else before she was enclosed in the body ? 

Cebes said that he had been wonderfully impressed 
by that part of the argument, and that his conviction 
remained absolutely unshaken. Simmias agreed, and 
added that he himself could hardly imagine the pos 
sibility of his ever thinking differently. 

But, rejoined Socrates, you will have to think differ 
ently, my Theban friend, if you still maintain that 
harmony is a compound, and that the soul is a harmony 
which is made out of strings set in the frame of the 
body ; for you will surely never allow yourself to say 
that a harmony is prior to the elements which com- 
pose it. 



Harmony not prior to the lyre 

Never, Socrates. 

But do you not see that this is what you imply when 
you say that the soul existed before she took the form 
and body of man, and was made up of elements which 
as yet had no existence ? For harmony is not like the 
soul, as you suppose ; but first the lyre, and the strings, 
and the sounds exist in a state of discord, and then 
harmony is made last of all, and perishes first. And how 
can such a notion of the soul as this agree with the other ? 

Not at all, replied Simmias. 

And yet, he said, there surely ought to be harmony 
in a discourse of which harmony is the theme ? 

There ought, replied Simmias. 

But there is no harmony, he said, in the two proposi 
tions that knowledge is recollection, and that the soul 
is a harmony. Which of them will you retain ? 

I think, he replied, that I have a much stronger faith, 
Socrates, in the first of the two, which has been fully 
demonstrated to me, than in the latter, which has not 
been demonstrated at all, but rests only on probable and 
plausible grounds ; and is therefore believed by the 
many. I know too well that these arguments from 
probabilities are impostors, and unless great caution is 
observed in the use of them, they are apt to be decep 
tive in geometry, and in other things too. But the 
doctrine of knowledge and recollection has been proven 
to me on trustworthy grounds : and the proof was that 
the soul must have existed before she came into the 
body, because to her belongs the essence of which the 
very name implies existence. Having, as 1 am con- 



Harmony admits of degrees 233 

vinced, rightly accepted this conclusion, and on sufficient 
grounds, I must, as I suppose, cease to argue or allow 
others to argue that the soul is a harmony. 

Let me put the matter, Simmias, he said, in another 
point of view : Do you imagine that a harmony or any 
other composition can be in a state other than that of 93 
the elements, out of which it is compounded ? 

Certainly not. 

Or do or suffer anything other than they do or suffer I 

He agreed. 

Then a harmony does not, properly speaking, lead 
the parts or elements which make up the harmony, but 
only follows them. 

He assented. 

For harmony cannot possibly have any motion, or 
sound, or other quality which is opposed to its parts. 

That would be impossible, he replied. 

And does not the nature of every harmony depend 
upon the manner in which the elements are harmonized ? 

I do not understand you, he said. 

I mean to say that a harmony admits of degrees, and 
is more of a harmony, and more completely a harmony, 
when more truly and fully harmonized, to any extent 
which is possible ; and less of a harmony, and less 
completely a harmony, when less truly and fully har 
monized. 

True. 

But does the soul admit of degrees ? or is one soul 
in the very least degree more or less, or more or less 
completely, a soul than another? 



234 The soul does not admit degrees 

o 

Not in the least. 

Yet surely of two souls, one is said to have intel 
ligence and virtue, and to be good, and the other to 
have folly and vice, and to be an evil soul : and this is 
said truly ? 

Yes, truly. 

But what will those who maintain the soul to be a 
harmony say of this presence of virtue and vice in the 
soul ? will they say that here is another harmony, and 
another discord, and that the virtuous soul is harmonized, 
and herself being a harmony has another harmony within 
her, and that the vicious soul is inharmonical and has 
no harmony within her ? 

I cannot tell, replied Simmias ; but I suppose that 
something of the sort would be asserted by those who 
say that the soul is a harmony. 

And we have already admitted that no soul is more 
a soul than another ; which is equivalent to admitting 
that harmony is not more or less harmony, or more or 
less completely a harmony ? 

Quite true. 

And that which is not more or less a harmony is not 
more or less harmonized ? 

True. 

And that which is not more or less harmonized can 
not have more or less of harmony, but only an equal 
harmony ? 

Yes, an equal harmony. 

Then one soul not being more or less absolutely a 
soul than another, is not more or less harmonized ? 



The soul not a harmony 

Exactly. 

And therefore has neither more nor less of discord, 
nor yet of harmony ? 

She has not. 

And having neither more nor less of harmony or of 
discord, one soul has no more vice or virtue than 
another, if vice be discord and virtue harmony ? 

Not at all more. 

Or speaking more correctly, Simmias, the soul, if she 94 
is a harmony, will never have any vice ; because a har 
mony, being absolutely a harmony, has no part in the 
inharmonical. 

No. 

And therefore a soul which is absolutely a soul has 
no vice? 

How can she have, if the previous argument holds? 

Then, if all souls are equally by their nature souls, 
all souls of all living creatures will be equally good ? 

I agree with you, Socrates, he said. 

And can all this be true, think you ? he said ; for 
these are the consequences which seem to follow from 
the assumption that the soul is a harmony ? 

It cannot be true. 

Once more, he said, what ruler is there of the ele 
ments of human nature other than the soul, and es 
pecially the wise soul ? Do you know of any ? 

Indeed, I do not. 

And is the soul in agreement with the affections of 
the body ? or is she at variance with them ? For example, when the body is hot and thirsty, does not the soul incline us against drinking ? and when the body is 
hungry, against eating ? And this is only one instance 
out of ten thousand of the opposition of the soul to the 
things of the body. 

Very true. 

But we have already acknowledged that the soul, 
being a harmony, can never utter a note at variance with 
the tensions and relaxations and vibrations and other 
affections of the strings out of which she is composed ; 
she can only follow, she cannot lead them ? 

It must be so, he replied. 

And yet do we not now discover the soul to be 
doing the exact opposite leading the elements of which 
she is believed to be composed ; almost always opposing 
and coercing them in all sorts of ways throughout life, 
sometimes more violently with the pains of medicine and 
gymnastic ; then again more gently ; now threatening, 
now admonishing the desires, passions, fears, as if talk 
ing to a thing which is not herself, as Homer in the 
Odyssee represents Odysseus doing in the words 

' He beat his breast, and thus reproached his heart : 
Endure, my heart ; far worse hast thou endured ! ' 

Do you think that Homer wrote this under the idea 
that the soul is a harmony capable of being led by the 
affections of the body, and not rather of a nature which 
should lead and master them herself a far diviner 
thing than any harmony ? 

Yes, Socrates, I quite think so. 

Then, my friend, we can never be right in saying 



The doubt of Cebes remains 237 

that the soul is a harmony, for we should contradict the 9$ / 
divine Homer, and contradict ourselves. 

True, he said. 

Thus much, said Socrates, of Harmonia, your The- 
ban goddess, who has graciously yielded to us ; but 
what shall I say, Cebes, to her husband Cadmus, and 
how shall I make peace with him ? 

I think that you will discover a way of propitiating 
him, said Cebes; I am sure that you have put the 
argument with Harmonia in a manner that I could never 
have expected. For when Simmias was mentioning 
his difficulty, I quite imagined that no answer could be 
given to him, and therefore I was surprised at finding 
that his argument could not sustain the first onset of 
yours, and not impossibly the other, whom you call 
Cadmus, may share a similar fate. 

Nay, my good friend, said Socrates, let us not boast, 
lest some evil eye should put to flight the word which I 
am about to speak. That, however, may be left in the 
hands of those above ; while I draw near in Homeric 
fashion, and try the mettle of your words. Here lies 
the point : You want to have it proven to you that the 
soul is imperishable and immortal, and the philosopher 
who is confident in death appears to you to have but a 
vain and foolish confidence, if he believes that he will 
fare better in the world below than one who has led 
another sort of life, unless he can prove this : and you 
say that the demonstration of the strength and divinity 
of the soul, and of her existence prior to our becom 
ing men, does not necessarily imply her immortality. 



238 The difficulty restated 

Admitting the soul to be longlived, and to have known 
and done much in a former state, still she is not on that 
account immortal ; and her entrance into the human 
form may be a sort of disease which is the beginning of 
dissolution, and may at last, after the toils of life are over, 
end in that which is called death. And whether the 
soul enters into the body once only or many times, does 
not, as you say, make any difference in the fears of in 
dividuals. For any man, who is not devoid of sense, 
must fear, if he has no knowledge and can give no 
account of the soul's immortality. This, or something 
like this, I suspect to be your notion, Cebes ; and I 
designedly recur to it in order that nothing may escape 
us, and that you may, if you wish, add or subtract 
anything. 

But, said Cebes, as far as I see at present, I have 
nothing to add or subtract : I mean what you say that 
I mean. 

Socrates paused awhile, and seemed to be absorbed 
in reflection. At length he said: You are raising a 
tremendous question, Cebes, involving the whole nature 
96 f generation and corruption, about which, if you like, 
I will give you my own experience ; and if anything 
which I say is likely to avail towards the solution of 
your difficulty you may make use of it. 

I should very much like, said Cebes, to hear what 
you have to say. 

Then I will tell you, said Socrates. When I was 
young, Cebes, I had a prodigious desire to know that 
department of philosophy which is called the investigation of nature ; to know the causes of things, and why 
a thing is and is created or destroyed appeared to me to 
be a lofty profession ; and I was always agitating my 
self with the consideration of questions such as these : 
Is the growth of animals the result of some decay 
which the hot and cold principle contracts, as some 
have said ? Is the blood the element with which we 
think, or the air, or the fire ? or perhaps nothing of the 
kind but the brain may be the originating power of 
the perceptions of hearing and sight and smell, and 
memory and opinion may come from them, and science 
may be based on memory and opinion when they have 
attained fixity. And then I went on to examine the cor 
ruption of them, and then to the things of heaven and 
earth, and at last I concluded myself to be utterly and 
absolutely incapable of these enquiries, as I will satis 
factorily prove to you. For I was fascinated by them 
to such a degree that my eyes grew blind to things which 
I had seemed to myself, and also to others, to know 
quite well ; I forgot what I had before thought self- 
evident truths; e.g. such a fact as that the growth of 
man is the result of eating and drinking ; for when by the 
digestion of food flesh is added to flesh and bone to 
bone, and whenever there is an aggregation of congenial 
elements, the lesser bulk becomes larger and the small 
man great. Was not that a reasonable notion ? 

Yes, said Cebes, I think so. 

Well ; but let me tell you something more. There 
was a time when I thought that I understood the mean 
ing of greater and less pretty well ; and when I saw a 



240 Socrates rejects the physical theory 

great man standing by a little one, I fancied that one 
was taller than the other by a head ; or one horse would 
appear to be greater than another horse : and still more 
clearly did I seem to perceive that ten is two more than 
eight, and that two cubits are more than one, because 
two is the double of one. 

And what is now your notion of such matters ? said 
Cebes. 

I should be far enough from imagining, he replied, 
that I knew the cause of any of them, by heaven I should; 
for I cannot satisfy myself that, when one is added to 
9? one, the one to which the addition is made becomes two, 
or that the two units added together make two by reason 
of the addition. I cannot understand how, when sepa 
rated from the other, each of them was one and not 
two, and now, when they are brought together, the mere 
juxtaposition or meeting of them should be the cause of 
their becoming two : neither can I understand how the 
division of one is the way to make two ; for then a dif 
ferent cause would produce the same effect, as in the 
former instance the addition and juxtaposition of one to 
one was the cause of two, in this the separation and 
subtraction of one from the other would be the cause. 
Nor am I any longer satisfied that I understand the 
reason why one or anything else is either generated or 
destroyed or is at all, but I have in my mind some con 
fused notion of a new method, and can never admit the 
other. 

Then I heard some one reading, as he said, from a 
book of Anaxagoras, that mind was the disposer and 



The philosophy of Anaxagoras 241 

cause of all, and I was delighted at this notion, which 
appeared quite admirable, and I said to myself: If mind 
is the disposer, mind will dispose all for the best, and put 
each particular in the best place ; and I argued that if 
any one desired to find out the cause of the generation 
or destruction or existence of anything, he must find out 
what state of being or doing or suffering was best for that 
thing, and therefore a man had only to consider the best 
for himself and others, and then he would also know 
the worse, since the same science comprehended both. 
And I rejoiced to think that I had found in Anaxagoras 
a teacher of the causes of existence such as I desired, 
and I imagined that he would tell me first whether the 
earth is flat or round ; and whichever was true, he would 
proceed to explain the cause and the necessity of this 
being so, and then he would teach me the nature of the 
best and show that this was best ; and if he said that 
the earth was in the centre, he would further explain 
that this position was the best, and I should be satisfied 
with the explanation given, and not want any other sort 
of cause. And I thought that I would then go on and 98 
ask him about the sun and moon and stars, and that he 
would explain to me their comparative swiftness, and 
their returnings and various states, active and passive, 
and how all of them were for the best. For I could 
not imagine that when he spoke of mind as the disposer 
of them, he would give any other account of their being 
as they are, except that this was best ; and I thought 
that when he had explained to me in detail the cause 
of each and the cause of all, he would go on to explain to me what was best for each and what was good for all. 
These hopes I would not have sold for a large sum of 
money, and I seized the books and read them as fast as 
I could in my eagerness to know the better and the worse. 
What expectations I had formed, and how grievously 
was I disappointed ! As I proceeded, I found my philo 
sopher altogether forsaking mind or any other principle 
of order, but having recourse to air, and ether, and water, 
and other eccentricities. I might compare him to a 
person who began by maintaining generally that mind 
is the cause of the actions of Socrates, but who, when 
he endeavoured to explain the causes of my several actions 
in detail, went on to show that I sit here because my 
body is made up of bones and muscles ; and the bones, 
as he would say, are hard and have joints which divide 
them, and the muscles are elastic, and they cover the 
bones, which have also a covering or environment of 
flesh and skin which contains them ; and as the bones 
are lifted at their joints by the contraction or relaxation 
of the muscles, I am able to bend my limbs, and this 
is why I am sitting here in a curved posture that is 
what he would say ; and he would have a similar ex 
planation of my talking to you, which he would attribute 
to sound, and air, and hearing, and he would assign ten 
thousand other causes of the same sort, forgetting to 
mention the true cause, which is, that the Athenians 
have thought fit to condemn me, and accordingly I have 
thought it better and more right to remain here and 
undergo my sentence ; for I am inclined to think that 
99 these muscles and bones of mine would have gone offlong 



Difference of conditions and causes 243 

ago to Megara or Boeotia by the dog they would, if they 
had been moved only by their own idea of what was 
best, and if I had not chosen the better and nobler part, 
instead of playing truant and running away, of enduring 
any punishment which the state inflicts. There is surely 
a strange confusion of causes and conditions in all 
this. It may be said, indeed, that without bones and 
muscles and the other parts of the body I cannot exe 
cute my purposes. But to say that I do as I do because 
of them, and that this is the way in which mind acts, 
and not from the choice of the best, is a very careless 
and idle mode of speaking. I wonder that they cannot 
distinguish the cause from the condition, which the many, 
feeling about in the dark, are always mistaking and mis 
naming. And thus one man makes a vortex all round 
and steadies the earth by the heaven ; another gives the 
air as a support to the earth, which is a sort of broad 
trough. Any power which in arranging them as they 
are arranges them for the best never enters into their 
minds ; and instead of finding any superior strength in 
it, they rather expect to discover another Atlas of the 
world who is stronger and more everlasting and more 
containing than the good ; of the obligatory and con 
taining power of the good they think nothing ; and yet 
this is the principle which I would fain learn if any one 
would teach me. But as I have failed either to discover 
myself, or to learn of any one else, the nature of the 
best, I will exhibit to you, if you like, what I have 
found to be the second best mode of enquiring into the 
cause. 

ft I 



244 The method of Plato 

I should very much like to hear, he replied. 

Socrates proceeded : I thought that as I had failed 
in 'the contemplation of true existence, I ought to be 
careful that I did not lose the eye of my soul; as 
people may injure their bodily eye by observing and gazing 
on the sun during an eclipse, unless they take the 
precaution of only looking at the image reflected in the 
water, or in some similar medium. So in my own case, 
I was afraid that my soul might be blinded altogether 
if I looked at things with my eyes or tried to apprehend 
them by the help of the senses. And I thought that I 
had better have recourse to the world of mind and seek 
100 there the truth of existence. I dare say that the simile 

is not perfect for I am very far from admitting that he 

who contemplates existences through the medium of 
thought, sees them only ' through a glass darkly,' any 
more than he who considers them in action and opera 
tion. However, this was the method which I adopted : 
I first assumed some principle which I judged to be the 
strongest, and then I affirmed as true whatever seemed 
to agree with this, whether relating to the cause or to 
anything else ; and that which disagreed I regarded as 
untrue. But I should like to explain my meaning more 
clearly, as I do not think that you as yet understand me. 

No indeed, replied Cebes, not very well. 

There is nothing new, he said, in what I am about 
to tell you ; but only what I have been always and every 
where repeating in the previous discussion and on other 
occasions : I want to show you the nature of that cause 
which has occupied my thoughts. I shall have to go 



The theory of Ideas 24.7 

back to those familiar words which are in the mouth of 
every one, and first of all assume that there is an absolute 
beauty and goodness and greatness, and the like ; grant 
me this, and I hope to be able to show you the nature 
of the cause, and to prove the immortality of the soul. 

Cebes said : You may proceed at once with the proof, 
for I grant you this. 

Well, he said, then I should like to know whether 
you agree with me in the next step ; for I cannot help 
thinking, if there be anything beautiful other than 
absolute beauty should there be such, that it can be 
beautiful only in so far as it partakes of absolute beauty 
and I should say the same of everything. Do you 
agree in this notion of the cause ? 

Yes, he said, I agree. 

He proceeded : I know nothing and can understand 
nothing of any other of those wise causes which are 
alleged ; and if a person says to me that the bloom of 
colour, or form, or any such thing is a source of beauty, 
I leave all that, which is only confusing to me, and 
simply and singly, and perhaps foolishly, hold and am 
assured in my own mind ^that nothing makes a thing 
beautJfid but h,S pp*""*"^ aaO^aarUcipatlUll uf beauty 111 
whatever way or manner obtained for *$ {o the manner^ 
I am uncertain, but I stoutly contend that by beauty all 
beautiful things become beautiful. This appears to me 
ToUe the safest answeT which I can give, either to my 
self or to another, and to this I cling, in the persuasion 
that this principle will never be overthrown, and that to 
myself or to any one who asks the question, I may 



246 Necessity of ideal principles 

I safely reply, That by beauty beautiful things become 
beautiful. Do you not agree with me ? 

I do. 

And that by greatness only great things become great 
and greater greater, and by smallness the less become less. 

True. 

Then if a person were to remark that A is taller by 
101 a head than B, and B less by a head than A, you would 
refuse to admit his statement, and would stoutly contend 
that what you mean is only that the greater is greater by, 
and by reason of, greatness, and the less is less only by, 
and by reason of, smallness ; and thus you would avoid 
the danger of saying that the greater is greater and the 
less less by the measure of the head, which is the same 
in both, and would also avoid the monstrous absurdity 
of supposing that the greater man is greater by reason 
of the head, which is small. You would be afraid to 
draw such an inference, would you not ? 

Indeed, I should, said Cebes, laughing. 

In like manner you would be afraid to say that ten 
exceeded eight by, and by reason of, two ; but would 
say by, and by reason of, number ; or you would say 
that two cubits exceed one cubit not by a half, but by 
magnitude ? for there is the same liability to error in 
all these cases. 

Very true, he said. 

Again, would you not be cautious of affirming that 
the addition of one to one, or the division of one, is the 
cause of two ? And you would loudly asseverate that 
you know of no way in which anything comes into ex- 



Ascent to a highest principle 247 

istence except by participation in its own proper essence, 
and consequently, as far as you know, the only cause 
of two is the participation in duality this is the way to 
make two, and the participation in one is the way to 
make one. You would say : I will let alone puzzles 
of division and addition wiser heads than mine may 
answer them ; inexperienced as I am, and ready to start, 
as the proverb says, at my own shadow, I cannot afford 
to give up the sure ground of a principle. And if any 
one assails you there, you would not mind him, or answer 
him, until you had seen whether the consequences which 
follow agree with one another or not, and when you are 
further required to give an explanation of this principle, 
you would go on to assume a higher principle, and a 
higher, until you found a resting-place in the best of the 
higher ; but you would not confuse the principle and 
the consequences in your reasoning, like the Eristics at 
least if you wanted to discover real existence. Not 
that this confusion signifies to them, who never care or 
think about the matter at all, for they have the wit to 
be well pleased with themselves however great may be 
the turmoil of their ideas. But you, if you are a philo- ioa 
sopher, will certainly do as I say. 

What you say is most true, said Simmias and Cebes, 
both speaking at once. 

Ecb. Yes, Phaedo; and I do not wonder at their 
assenting. Any one who has the least sense will acknow 
ledge the wonderful clearness of Socrates' reasoning. 

Phaed. Certainly, Echecrates; and such was the 
feeling of the whole company at the time. 



248 Greatness absolute and relative 

Ech. Yes, and equally of ourselves, who were not of 
the company, and are now listening to your recital. But 
what followed ? 

Phaed. After all this had been admitted, and they 
had agreed that ideas exist, and that other things par 
ticipate in them and derive their names from them, 
Socrates, if I remember rightly, said : 

This is your way of speaking; and yet when you 
say that Simmias is greater than Socrates and less than 
Phaedo, do you not predicate of Simmias both greatness 
and smallness ? 

Yes, I do. 

But still you allow that Simmias does not really exceed Socrates, as the words may seem to imply, because 
he is Simmias, but by reason of the size which he has ; 
just as Simmias does not exceed Socrates because he is 
Simmias, any more than because Socrates is Socrates, 
but because he has smallness when compared with the 
greatness of Simmias ? 

True. 

And if Phaedo exceeds him in size, this is not because 
Phaedo is Phaedo, but because Phaedo has greatness 
relatively to Simmias, who is comparatively smaller ? 

That is true. 

And therefore Simmias is said to be great, and is 
also said to be small, because he is in a mean between 
them, exceeding the smallness of the one by his great 
ness, and allowing the greatness of the other to exceed 
his smallness. He added, laughing, I am speaking like 
a book, but I believe that what I am saying is true. 



Abstract and concrete opposition 249 

Simmias assented. 

I speak as I do because I want you to agree with me 
in thinking, not only that absolute greatness will never 
be great and also small, but that greatness in us or in 
the concrete will never admit the small or admit of 
being exceeded : instead of this, one of two things 
will happen, either the greater will fly or retire before 
the opposite, which is the less, or at the approach of the 
less has already ceased to exist ; but will not, if allowing 
or admitting of smallness, be changed by that ; even as 
I, having received andadmitted smallness when compared 
with Simmias, remain just as I was, and am the same 
small person. And as the idea of greatness cannot 
condescend ever to be or become small, in like manner 
the smallness in us cannot be or become great ; nor can 
any other opposite which remains the same ever be or 
become its own opposite, but either passes away or 103 
perishes in the change. 

That, replied Cebes, is quite my notion. 

Hereupon one of the company, though I do not 
exactly remember which of them, said : In heaven's 
name, is not this the direct contrary of what was ad 
mitted before that out of the greater came the less 
and out of the less the greater, and that opposites were 
simply generated from opposites ; but now this principle 
seems to be utterly denied. 

Socrates inclined his head to the speaker and listened. 
I like your courage, he said, in reminding us of this. 
But you do not observe that there is a difference in the 
two cases. For then we were speaking of opposites in 



Abstract opposite* cannot combine 

the concrete, and now of the essential opposite which, 
as is affirmed, neither in us nor in nature can ever be at 
variance with itself: then, ray friend, we were speaking 
of things in which opposites are inherent and which are 
called after them, but now about the opposites which are 
inherent in them and which give their name to them ; 
and these essential opposites will never, as we maintain, 
admit of generation into or out of one another. At the 
same time, turning to Cebes, he said : Are you at all 
disconcerted, Cebes, at our friend's objection ? 

No, I do not feel so, said Cebes ; and yet I cannot 
deny that I am often disturbed by objections. 

Then we are agreed after all, said Socrates, that the 
opposite will never in any case be opposed to itself? 

To that we are quite agreed, he replied. 

Yet once more let me ask you to consider the ques 
tion from another point of view, and see whether you 
agree with me : There is a thing which you term heat, 
and another thing which you term cold ? 

Certainly. 

But are they the same as fire and snow ? 

Most assuredly not. 

Heat is a thing different from fire, and cold is not 
the same with snow ? 

Yes. 

And yet you will surely admit, that when snow, as 
was before said, is under the influence of heat, they will 
not remain snow and heat; but at the advance of the 
heat, the snow will either retire or perish ? 

Very true, he replied. 



Does this ever apply to the concrete? 271 

And the fire too at the advance of the cold will either 
retire or perish ; and when the fire is under the influence 
of the cold, they will not remain as before, fire and cold. 

That is true, he said. 

And in some cases the name of the idea is not only 
attached to the idea in an eternal connexion, but any 
thing else which, not being the idea, exists only in the 
form of the idea, may also lay claim to it. I will try 
to make this clearer by an example : The odd number 
is always called by the name of odd ? 

Very true. 

But is this the only thing which is called odd ? Are 
there not other things which have their own name, and 104 
yet are called odd, because, although not the same as 
oddness, they are never without oddness ? that is what 
I mean to ask whether numbers such as the number 
three are not of the class of odd. And there are many 
other examples : would you not say, for example, that 
three may be called by its proper name, and also be 
called odd, which is not the same with three ? and this 
may be said not only of three but also of five, and of 
every alternate number each of them without being 
oddness is odd ; and in the same way two and four, 
and the other series of alternate numbers, has every 
number even, without being evenness. Do you agree ? 

Of course. 

Then now mark the point at which I am aiming : 
not only do essential opposites exclude one another, but 
also concrete things, which, although not in themselves 
opposed, contain opposites ; these, I say, likewise reject 



The illustration from number 

the idea which is opposed to that which is contained in 
them, and when it approaches them they either perish 
or withdraw. For example: Will not the number 
three endure annihilation or anything sooner than be 
converted into an even number, while remaining three ? 

Very true, said Cebes. 

And yet, he said, the number two is certainly not 
opposed to the number three ? 

It is not. 

Then not only do opposite ideas repel the advance of 
one another, but also there are other natures which 
repel the approach of opposites. 

Very true, he said. 

Suppose, he said, that we endeavour, if possible, to 
determine what these are. 

By all means. 

Are they not, Cebes, such as compel the things of 
which they have possession, not only to take their own 
form, but also the form of some opposite ? 

What do you mean ? 

I mean, as I was just now saying, and as I am sure 
that you know, that those things which are possessed by 
the number three must not only be three in number, but 
must also be odd. 

Quite true. 

And on this oddness, of which the number three has 
the impress, the opposite idea will never intrude ? 

No. 

And this impress was given by the odd principle ? 

Yes. 


And to the odd is opposed the even ? 

True. 

Then the idea of the even number will never arrive 
at three ? 

No. 

Then three has no part in the even ? 

None. 

Then the triad or number three is uneven ? 

Very true. 

To return then to my distinction of natures which 
are not opposed, and yet do not admit opposites as, in 
the instance given, three, although not opposed to the 
even, does not any the more admit of the even, but al 
ways brings the opposite into play on the other side ; or as 
two does not receive the odd, or fire the cold from 105 
these examples (and there are many more of them) 
perhaps you may be able to arrive at the general conclu 
sion, that not only opposites will not receive opposites, 
but also that nothing which brings the opposite will 
admit the opposite of that which it brings, in that to 
which it is brought. And here let me recapitulate 
for there is no harm in repetition. The number five will 
not admit the nature of the even, any more than ten, which 
is the double of five, will admit the nature of the odd. 
The double has another opposite, and is not strictly 
opposed to the odd, but nevertheless rejects the odd alto 
gether. Nor again will parts in the ratio 3 : 2, nor any 
fraction in which there is a half, nor again in which there 
is a third, admit the notion of the whole, although they 
are not opposed to the whole : You will agree ? 



Their necessary connexion 

Yes, he said, I entirely agree and go along with you 
in that. 

And now, he said, let us begin again ; and do not 
you answer my question in the words in which I ask it : 
let me have not the old safe answer of which I spoke 
at first, but another equally safe, of which the truth 
will be inferred by you from what has been just said. 
I mean that if any one asks you ' what that is, of which 
the inherence makes the body hot,' you will reply not 
heat (this is what I call the safe and stupid answer), 
but fire, a far superior answer, which we are now in a 
condition to give. Or if any one asks you ' why a 
body is diseased,' you will not say from disease, but 
from fever; and instead of saying that oddness is the 
cause of odd numbers, you will say that the monad is 
the cause of them : and so of things in general, as I 
dare say that you will understand sufficiently without my 
adducing any further examples. 

Yes, he said, I quite understand you. 

Tell me, then, what is that of which the inherence 
will render the body alive ? 

The soul, he replied. 

And is this always the case ? 

Yes, he said, of course. 

Then whatever the soul possesses, to that she comes 
bearing life ? 

Yes, certainly. 

And is there any opposite to life ? 

There is, he said. 

And what is that ? 



'The soul cannot die 2ff 

Death. 

Then the soul, as has been acknowledged, will never 
receive the opposite of what she brings. 

Impossible, replied Cebes. 

And now, he said, what did we just now call that 
principle which repels the even ? 

The odd. 

And that principle which repels the musical or the 
just ? 

The unmusical, he said, and the unjust. 

And what do we call that principle which does not 
admit of death ? 

The immortal, he said. 

And does the soul admit of death ? 

No. 

Then the soul is immortal ? 

Yes, he said. 



And may we say that this has been proven ? 

Yes, abundantly proven, Socrates, he replied. 

Supposing that the odd were imperishable, must not
three be imperishable ? 

Of course. 

And if that which is cold were imperishable, when 
the warm principle came attacking the snow, must not 
the snow have retired whole and un melted for it could 
never have perished, nor could it have remained and 
admitted the heat ? 

True, he said. What then is death? 

Again, if the uncooling or warm principle were im 
perishable, the fire when assailed by cold would not 
have perished or have been extinguished, but would 
have gone away unaffected ? 

Certainly, he said. 

And the same may be said of the immortal : if the 
immortal is also imperishable, the soul when attacked by 
death cannot perish ; for the preceding argument shows 
that the soul will not admit of death, or ever be dead, 
any more than three or the odd number will admit of 
the even, or fire, or the heat in the fire, of the cold. 
Yet a person may say : ' But although the odd will not 
become even at the approach of the even, why may not 
the odd perish and the even take the place of the odd ? ' 
Now to him who makes this objection, we cannot 
answer that the od,d principle is imperishable ; for this 
has not been acknowledged, but if this had been ac 
knowledged, there would have been no difficulty in con 
tending that at the approach of the even the odd prin 
ciple and the number three took their departure ; and 
the same argument would have held good of fire and 
heat and any other thing. 

Very true. 

And the same may be said of the immortal : if the 
immortal is also imperishable, then the soul will be 
imperishable as well as immortal ; but if not, some 
other proof of .her imperishableness will have to be 
given. 

No other proof is needed, he said ; for if the im 
mortal, being eternal, is liable to perish, then nothing is 
imperishable. 

Yes, replied Socrates, and yet all men will agree 



Conclusion of the argument 25-7 

that God, and the essential form of life, and the im 
mortal in general, will never perish. 

Yes, all men, he said that is true; and what is 
more, gods, if I am not mistaken, as well as men. 

Seeing then that the immortal is indestructible, must 
not the soul, if she is immortal, be also imperishable ? 

Most certainly. 

Then when death attacks a man, the mortal portion 
of him may be supposed to die, but the immortal retires 
at the approach of death and is preserved safe and 
sound ? 

True. 

Then, Cebes, beyond question, the soul is immortal 
and imperishable, and our souls will truly exist in 107 
another world ! 

I am convinced, Socrates, said Cebes, and have 
nothing more to object ; but if my friend Simmias, or 
any one else, has any further objection to make, he had 
better speak out, and not keep silence, since I do not 
know to what other season he can defer the discussion, 
if there is anything which he wants to say or to have 
said. 

But I have nothing more to say, replied Simmias; 
nor can I see any reason for doubt after what has been 
said. But I still feel and cannot help feeling uncertain 
in my own mind, when I think of the greatness of the 
subject and the feebleness of man. 

Yes, Simmias, replied Socrates, that is well said: 
and I may add that first principles, even if they appear 
certain should be carefully considered ; and when they 



2 f 8 Myth of the future life 

are satisfactorily ascertained, then, with a sort of hesi 
tating confidence in human reason, you may, I think, 
follow the course of the argument ; and if that be 
plain and clear, there will be no need for any further 
enquiry. 

Very true. 

But then, O my friends, he said, if the soul is really 
immortal, what care should be taken of her, not only in 
respect of the portion of time which is called life, but 
of eternity ! And the danger of neglecting her from 
this point of view does indeed appear to be awful. If 
death had only been the end of all, the wicked would 
have had a good bargain in dying, for they would have 
been happily quit not only of their body, but of their 
own evil together with their souls. But now, inasmuch 
as the soul is manifestly immortal, there is no release or 
salvation from evil except the attainment of the highest 
virtue and wisdom. For the soul when on her progress 
to the world below takes nothing with her but nurture 
and education ; and these are said greatly to benefit 
or greatly to injure the departed, at the very beginning 
of his journey thither. 

For after death, as they say, the genius of each 
individual, to whom he belonged in life, leads him to 
a certain place in which the dead are gathered together, 
whence after judgment has been given they pass into 
the world below, following the guide, who is appointed 
to conduct them from this world to the other : and 
when they have there received their due and remained 
their time, another guide brings them back again after 



The soul goes to its place 25-9 

many revolutions of ages. Now this way to the other 
world is not, as Aeschylus says in the Telephus, 108 
a single and straight path if that were so no guide 
would be needed, for no one could miss it ; but there 
are many partings of the road, and windings, as I 
infer from the rites and sacrifices which are offered 
to the gods below in places where three ways meet 
on earth. The wise and orderly soul follows in the 
straight path and is conscious of her surroundings ; but 
the soul which desires the body, and which, as I was 
relating before, has long been fluttering about the lifeless 
frame and the world of sight, is after many struggles 
and many sufferings hardly and with violence carried 
away by her attendant genius ; and when she arrives at 
the place where the other souls are gathered, if she 
be impure and have done impure deeds, whether foul 
murders or other crimes which are the brothers of 
these, and the works of brothers in crime from that 
soul every one flees and turns away ; no one will be her 
companion, no one her guide, but alone she wanders in 
extremity of evil until certain times are fulfilled, and 
when they are fulfilled, she is borne irresistibly to her 
own fitting habitation ; as every pure and just soul which 
has passed through life in the company and under the 
guidance of the gods has also her own proper home. 

Now the earth has divers wonderful regions, and is 
indeed in nature and extent very unlike the notions of 
geographers, as I believe on the authority of one who 
shall be nameless. 

What do you mean, Socrates ? said Simmias. I have 

S 2 



2.6 o Description of the earth 

myself heard many descriptions of the earth, but I do 
not know, and I should very much like to know, in 
which of thse you put faith. 

And I, Simmias, replied Socrates, if I had the art of 
Glaucus would tell you ; although I know not that the 
art of Glaucus could prove the truth of my tale, which 
I myself should never be able to prove, and even if 
I could, I fear, Simmias, that my life would come to 
an end before the argument was completed. I may 
describe to you, however, the form and regions of the 
. earth according to my conception of them. 

That, said Simmias, will be enough. 

Well then, he said, my conviction is, that the earth 
is a round body in the centre of the heavens, and there- 
109 fore has no need of air or of any similar force to be 
a support, but is kept there and hindered from falling or 
inclining any way by the equability of the surrounding 
heaven and by her own equipoise. For that which, 
being in equipoise, is in the centre of that which is 
equably diffused, will not incline any way in any degree, 
but will always remain in the same state and not deviate. 
And this is my first notion. 

Which is surely a correct one, said Simmias. 
,/ Also I believe that the earth is very vast, and that 
we who dwell in the region extending from the river 
Phasis to the Pillars of Heracles inhabit a small portion 
only about the sea, like ants or frogs about a marsh, 
and that there are other inhabitants of many other like 
places ; for everywhere on the face of the earth there 
are hollows of various forms and sizes, into which the 



Its upper and lowet regions 261 

water and the mist and the lower air collect. But the 
true earth is pure and situated in the pure heaven 
there are the stars also; and it is the heaven which 
is commonly spoken of by us as the ether, and of 
which our own earth is the sediment gathering in the 
hollows beneath. But we who live in these hollows 
are deceived into the notion that we are dwelling above 
on the surface of the earth ; which is just as if a creature 
who was at the bottom of the sea were to fancy that he 
was on the surface of the water, and that the sea was 
the heaven through which he saw the sun and the other 
stars, he having never come to the surface by reason of 
his feebleness and sluggishness, and having never lifted 
up his head and seen, nor ever heard from one who 
had seen, how much purer and fairer the world above is 
than his own. And such is exactly our case : for we 
are dwelling in a hollow of the earth, and fancy that we 
are on the surface ; and the air we call the heaven, in 
which we imagine that the stars move. But the fact is, 
that owing to our feebleness and sluggishness we are 
prevented from reaching the surface of the air : for 
if any man could arrive at the exterior limit, or take 
the wings of a bird and come to the top, then like a fish 
who puts his head out of the water and sees this world, 
he would see a world beyond; and, if the nature of 
man could sustain the sight, he would acknowledge that 
this other world was the place of the true heaven and 
the true light and the true earth. For our earth, and 110 
the stones, and the entire region which surrounds us, 
are spoilt and corroded, as in the sea all things are corroded by the brine, neither is there any noble or 
perfect growth, but caverns only, and sand, and an end 
less slough of mud ; and even the shore is not to be 
compared to the fairer sights of this world. And still 
Jess is this our world to be compared with the other. 
Of that upper earth which is under the heaven, I can 
tell you a charming tale, Simmias, which is well worth 
hearing. 

And we, Socrates, replied Simmias, shall be charmed 
to listen to you. 

The tale, my friend, he said, is as follows : In the 
first place, the earth, when looked at from above, is in 
appearance streaked like one of those balls which have 
leather coverings in twelve pieces, and is decked with 
various colours, of which the colours used by painters 
on earth are in a manner samples. But there the whole 
earth is made up of them, and they are brighter far and 
clearer than ours ; there is a purple of wonderful lustre, 
also the radiance of gold, and the white which is in the 
earth is whiter than any chalk or snow. Of these and 
other colours the earth is made up, and they are more 
in number and fairer than the eye of man has ever seen ; 
the very hollows (of which I was speaking) filled with 
air and water have a colour of their own, and are seen 
like light gleaming amid the diversity of the other 
colours, so that the whole presents a single and con 
tinuous appearance of variety in unity. And in this 
fair region everything that grows trees, and flowers 
and fruits are in a like degree fairer than any here; 
and there are hills, having stones in them in a like 



The regions of bliss 2.6$ 

degree smoother, and more transparent, and fairer in 
colour than our highly-valued emeralds and sardonyxes 
and jaspers, and other gems, which are but minute 
fragments of them : for there all the stones are like our 
precious stones, and fairer still *. The reason is, that 
they are pure, and not, like our precious stones, infected 
or corroded by the corrupt briny elements which coagulate 
among us, and which breed foulness and disease both 
in earth and stones, as well as in animals and plants. 
They are the jewels of the upper earth, which also 
shines with gold and silver and the like, and they are m 
set in the light of day and are large and abundant and 
in all places^ making the earth a sight to gladden the 
beholder's eye. And there are animals and men, some 
in a middle region, others dwelling about the air as we 
dwell about the sea ; others in islands which the air 
flows round, near the continent ; and in a word, the air 
is used by them as the water and the sea are by us, and 
the ether is to them what the air is to us. Moreover, 
the temperament of their seasons is such that they have 
no disease, and live much longer than we do, and have 
sight and hearing and smell, and all the other senses, in 
far greater perfection, in the same proportion that air is 
purer than water or the ether than air. Also they have 
temples and sacred places in which the gods really dwell, 
and they hear their voices and receive their answers, and 
are conscious of them and hold converse with them ; 
and they see the sun, moon, and stars as they truly are, 
and their other blessedness is of a piece with this. 
1 Cp. Rev., esp. c. xxi. v. 18 ft. 



The regions of love 

Such is the nature of the whole earth, and of the 
things which are around the earth ; and there are divers 
regions in the hollows on the face of the globe every 
where, some of them deeper and more extended than 
that which we inhabit, others deeper but with a narrower 
opening than ours, and some are shallower and also 
wider. All have numerous perforations, and there are 
passages broad and narrow in the interior of the earth, 
connecting them with one another ; and there flows out 
of and into them, as into basins, a vast tide of water, 
and huge subterranean streams of perennial rivers, and 
springs hot and cold, and a great fire, and great rivers 
of fire, and streams of liquid mud, thin or thick (like 
the rivers of mud in Sicily, and the lava streams which 
follow them), and the regions about which they happen 
to flow are filled up with them. And there is a swing 
ing or see-saw in the interior of the earth which moves 
all this up and down, and is due to the following 
cause : There is a chasm which is the vastest of them 
ii a all, and pierces right through the whole earth; this is 
that chasm which Homer describes in the words, 

* Far off, where is the inmost depth beneath the earth '; 

and which he in other places, and many other poets, 
have called Tartarus. And the see-saw is caused by 
the streams flowing into and out of this chasm, and 
they each have the nature of the soil through which 
they flow. And the reason why the streams are always 
flowing in and out, is that the watery element has no 
bed or bottom, but is swinging and surging up and 



The regions of love 26? 

down, and the surrounding wind and air do the same ; 
they follow the water up and down, hither and thither, 
over the earth just as in the act of respiration the air 
is always in process of inhalation and exhalation ; and 
the wind swinging with the water in and out produces 
fearful and irresistible blasts : when the waters retire with 
a rush into the lower parts of the earth, as they are 
called, they flow through the earth in those regions, and 
fill them up like water raised by a pump, and then when 
they leave those regions and rush back hither, they again 
fill the hollows here, and when these are filled, flow 
through subterranean channels and find their way to 
their several places, forming seas, and lakes, and rivers, 
and springs. Thence they again enter the earth, some 
of them making a long circuit into many lands, others 
going to a few places and not so distant ; and again fall 
into Tartarus, some at a point a good deal lower than 
that at which they rose, and others not much lower, 
but all in some degree lower than the point from which 
they came. And some burst forth again on the opposite 
side, and some on the same side, and some wind round 
the earth with one or many folds like the coils of 
a serpent, and descend as far as they can, but always 
return and fall into the chasm. The rivers flowing in 
either direction can descend only to the centre and no 
further, for opposite to the rivers is a precipice. 

Now these rivers are many, and mighty, and diverse, 
and there are four principal ones, of which the greatest 
and outermost is that called Oceanus, which flows round 
the earth in a circle ; and in the opposite direction flows 



266 The rivers of the lower world 

IT 3 Acheron, which passes under the earth through desert 
places into the Acherusian lake : this is the lake to the 
shores of which the souls of the many go when they 
are dead, and after waiting an appointed time, which 
is to some a longer and to some a shorter time, they 
are sent back to be born again as animals. The third 
river passes out between the two, and near the place 
of outlet pours into a vast region of fire, and forms 
a lake larger than the Mediterranean Sea, boiling with 
water and mud ; and proceeding muddy and turbid, and 
winding about the earth, comes, among other places, to 
the extremities of the Acherusian lake, but mingles not 
with the waters of the lake, and after making many 
coils about the earth plunges into Tartarus at a deeper 
level. This is that Pyriphlegethon, as the stream is 
called, which throws up jets of fire in different parts of 
the earth. The fourth river goes out on the opposite 
side, and falls first of all into a wild and savage region, 
which is all of a dark blue colour, like lapis lazuli ; and 
this is that river which is called the Stygian river, and 
falls into and forms the Lake Styx, and after falling 
into the lake and receiving strange powers in the waters, 
passes under the earth, winding round in the opposite 
direction, and comes near the Acherusian lake from 
the opposite side to Pyriphlegethon. And the water 
of this river too mingles with no other, but flows round 
in a circle and falls into Tartarus over against Pyri 
phlegethon ; and the name of the river, as the poet says, 
is Cocytus. 

Such is the nature of the other world ; and when the 



Purgation and punishment 267 

dead arrive at the place to which the genius of each 
severally guides them, first of all, they have sentence 
passed upon them, as they have lived well and piously 
or not. And those who appear to have lived neither 
well nor ill, go to the river Acheron, and embarking in 
any vessels which they may find, are carried in them to 
the lake, and there they dwell and are purified of their 
evil deeds, and having suffered the penalty of the wrongs 
which they have done to others, they are absolved, and 
receive the rewards of their good deeds, each of them 
according to his deserts. But those who appear to be 
incurable by reason of the greatness of their crimes 
who have committed many and terrible deeds of sacrilege, 
murders foul and violent, or the like such are hurled 
into Tartarus which is their suitable destiny, and they 
never come out. Those again who have committed 
crimes, which, although great, are not irremediable 
who in a moment of anger, for example, have done 
some violence to a father or a mother, and have repented 
for the remainder of their lives, or, who have taken the 114 
life of another under the like extenuating circumstances 
these are plunged into Tartarus, the pains of which 
they are compelled to undergo for a year, but at the end 
of the year the wave casts them forth mere homicides 
by way of Cocytus, parricides and matricides by Pyri- 
phlegethon and they are borne to the Acherusian lake, 
and there they lift up their voices and call upon the 
victims whom they have slain or wronged, to have pity 
on them, and to be kind to them, and let them come 
out into the lake. And if they prevail, then they 



The moral of the tale 

come forth and cease from their troubles ; but if not, 
they are carried back again into Tartarus and from 
thence into the rivers unceasingly, until they obtain 
mercy from those whom they have wronged : for that 
is the sentence inflicted upon them by their judges. 
Those too who have been pre-eminent for holiness 
of life are released from this earthly prison, and go 
to their pure home which is above, and dwell in the 
purer earth ; and of these, such as have duly purified 
themselves with philosophy, live henceforth altogether 
without the body, in mansions fairer still, which may 
not be described, and of which the time would fail me 
to tell. 

Wherefore, Simmias, seeing all these things, what 
ought not we to do that we may obtain virtue and 
wisdom in this life? Fair is the prize, and the hope 
great ! 

A man of sense ought not to say, nor will I be very 
confident, that the description which I have given of 
the soul and her mansions is exactly true. But I do 
say that, inasmuch as the soul is shown to be immortal, 
he may venture to think, not improperly or unworthily, 
that something of the kind is true. The venture is 
a glorious one, and he ought to comfort himself with 
words like these, which is the reason why I lengthen 
out the tale. Wherefore, I say, let a man be of good 
cheer about his soul, who having cast away the pleasures 
and ornaments of the body as alien to him and working 
harm rather than good, has sought after the pleasures of 
knowledge ; and has arrayed the soul, not in sc nc foreign 



Last words of Socrates 269 

attire, but in her own proper jewels, temperance, and 
justice, and courage, and nobility, and truth in these 115 
adorned she is ready to go on her journey to the world 
below, when her hour comes. You, Simmias and Ceb-s, 
and all other men, will depart at some time or other. 
Me already, as a tragic poet would say, the voice of fate 
calls. Soon I must drink the poison ; and I think that 
I had better repair to the bath first, in order that the 
women may not have the trouble of washing my body 
after I am dead. 

When he had done speaking, Crito said : And have 
you any commands for us, Socrates anything to say 
about your children, or any other matter in which we 
can serve you? 

Nothing particular, Crito, he replied : only, as I 
have always told you, take care of yourselves ; that is a 
service which you may be ever rendering to me and 
mine and to all of us, whether you promise to do so or 
not. But if you have no thought for yourselves, and 
care not to walk according to the rule which I have 
prescribed for you, not now for the first time, however 
much you may profess or promise at the moment, it will 
be of no avail. 

We will do our best, said Crito : And in what way 
shall we bury you ? 

In any way that you like ; but you must get hold of 
me, and take care that I do not run away from you. 
Then he turned to us, and added with a smile: I 
cannot make Crito believe that I am the same Socrates 
who have been talking and conducting the argument ; 
he fancies that I am the other Socrates whom he will 
soon see, a dead body and he asks, How shall he 
bury me ? And though I have spoken many words in 
the endeavour to show that when I have drunk the 
poison I shall leave you and go to the joys of the blessed, 
these words of mine, with which I was comforting 
you and myself, have had, as I perceive, no effect upon 
Crito. And therefore I want you to be surety for me 
to him now, as at the trial he was surety to the judges 
for me : but let the promise be of another sort ; for he 
was surety for me to the judges that I would remain, 
and you must be my surety to him that I shall not 
remain, but go away and depart ; and then he will suffer 
less at my death, and not be grieved when he sees my 
body being burned or buried. I would not have him 
sorrow at my hard lot, or say at the burial, Thus we 
lay out Socrates, or, Thus we follow him to the grave 
or bury him ; for false words are not only evil in them 
selves, but they infect the soul with evil. Be of good 
cheer then, my dear Crito, and say that you are burying 
"6 my body only, and do with that whatever is usual, and 
what you think best. 

When he had spoken these words, he arose and went 
into a chamber to bathe ; Crito followed him, and told 
us to wait. So we remained behind, talking and think 
ing of the subject of discourse, and also of the greatness 
of our sorrow ; he was like a father of whom we were 
being bereaved, and we were about to pass the rest of 
our lives as orphans. When he had taken the bath his 
children were brought to him (he had two young sons 



Socrates and the jailer 171 

and an elder one) ; and the women of the family also 
came, and he talked to them and gave them a few direc 
tions in the presence of Crito ; then he dismissed them 
and returned to us. 

Now the hour of sunset was near, for a good deal of 
time had passed while he was within. When he came 
out, he sat down with us again after his bath, but not 
much was said. Soon the jailer, who was the servant 
of the Eleven, entered and stood by him, saying : To 
you, Socrates, whom I know to be the noblest and 
gentlest and best of all who ever came to this place, I will 
not impute the angry feelings of other men, who rage 
and swear at me, when, in obedience to the authorities, 
I bid them drink the poison indeed, I am sure that 
you will not be angry with me ; for others, as you are 
aware, and not I, are to blame. And so fare you well, 
and try to bear lightly what must needs be you know 
my errand. Then bursting into tears he turned away 
and went out. 

Socrates looked at him, and said : I return your good 
wishes, and will do as you bid. Then turning to us, he 
said, How charming the man is : since I have been in 
prison he has always been coming to see me, and at 
times he would talk to me, and was as good to me as 
could be, and now see how generously he sorrows on 
my account. We must do as he says, Crito; and 
therefore let the cup be brought, if the poison is pre 
pared : if not, let the attendant prepare some. 

Yet, said Crito, the sun is still upon the hill-tops, 
and I know that many a one has taken the draught late, 



272 The closing scene 

and after the announcement has been made to him, he 
has eaten and drunk, and enjoyed the society of his 
beloved ; do not hurry there is time enough. 

Socrates said : Yes, Crito, and they of whom you 
speak are right in so acting, for they think that they 
will be gainers by the delay ; but I am right in not follow 
ing their example, for I do not think that I should gain 
117 anything by drinking the poison a little later ; I should 
only be ridiculous in my own eyes for sparing and saving 
a life which is already forfeit. Please then to do as I 
say, and not to refuse me. 

Crito made a sign to the servant, who was standing 
by ; and he went out, and having been absent for some 
time, returned with the jailer carrying the cup of poison. 
Socrates said : You, my good friend, who are experi 
enced in these matters, shall give me directions how I 
am to proceed. The man answered : You have only to 
walk about until your legs are heavy, and then to lie 
down, and the poison will act. At the same time he 
handed the cup to Socrates, who in the easiest and gen 
tlest manner, without the least fear or change of colour 
or feature, looking at the man with all his eyes, Eche- 
crates, as his manner was, took the cup and said : What 
do you say about making a libation out of this cup to 
any god ? May I, or not ? The man answered : We , 
only prepare, Socrates, just so much as we deem enough. 
I understand, he said : but I may and must ask the gods 
to prosper my journey from this to the other world 
even so and so be it according to my prayer. Then 
raising the cup to his lips, quite readily and cheerfully 



The closing scene 273 



he drank off the poison. And hitherto most of us had 
been able to control our sorrow ; but now when we saw 
him drinking, and saw too that he had finished the 
draught, we could no longer forbear, and in spite of my 
self my own tears were flowing fast ; so that I covered 
my face and wept, not for him, but at the thought of 
my own calamity in having to part from such a friend. 
Nor was I the first ; for Crito, when he found himself 
unable to restrain his tears, had got up, and I followed ; 
and at that moment, Apollodorus, who had been weeping 
all the time, broke out in a loud and passionate cry which 
made cowards of us all. Socrates alone retained his 
calmness : What is this strange outcry ? he said. I sent 
away the women mainly in order that they might not 
misbehave in this way, for I have been told that a man 
should die in peace. Be quiet then, and have patience. 
When we heard his words we were ashamed, and 
refrained our tears ; and he walked about until, as he said, 
his legs began to fail, and then he lay on his back, ac 
cording to the directions, and the man who gave him the 
poison now and then looked at his feet and legs ; and 
after a while he pressed his foot hard, and asked him if 
he could feel; and he said, No ; and then his leg, and "8 
so upwards and upwards, and showed us that he was 
cold and stiff. And he felt them himself, and said : 
When the poison reaches the heart, that will be the end. 
He was beginning to grow cold about the groin, when 
he uncovered his face, for he had covered himself up, 
and said they were his last words he said : Crito, I 
owe a cock to Asclepius ; will you remember to pay the 
debt ? The debt shall be paid, said Crito ; is there 
anything else ? There was no answer to this question ; 
but in a minute or two a movement was heard, and the 
attendants uncovered him ; his eyes were set, and Crito 
closed his eyes and mouth. 

Such was the end, Echecrates, of our friend ; con 
cerning whom I may truly say, that of all the men of 
his time whom I have known, he was the wisest and 
justest and best. 



Oxford Translation Series 

All volumes sold separately. Price QB. net each. 

1 Greek, *> 

HESIOD. The Poems and Fragments. ByA.W.MAiR 

PLATO. The Four Socratic Dialogues. By BENJAMII 
.JOWETT, with Preface by EDWARD CAIRO. Cheaper edition 
45 6d. net. 

PLATO. The Republic. By BKNJAMIN JOWETT. Tw< 
vols. IDS. net. Cheaper edition 75. 6d. net, or 43. 6d. ne 
each volume. In one volume on India paper, ros. 6d. net. 

DEMOSTHENES. Public Orations. By A. W 
PICKARD-CAMBRIDGE. Two vols. IDS. net. 

ARISTOTLE. Politics. By BENJAMIN JOWETT, with 
Introduction by H. W. C. DAVIS. Cheaper edition, 45. 6d. n 

PLUTARCH. Selected Essays. By T. G. TUCKER 
Selected Essays from The Moralia, by A. O. PRICKARD 
Two vols. IQS. net. 

EP1CTETUS. The Discourses and Manual, with 
Fragments of his Writings. By P. E. MATHESON. Two vols 
i os. net. 

MARCUS AURELIUS. The Meditations. By JOH* 
JACKSON, with Introduction by CHARLES BIGG. 

LUCIAN. By H. W. and F. G. FOWLER. Four vols, 
2is. net. 

P H I LOST RAT U S. In Honour of Apollonius of Tyana, 
By J. S. PHILLIMORE. Two vols. IDS net. 

LONGINUS. On the Sublime. By A. O. PRICKARD. 

MARK THE DEACON. The Life of Porphyry oj 
Gaza. By G. F. HILL. 

5 1 at in 

CAESAR. The Gallic War. By F. P. LONG. 
CAESAR. The Cvvil War. By F. P. LONG. 

LUCRETIUS. On tlte Nature of Things. By CYRII 
BAILEY. 



.) 

VIRGIL. By JOHN JACKSON. On India paper, 7s.6d.net. 

HORACE. By E. C. WICKHAM. Cheaper edition, 
45. 6d. net, 

PROPERTIUS. By J. S. PHILLIMORE. 
STATIUS. TheSilvae. By D. A. SLATER. 

TACITUS. The Histories. By W. HAMILTON FYFE. 
Two vols. IDS. net. 

TAG I T U S . The Dialogus, Agricola and Ger mania . By 
W. HAMILTON FYFE. 

APULEIUS. The Apologia and Florida. By H. E. 
BUTLER. 

APULEIUS. The Metamorphoses. By H. E. BUTLER. 
Two vols. IDS. net. 

SIDONIUS. The Letters. By O. M. DALTON. Two 
vols. IDS. net. 

ST. BERNARD. On Consideration. By GEORGE 
LEWIS. 

] ^Miscellaneous 

THE PARALLEL PSALTER. The Prayer Book 
version of the Psalms and a new version on opposite pages. 
By S. R. DRIVER. 

^> 

S BEOWULF. By JOHN EARLE. Cheaperedition,4s.6d.n. 

ALFRED. Version of the Consolations of Boethius. 
By W. J. SEDGEFIELD. 

DANTE. The Convivio. By W. W. JACKSON. 
DANTE. The Divina Commedia. By H. F. TOZER. 
MACHIAVELLI. The Prince. By N. H. THOMSON. 

HEINE. The Book of Songs. By JOHN TODHUNTER. 
v On India paper, 75. 6d. net. 



PA 



A3 
The four Socratic dialogues 

jo- 